

   CCAMP Working Group                            Eric Mannie (Ebone)
   Internet Draft                          D. Papadimitriou (Alcatel)
   Expiration Date: August 2002                    J. Jones (Alcatel)
                                                       L. Ong (Ciena)

                                                        February 2002



          GMPLS LSP Bandwidth Modification (LBM) for SDH/SONET

                draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-lbm-tdm-01.txt



Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  Internet-Drafts are
   working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF),
   its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may
   also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."

  
     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

Abstract


   This document defines how GMPLS can be used to dynamically modify
   the bandwidth of a TDM circuit. It focuses first on SONET/SDH and
   intend to cover other technologies in a further release.

   This document also defines how to use multiple differently routed
   LSPs to build a single SONET/SDH virtually concatenated circuit.
   Each LSP can be recovered (i.e. protected or restored) individually.

1. Introduction


   Extensions to GMPLS are defined to control SONET/SDH networks in
   [GMPLS-SONET-SDH]. They specify the SONET/SDH traffic parameters
   used to describe in details the type of SONET/SDH LSP (i.e. circuit)
   being requested. Such a circuit can be requested unidirectional or
   bi-directional.

   Dynamically changing the bandwidth allocated for a SONET/SDH circuit
   is very useful for instance, when Ethernet traffic is transported


E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft - August 2002                    1

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-01.txt                         Feb∆02

   over SONET/SDH circuits. According to the demand, the size of a
   concatenated circuit can be modified dynamically without having to
   reestablish a new circuit, and potentially to interrupt the service.

   SONET/SDH, bandwidth modification can be indeed achieved in very
   different ways. It can be done by establishing another circuit
   between the same source and destination with different
   characteristics (e.g. signal type) and then by switching the traffic
   to that new circuit doing a switchover.

   At the other end of the spectrum, bandwidth modification can be
   done by dynamically adding or removing SPEs/VCs to a circuit using
   the concept of virtual or contiguous concatenation. This is
   ideally achieved in a non-disruptive way and by avoiding double
   counting (i.e. double reserving) the resources while modifying the
   bandwidth, by using for instance, the concept of make-before-break.
   The current proposal focuses on this last case where only
   differential capacity is added (or removed) to the circuit.

   In practice, bandwidth modification is achievable when virtual
   concatenation is used since SPEs/VCs don∆t need to be contiguous,
   are transported individually and can even be routed independently.
   This could also be achieved as well when contiguous concatenation is
   used but is in practice much less likely to happen since a bandwidth
   increase requires additional free SPEs/VCs physically contiguous at
   each interface∆s node traversed by the circuit.

   Moreover, as currently defined, GMPLS only allows the SPEs/VCs
   components belonging to a virtually concatenated circuit to be co-
   routed through the same line/multiplex section. This contribution
   removes this limitation by allowing the same SONET/SDH circuit to be
   made of several independent LSPs.

   In that case, LSPs can be set-up, maintained and deleted
   independently, while being part of the same SONET/SDH circuit. LSPs
   can be co-routed through the same component TE link, through
   different components of the same TE link or even routed completely
   diversely, as far as T1X1/ITU-T requirements for differential delays
   are respected (out of the scope of this document).


   T1X1 and ITU-T Efforts:
   -----------------------

   T1X1 and ITU-T are standardizing a similar concept for SONET and SDH
   but also G.709 OTN (Optical Transport Networks), independently of
   any distributed control plane and for virtual concatenation only.
   They defined a signalling protocol transported in-band in the
   overhead, for instance in SONET/SDH, this protocol is transported in
   the Path Overhead (POH). This protocol is defined in ITU-T
   Recommendation G.7042 (former G.lcas) and called Link Capacity
   Adjustment Scheme (LCAS) for virtual concatenated (group) signals.

   LCAS allows increasing or decreasing the capacity of a virtual


E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft - August 2002                    2

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-01.txt                         Feb∆02

   container that is transported using Virtual Concatenation. In
   addition, LCAS will automatically decrease the capacity if a
   member experiences a failure in the network, and increase the
   capacity when the network fault is repaired.

   For SDH, LCAS is defined for all VC types for which virtual
   concatenation is defined, i.e. VC-4, VC-3, VC-2, VC-12 and VC-11.
   Using LCAS, a VC can only be added at the end of a concatenated
   signal, but can be removed from any place.


   Current scope and coverage:
   ---------------------------

   This document defines LSP Bandwidth Modification (LBM) procedures
   and extensions for GMPLS using either virtual concatenation or
   contiguous concatenation. It also proposes a combination of the
   signalling provided by GMPLS and LCAS at the control and transport
   plane, respectively. Note it first focuses on SONET/SDH and will
   later cover G.709 with the same approach in a next version.

   Similarly to GMPLS, this document covers unidirectional LSPs
   and bi-directional symmetric LSPs. Bi-directional asymmetric LSPs
   are not supported today by GMPLS. It should be noted however that
   today operators do not use such asymmetric LSPs in practice.

   The current proposal allows for bandwidth modification being
   requested only by the initiator (source) of a circuit. A next
   version could cover destination initiated bandwidth modification.
   However, we expect to cover most of the operational needs using
   initiator control.

   It can also be extended in the future to cover modification of other
   circuit attributes than the bandwidth, like link protection/
   restoration characteristics. It focuses first on the SONET/SDH
   bandwidth modification initiated by the source since it meets the
   current operational needs.

2. SONET/SDH Virtual and Contiguous Concatenation

   This section introduces SDH virtual and contiguous concatenation,
   this will be extended with a description of the SONET concatenation
   in a future version.

   Section 11 of G.707 (April 2000) recommendation defines VC
   contiguous and virtual concatenation. Contiguous concatenation
   maintains the contiguous bandwidth through the whole network,
   while virtual concatenation breaks the contiguous bandwidth into
   individuals VCs, transports and routes these VCs individually from
   the source and then recombines them at the path termination. Virtual
   concatenation requires concatenation functionality only at the path
   termination equipment, while contiguous concatenation requires
   concatenation functionality at each network element:



E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft - August 2002                    3

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-01.txt                         Feb∆02

   - Contiguous concatenation is defined for VC-4s to provide a VC-4-Xc
     (X=4, 16, 64, 256) and for VC-2s in a higher order VC-3 to provide
     a VC-2-Xc (X=1,...,7).
   - Virtual concatenation is defined for VC-4s, VC-3s, VC-2s, VC-12s
     and VC-11s but VCs belonging to a virtually concatenated circuit
     must be of the same type. The virtual concatenation of X VC-4/3
     (X=1,...,256) provides a VC-4/3-Xv. The number of low order VCs
     that can be virtually concatenated together depends on the higher
     order VC in which they are transported and is defined according to
     table 11-9 in G.707.

   Each VC has its own Path Overhead (POH):
   - For low order VC: the VC-2/1 K4 POH byte in bit 2 is multi-framed
     in 32 frames to form a 32 bits string and is used to indicate a
     frame count and a sequence indicator. The frame count provides a
     measure of the differential delay (see ITU-T G.707). Each VC-2/1
     of a VC-2/1-Xv has a fixed unique sequence number in the range of
     0 to X-1.
   - For high order VC: the VC-4/3 H4 POH byte is used for the virtual
     concatenation specific sequence and multi-frame indication. It is
     more elaborate than for low order VCs and uses a two-stage multi-
     framing. What is important in the context of GMPLS LBM is that
     each VC-4/3 has a fixed sequence number in the range of 0 to X-1.

   These VC sequence numbers will be used by the GMPLS LBM procedures
   to identify each frame unambiguously in the same virtually
   concatenated circuit.

   VCs can be routed and transported individually, even over different
   multiplex sections, i.e. over different TE link components or over
   different TE links. They are obvious limitations due to the
   differential delay between different routes (not in the scope of
   this document). GMPLS LBM will provide the same level of
   flexibility, using and combining multiple LSPs.

3. GMPLS LBM and LCAS

   Link Capacity Adjustment Scheme (LCAS) recommendation [LCAS] details
   the procedure to add (or remove) a VC-4/VC-3 from a VC-4-xV/VC-3-xV
   group. LCAS is defined as an end-to-end signalling protocol
   transported over the H4 overhead (for HOVC/STS SPE) and K4 overhead
   (for LOVC/VT) using additional MFI (multi-frame indicator) and SEQ
   (sequence indicator) values than the one defined for Virtual
   Concatenated signals.

   When running GMPLS at the control plane level and LCAS at the
   transport level, since the latter is an end-to-end signalling
   protocol, we have to clearly define the function fulfilled by each
   of these signalling protocols.

   LCAS is an end-to-end (i.e. PTE-to-PTE) signalling protocol enabling
   the bandwidth modification at end systems and setting up and
   releasing circuits provisioned and configured through Network
   Management Systems (NMS). However, LCAS doesn't apply to setting up

E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft - August 2002                    4

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-01.txt                         Feb∆02

   and releasing bandwidth at intermediate nodes. This means that LCAS
   must be combined with an NMS system in order to offer a dynamic
   connection setup throughout the network. Therefore, the advantage of
   using GMPLS is that it provides a complete integrated solution,
   allowing for a wide range of traffic parameter modifications.

   Using LCAS in parallel with GMPLS implies that GMPLS traffic
   parameters may be modified without the GMPLS control plane being
   aware of these modifications. However, GMPLS provides native
   capabilities to modify traffic parameters of an established LSP
   since MPLS-TE signalling was originally conceived to allow traffic
   parameter (bandwidth) modification.

   Using multiple LSPs to support a single circuit (optional) has the
   drawback of requiring more signalling but this seems to be the most
   appropriate way to operate within the context of a global control
   plane. It provides the advantage that each independent LSP can be
   protected/restored independently. Note that GMPLS LBM can be first
   used to modify the bandwidth of a single unique LSP (circuit),
   without any LSP combination.

   This document defines the concept underlying LSP (i.e. connection)
   bandwidth non-disruptive modification using GMPLS signalling.
   Compared to an LCAS only solution (combined or not with EMS/NMS) it
   provides the advantage of being an integrated solution. At the
   transport plane level this solution can be combined with LCAS or any
   other appropriate mechanism providing the equivalent capability.

4. GMPLS LBM Procedures Using a Parallel Circuit

   This section describes how to modify the bandwidth of a circuit by
   establishing a new completely bandwidth disjoint circuit and moving
   the traffic to that new circuit by doing a switchover. This
   procedure can be done manually or automatically. It uses a
   simplified version of the make-before-break concept.

   Note that in the context of this document, the concept of "make-
   before-break" should be better renamed "share-before-break". In
   addition, "break" refers more to the LSP status modification in the
   control plane than to circuit connection changes in the transport
   plane.

   A new disjoint circuit is established first. It can be routed
   differently from the original circuit and may have completely
   different traffic parameters. This new circuit reserves its own
   resources and before the switchover is done, some bandwidth may be
   double reserved.

   This is for instance the only way to change the bandwidth of an
   SDH LSP from a non-concatenated VC type to a different non-
   concatenated VC type. For instance, going from a VC-3 to a VC-4
   for an IP/MPLS bandwidth upgrade. Clearly, a VC-3 (on an STM-0)
   cannot be shared at the same time with a VC-4 (on an STM-1) while


E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft - August 2002                    5

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-01.txt                         Feb∆02

   transporting data. This situation is depicted in the following
   figure:

   Step 1: Make

    -----------      Working      -----------  Working active
   |     |VC-3 |-----------------| VC-3|     |
   | PTE |-----     Make (GMPLS)  -----| PTE |
   |     |VC-4 |<--------------->| VC-4|     |
    -----------                   -----------

   Step 2: Share

    -----------      Working      -----------
   |     |VC-3 |<--------------->| VC-3|     | Working active
   | PTE |-----      Working      -----| PTE |
   |     |VC-4 |<--------------->| VC-4|     | Working standby
    -----------                   -----------

   Step 3: Break

    -----------    Break (GMPLS)  -----------
   |     |VC-3 |<--------------->| VC-3|     |
   | PTE |-----      Working      -----| PTE | Working active
   |     |VC-4 |-----------------| VC-4|     |
    -----------                   -----------

   With RSVP-TE, the procedures described in [RSVP-TE] (Section 4.6.4)
   could be used but with a FF (Fixed Filter) reservation style instead
   of a SE (Share Explicit) style (this requires further
   investigation). An alternative is to use a disjoint source route
   with a SE style.

   With CR-LDP, the procedures described in [CRLDP-MODIFY] MUST be
   used. A new Action Indicator Flag [CRLDP] value is defined for this
   purposes. A disjoint source route can also be used.

   The important point is that the LSP destination must be able to
   understand that a new LSP is intended to replace an existing one
   and that this is not just a new independent LSP being setup. This is
   achieved using the procedures referenced just before.

   For SONET/SDH, the switchover from the working circuit to the new
   one is a pure endpoint operation. It can be done very quickly and
   certainly within the 50ms constraint. From that perspective it can
   be considered as non-service impacting and non-disruptive.

5. GMPLS LBM Procedures Using Virtual Concatenation

   This section defines simple procedures for SONET/SDH circuit
   bandwidth modification when virtual concatenation is used. It first
   defines the procedures to add or remove VCs in a single LSP, and
   then defines the procedures to combine several LSPs together.


E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft - August 2002                    6

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-01.txt                         Feb∆02

5.1 Single LSP bandwidth modification

   This section is only applicable to the standard virtual
   concatenation as defined by T1X1/ITU-T (see [T1.105] and [G.707],
   respectively).

   SONET/SDH LSP bandwidth modification can only be allowed when the
   LSP is already set up and active, i.e. modification is not defined
   or allowed during the LSP(s) establishment or release. Only
   bandwidth modification requested by the ingress LSR of the LSP is
   considered here. The Ingress LSR cannot modify an LSP before a
   previous modification procedure is completed.

   When a bandwidth modification is requested, a new (updated)
   SONET/SDH traffic parameter is sent downstream within a Path/Label
   Request message. This request is explicitly identified as a
   bandwidth modification request using a specific indication
   mechanism.

   With RSVP-TE, the procedures for bandwidth modification defined in
   Section 4.6.4 of [RSVP-TE] are used. The SENDER_TEMPLATE and
   SENDER_TSPEC objects carry respectively a modified LSP ID and a
   modified SONET/SDH traffic parameter within the Path message sent
   from the source LSR (i.e. head-end PTE) to the destination LSR (i.e.
   tail-end PTE). This allows recognizing that a bandwidth modification
   is requested.

   With CR-LDP, the procedures described in [CRLDP-MODIFY] MUST be
   used. The Action Indicator Flag [CRLDP] of the LSPID TLV indicates
   an LSP modification. This allows recognizing that a bandwidth
   modification is requested.

   Subsequently, the following alternative can be considered:
   - If accepted, the same new traffic parameter is sent back to the
     source also indicating a bandwidth modification. This traffic
     parameter is transported in the FLOWSPEC of the Resv message with
     RSVP-TE or in the Label Mapping message with CR-LDP.
   - If refused, the previously used SONET/SDH traffic parameter is
     sent back to the source also indicating a bandwidth modification
     indication. It allows ensuring that the request for bandwidth
     modification was well received and treated by the destination. The
     actual bandwidth allocation is committed when the Resv/Label
     Mapping message flows in the upstream direction.

   A modified SONET/SDH traffic parameter SHOULD have a different NVC
   field and MAY have a different MT field. The multiplier field (MT)
   SHOULD not be used since this field has a different semantic. All
   other fields MUST be identical.

   SPEs/VCs can only be added at the end of an LSP. For instance, when
   adding Y VC-4s to a VC-4-Xv (where each of the VC-4 is numbered from
   0 to X-1), one obtains a VC-4-(X+Y)v with the sequence numbered from
   0 to X+Y-1.


E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft - August 2002                    7

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-01.txt                         Feb∆02

   The number Y of SPEs/VCs to add is given by the following equation:
   ABS[(new NVC * new MT) - (old NVC * old MT)]. The first new SPE/VC
   will have a sequence number equals to the sequence number of the
   previously last VC + 1 (i.e. X).

   Example:

   Old Traffic Parameters: ST = VC-4 ˚ NVC = 2 ˚ MT = 1 (VC-4-2v)
     Sequence: VC-4[1] = 0 and VC-4[2] = 1

   New Traffic Parameters: ST = VC-4 ˚ NVC = 4 ˚ MT = 1 (ADD 2 VC-4)
     Sequence: VC-4[3] = 2 and VC-4[4] = 3

   Such that the (new NVC * new MT) - (old NVC * old MT) is verified.

   GMPLS LBM explicitly allows the value of the traffic parameters to
   change over time. Modified SONET/SDH traffic parameter indicates the
   complete traffic parameters of the circuit and not a delta.
   The delta computation is simply done by comparing the fields.

   SPEs/VCs can be removed from an LSP but only at the end of that LSP
   (i.e. starting at SPE/VC sequence number X). When a new traffic
   parameter is sent requesting less SPEs/VCs, the difference is
   removed from the end. This is a light limitation in comparison with
   LCAS that allows removing SPEs/VCs from anywhere, however this
   doesn't provide significant benefit.

   Note: The sequence number of each SPE/VC is transported in the
   corresponding POH according to the SONET/SDH specifications. It is
   not needed to transport these sequence numbers in the GMPLS
   signalling, they are implicitly deduced at each end according to the
   order of operations. When adding or removing SPEs/VCs, the sequence
   numbers of the other (previous) SPEs/VCs of the same LSP are not
   modified and stay identical.

5.2 Multiple LSPs combination

   The reasons to combine multiple LSPs to provide one big SONET/SDH
   circuit were already explained before. Such a combination requires
   that all LSPs belonging to the same circuit be clearly identified as
   belonging to the same group, and be clearly identified as being in a
   given order. This is achieved by using a Circuit ID and an LSP
   Sequence Number in GMPLS signalling [GMPLS-SIG]. Obviously, each LSP
   of the combination may have a different number of SPEs/VCs.

   The following rules are defined together with the introduction of
   the Circuit ID and the LSP Sequence Number:
   - All LSPs belonging to the same circuit MUST have the same Circuit
     ID
   - All LSPs MUST have a unique LSP sequence number in that Circuit ID

   The LSP sequence number MUST be the sequence number of the first
   SPE/VC of the overall virtually concatenated circuit. This sequence
   number is redundant information with the SONET/SDH SPE/VC sequence

E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft - August 2002                    8

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-01.txt                         Feb∆02

   number transported in the POH. This allows a level of consistency
   checking between the control plane and the transport plane.

   From the GMPLS control plane point of view, these LSPs are seen as
   totally independent and being uniquely identified in RSVP-TE by the
   SESSION object together with the SENDER_TEMPLATE or FILTER_SPEC
   object. They can be co-routed or not. They can be routed explicitly
   diversely or not. They can fail separately and be individually
   protected/restored or not.

   The GMPLS LBM "application" can be seen as a straightforward
   application at the top of the control plane, managing individual
   LSPs made of virtually concatenated VCs, to build a bigger SONET/SDH
   virtually concatenated circuit. This "application" is only supported
   at each end of an SONET/SDH circuit without impacting intermediate
   nodes.

   All SPEs/VCs corresponding to a new LSP can only be added at the end
   of the virtually concatenated signal. In that case, the SPE/VC
   sequence number of the first SPE/VC is the sequence number of the
   last SPE/VC of the last LSP + 1.

   When an LSP is removed, for whatever reason, all its SPEs/VCs are
   removed. This implies that sequence numbers of other SPEs/VCs
   belonging to the LSPs logically following the removed LSP must be
   renumbered. The same is done for the LSP sequence numbers. However,
   this is not an issue since all the LSPs are controlled by the same
   entity.

   Note that according to the single LSP bandwidth modification
   procedure defined here before, only the last SPEs/VCs of an LSP can
   be removed. It results in a multi-LSP configuration that SPEs/VCs
   can also be removed independently of a complete LSP removal but with
   the given restriction.

   All LSPs belonging to the same virtually concatenated signal MUST
   have the same SONET/SDH traffic parameter, except for the NVC and MT
   fields. Note however that the use of the multiplier (MT) in that
   context is not recommended.

5.3 SPE/VC recognition and significance

   When a modification occurs in a virtually concatenated signal, the
   receiving end needs to know which SPE/VC is part of the circuit and
   when the content of each SPE/VC is valid.

   A SPE/VC is considered as being part of circuit when it is signaled,
   i.e. when the corresponding Resv/Label Mapping message is sent back
   to the source. The SPE/VC content is considered as significant when
   it is received with a specific indication in the POH (it can also be
   located in the H4 POH byte as defined by LCAS) and a valid sequence
   number according to the receiving end status.

   The sequence number transported in the POH has a global

E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft - August 2002                    9

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-01.txt                         Feb∆02

   significance per circuit not per LSP. Since multi-frames are used,
   the sequence number is considered usable only when the last bit of
   the multi-framed field has been received.

   Note: to ensure that in the upstream direction the destination
   end doesn't send traffic before the source completed the bandwidth
   modification; the destination end MAY simply wait for a ResvConf to
   be received with RSVP.

5.4 Combining GMPLS LBM with LCAS

   This section describes a sequential combination of GMPLS and LCAS
   LCAS. In brief, the proposed mechanism runs GMPLS for LSP
   provisioning between end-points, then activation of the additional
   VC/STS component using LCAS end-to-end signalling and finally
   optional confirmation at the control plane level when requesting bi-
   directional bandwidth increase.

   The detailed mechanism can be described as follows:

   1. Path Message/Label Request message from Source to Destination
      indicating the incremental Traffic Parameter values i.e. NVC and
      MT and the capability of the Source to support of LCAS or not (by
      using a specific flag in the Admin_Status object/TLV for
      instance)

   2. Resv/Label Mapping Message sent back as described in Section 5.3
      in addition to the LCAS capability support by the receiver. Same
      rules as the one defined for the Admin Status object/TLV are used
      for that purpose.

   IF LCAS is supported by both ends and unidirectional bandwidth
   increase is requested:
     3a. LCAS end-to-end signalling protocol used to exchange the H4
         CTRL messages
     4a. Trigger the H4 NORM value and use the allocated bandwidth

   IF LCAS is supported by both ends and bidirectional bandwidth
   increase is requested:
     3b. LCAS end-to-end signalling protocol used to exchange the H4
         CTRL messages
     4b. Trigger the H4 NORM value and use the allocated bandwidth
     5b. Source may send a ResvConf message to the destination in order
         to prevent the destination from sending data before the source
         completes the bandwidth modification

   IF LCAS NOT supported by at least one end (LCAS messaged are ignored
   by the non-supporting end) and uni or bi-directional bandwidth
   increase is requested:
     3c. The source sends the ResvConf back to the destination
         indicating the bidirectional successful establishment and the
         source side can start to use the new channel
     4c. On receipt of the ResvConf the destination side can start to
         to use the new channel.

E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft - August 2002                   10

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-01.txt                         Feb∆02


5.5 GMPLS Extensions encoding

   This memo requires the encoding and transport of a Circuit ID and an
   LSP sequence number for all LSP being established according to the
   procedures of section 5. Having a Circuit ID even for a single LSP
   circuit further allows adding LSPs to that circuit.

   A new Circuit ID object/TLV is defined to identify all LSPs
   belonging to the same SONET/SDH circuit where each LSP is identified
   by a sequence number.

   For RSVP-TE, one new SENDER_TEMPLATE class object is defined and
   uses a new C-Type (TBA), and one new FILTER_SPEC class object is
   defined and uses a new C-Type (TBA).

   For CR-LDP, a new Circuit ID TLV is defined and the use of LSPID TLV
   is mandatory.

   In both cases this Object/TLV includes the following fields:

   -  Circuit ID field (32 bits)

      This is a unique Circuit ID number, generated by the source. It
      is unique in the context of the source and does not change during
      the lifetime of the circuit.

   -  LSP Sequence Number field (32 bits)

      This is a unique sequence number in the context of the Circuit
      ID. It allows ordering the LSP in the SONET/SDH virtually
      concatenated signal. Numbering starts at 0.

6. GMPLS LBM Procedures with Contiguous Concatenation

   This section is for further study but the procedure should at least
   support the following capabilities.

   A non-concatenated circuit can be modified to a contiguously
   concatenated circuit (with any number of SPEs/VCs), and vice-versa,
   by using the procedures defined hereafter. Typically this function
   is provided when using AUG flexible multiplexing allowing to
   increase change a N x AUG-1 to an AUG-N (with N = 4, 16, 64, 256).

   When increasing the bandwidth of a circuit, it works only if the
   right number of free SPEs/VCs can be found directly before the
   beginning of the circuit, or after the end of the circuit. This is
   unlikely to happen in most of the cases. When decreasing the
   bandwidth of a circuit, it works in all cases.

   For instance, a received SDH STM-64 frame can contain a VC-4-4c,
   while a next frame can contain a VC-4-16c starting at the same place
   as the VC-4-4c and thus occupying the same first VC-4 spaces. This
   process is not service impacting or disruptive.

E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft - August 2002                   11

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-01.txt                         Feb∆02


   As opposed to virtual concatenation, there is one single POH and
   there is of course no SPE/VC sequence number. Therefore, by
   analyzing the frame overhead (pointers) one can discover how many
   SPEs/VCs are contiguously concatenated in one SONET/SDH frame. The
   new number of concatenated SPEs/VCs MUST match what was advertised
   in the traffic parameters.

   Nevertheless, the concept of make/share-before-break defined in MPLS
   can also be used to support bandwidth modification of continuously
   concatenated signals in the same way as with the single LSP
   bandwidth modification with virtual concatenation. However, in that
   case multiple LSPs cannot be combined.

7. Acknowledgments

   Valuable comments and input were received from Alexandre Geyssens,
   Michael Moelants, Xavier Neerdaels and Philippe Noel and Fuhua
   Yin.

8. Security Considerations

   This draft introduces no new security considerations to [GMPLS-
   SONET-SDH].

9. References

   [GMPLS-LDP] Ashwood-Smith, P. et al, "Generalized MPLS Signaling
               - CR-LDP Extensions", Internet Draft, draft-ietf-mpls-
               generalized-cr-ldp-05.txt, November, 2001.

   [GMPLS-SIG] Ashwood-Smith, P. et al, "Generalized MPLS ˚ Signaling
               Functional Description", Internet Draft, draft-ietf-
               mpls-generalized-signaling-07.txt, November 2001.

   [GMPLS-RSVP] Ashwood-Smith, P. et al, "Generalized MPLS Signaling
                - RSVP-TE Extensions", Internet Draft, draft-ietf-
                mpls-generalized-rsvp-te-06.txt, November 2001.

   [GMPLS-ARCH] Mannie, E. (Editor), "GMPLS Architecture", Internet
                Draft, draft-ccamp-ietf-gmpls-architecture-01.txt,
                November 2001.

   [GMPLS-SONET-SDH] Mannie, E. (Editor), "GMPLS Extensions for SONET
                and SDH Control", Internet Draft, draft-ietf-ccamp-
                gmpls-sonet-sdh-02.txt, October 2001.

   [GMPLS-SONET-SDH-EXT] Mannie, E. (Editor), "GMPLS Extensions to
                Control Non-Standard SONET and SDH Features",
                Internet Draft, draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-sonet-sdh-
                extensions-00.txt, October, 2001.

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
             Requirement Levels," RFC 2119.

E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft - August 2002                   12

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-01.txt                         Feb∆02


   [RFC2210] Wroclawski, J., "The Use of RSVP with IETF Integrated
             Services," RFC 2210, September 1997.

10. Authors' Addresses

      Eric Mannie
      EBONE
      Terhulpsesteenweg 6A
      1560 Hoeilaart - Belgium
      Phone:  +32 2 658 56 52
      Email:  eric.mannie@ebone.com

      Dimitri Papadimitriou
      Alcatel
      Francis Wellesplein 1,
      B-2018 Antwerpen, Belgium
      Phone: +32 3 240-8491
      Email: Dimitri.Papadimitriou@alcatel.be




































E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft - August 2002                   13

