Internet Draft             Shanghai Hongchuang WEB Technology Service Co., Ltd.

Intended Status: Experimental                                      Tian Guorong

                                                                   Curtis Young

                                                                    Teo Engsoon

                                                                     Monica Zhu

                                                                    Jinzhu Wang

                                                                   Jianhua Tong                                                                            
								     
								    28 Nov 2016							      		                             
							      Expires: May 2017


<br>

HIEP: HTB Internet E-Wallet Protocol

draft-tianguorong-hiep-05


This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the provisions of BCP
78 and BCP 79.


Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other groups may 
also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.


Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months and
may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any time. 
It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite 
them other than as "work in progress".


The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html


The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html


This Internet-Draft will expire on Oct., 2015.


Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document authors.
All rights reserved. This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's 
Legal Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) 
in effect on the date of publication of this document. Please review these 
documents carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect 
to this document.

<br>

Abstract:

This document describes an online-paying method that realizes the paying
addressing on the basis of HTTP protocol. It is for the purpose to 
setup a normative and safe E-paying system standard, and specify the 
definition of E-paying. In the last version, we described how this system 
working with bank. We would like to introduce the HART pay application 
functions we designed. 





Table of Contents

1. Introduction

2. Conventions used in the Document

3. HIEP Problem Statements

4. HIEP Main Application Functions

5. Security Considerations

6. IANA Considerations

7. Conclusions

8. References


<br>


1. Introduction

Till now, there's no one paying addressing language to realize the online paying 
or data set's interoperating that COULD be used for definite or name of E-
currency's widely used. Under the promoting by W3C, the future generation WEB of 
the semantic web is defined as "the WEB concept structure which COULD be handled 
directly by the machine". On the background of this technology, this ID describes 
an E-currency paying public infrastructure of the bank pre-positive system in the 
field of e-paying. Explanation of Nouns: Hart main account: Hart account platform 
within the account, refers to the domain name of Hart. Hart bank main account 
(Collection): Hart main account in the bank account corresponding to the open 
account which is a main account. Hart bank accounts (payment): Hart main account
in the bank under the corresponding bank account of sub-account.



2. Conventions used in this document

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", 
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", AND "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be 
interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119]. In this document, these words 
will appear with that interpretation only when in ALL CAPS. Lower case uses of 
these words are not to be interpreted as carrying RFC 2119 [RFC2119] significance.


<br>


3. HIEP Problem Statements

At present, differentiation of the payment communication and system structure are 
formed by independent bank organizations or 3rd party payment company's leading 
position, that they are using different payment models to describe the objects, 
and formulate each standard. Those standards just extend the life time of each 
existed systems, instead ensure the data exchange or dataset's interoperation 
between different paying systems. Obviously, it will restrict the application 
field online paying, and it COULD not reach the ability and technique of handling 
the paying activities of all kinds of bank cards. The real-time of paying is 
finally a bottleneck problem of the E-business development. Without solving this 
problem, furthermore, it will bring the unsafe hidden trouble on the capital 
operation. For the time being, we can only say in own scope utmost, as it only 
can realize the online paying with safe within each own system. It cannot make 
the real-time online paying, and can not reach the comprehensive integration of 
huge scale (supranational, super-region, super-section). Currency's credit: The 
currency is a credit symbol of paying, people trust it to make it as the 
intermediation of substitution. It is accepted by the social due to its 
characteristic advantage comparing the metal money on "Gold Standard System" or 
"Silver Standard System". Obviously, the symbol in virtual paying organizations 
transaction Must use a unique identifier, which COULD make into a definition when 
people using. This is the credit problem in the paying procedure.


<br>


4.HIEP Main Application Functions

4.1 Enterprise Version Functions

4.1.1 Domain Name Activation

Enterprise users COULD activate its domain name account on APP after its 
registration in bank, pls find details in HART Domain Name Activation Procedure.

4.1.2 Bank Main Account Balance Inquiry

COULD check the balance, frozen amount, withdrawal amount, unwithdrawal amount

4.1.3 Account Transaction List Inquiry

COULD check the user?s indicated transaction type, status, time, details. Details 
include transaction flow number, date, time, amount, type and status.

4.1.4 Bank Reconciliation Statement Inquiry

Check account platform supplied reconciliation list everyday, to fulfill the 
checking automatically.

4.1.5 Account Security Setup

Enterprise users COULD make the setup functions as transaction code and check-in 
code etc.

Find the Transaction Password

Amend the Transaction Password

Find the Check-in Password

Amend the Transaction Password

4.1.6 Enterprise Registration Data Inquiry

In the users interface, enterprises COULD inquiry the data as domain name, company 
name, company add., contact, telephone, email add., business license, settlement 
bank, HART bank account, account status etc.


<br>


4.2 Individual Version Functions

4.2.1 Domain Activation

Individual users COULD activate its domain name account on APP(Individual Version) 
after its registration in bank, pls find details in ?HART Domain Name Activation 
Procedure?.

4.2.2 Bank Account Balance Inquiry

Service of account balance inquiry is available.

Inquiry Procedure:

4.2.2.1 Individual users send the inquiry request to account platform system by 
its HART APP;

4.2.2.2 The platform make out the information related after received the request, 
and revert 
to the APP;

4.2.2.3 HART APP got the data from the platform, and reveal to the end user in 
APP.

4.2.3 Account Rechargement

Individual users COULD realize the function of recharge from its bank account to 
its own HART bank account. This function via APP inlay the bank WAP interface, 
and fund transfering-fulfil through the bank WAP. Details pls find in Bank WAP 
Procedure.

<br>

4.2.4 Account Transaction List Inquiry

Service of transaction details inquiry is available KEY phrase: opposite account, 
transaction amount, transaction time, transaction type, flow number Inquiry 
procedure:

4.2.4.1 Individual users send the inquiry request via its APP to HART account 
platform system;

4.2.4.2 The platform make out the information related after received the request, 
and revert to the APP;

4.2.4.3 HART APP got the data from the platform, and reveal to the end user in 
APP.

4.2.5 Account Security Setup

Individual users COULD make the setup functions as transaction code and checkin 
code etc.

Find the Transaction Password

Amend the Transaction Password

Find the Checkin Password

Amend the Transaction Password

4.2.6 Payment Setup

Single Transaction Limit Setup: To setup each single transaction maximum amount 
within the bank limits; Day Transaction Limit Setup: To setup every days 
accumulate transaction maximum amount within the bank limits.


<br>

4.2.6 Housekeeping Function

House regular payment business as water, gas, power fund by using the intermediary 
service platform interface with bank.

4.2.8 Applications Collection

Contractor businesses push their application links or introductions to the 
individual users via APP. Individual users COULD collect all the related and 
interested HART contact business in this function, and collect those accounts.


5. Security Considerations

In order to realize the interconnection and mutual certification, the HIEP mutual 
information approval is refer to X.509V3 extension. It is merged into PKCS#12, 
the indicated HTB domain name Must be the first level domain name of a bank. Bind 
the user's public key information with other identified information including the 
username and email add., to complete the certification of users on the internet.


6.IANA Considerations

The IANA will configure the HTB port for HIEP.


7.Conclusions

This document describes the pre-position E-currency paying public infrastructure 
of bank in the field of the internet E-paying, that realize the HIEP on the HTTP 
protocol according to the open standard of W3C.


<br>

8.References:

[RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key Words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels",       
           BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997

[RFC2616]  R. Fielding, J. Gettys, J. Mogul, H. Frystyk, L. Masinter, P. Leach, 
           T.Berners-  Lee, 
           "Hypertext Transfer Protocol - HTTP/1.1", June 1999

[RFC1866]  T. Berners-Lee, D. Connolly, "Hypertext Markup Language - 2.0", 
           November 1995


<br>

Author's Address:

Tian Guorong
Shanghai Hongchuang WEB Technology Service Co., Ltd.
Bldg 14, Xinyun Economic Zone, Lane 3199 Zhenbei Rd. 
Shanghai, China
Phone no.: 0086 135 8592 1617
Email: bill@iftg.org


Curtis Yang
Phone No.: 0086 138 0178 0703
Email: curtis.yang@iftg.org


Teo Engsoon
Phone No.: 0065 9015 4476
Email: francis@iftg.org


Monica Zhu
Phone No.: 0086 138 0178 0703
Email: monica@iftg.org


Jinzhu Wang
Phone No.: 0086 134 3566 8777
Email: jinzhuwang@iftg.org


Jianhua Tong
Phone No.: 0086 138 0297 9993
Email: jianhuatong@iftg.org





