Internet-Draft                                                 M. Welzl
Intended status: Proposed Standard              University of Innsbruck
Expires: January 31, 2009                                       T. Nolf
                                                University of Innsbruck
                                                               J. Palme
                                             Stockholm University / KTH
                                                          July 30, 2008

    
                       The Expires Header in E-mail 
                        draft-welzl-expires-00.txt

    
Status of this Memo 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
       
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- 
   Drafts.    

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
      The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
      http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
      The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
      http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 31, 2009. 
    
    
Copyright Notice  
        
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 

    
Abstract 
    
   This memo introduces a new email header called Expires. Using this 
   header, the sender of an email can state that (s)he believes this 
   message will be irrelevant after the indicated date/time. The 
   receiving MUA can then automatically detect that a message has 
   expired and facilitate handling of such emails for the user. 
    
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [i]. 
    
   The word "client" may in this text designate functionality, which 
   some implementations actually implement wholly or partly in a server. 
   For example, in the case of IMAP and NNTP, it is very common to 
 

Welzl, Nolf, Palme      Expires - January 2008                    [Page 1] 

                     The Expires Header in E-mail                July 2008
 
 
   implement functionality, which logically may be regarded as belonging 
   to a client, in the server. 
    
   The acronym "MUA" is short for "mail user agent", the software that 
   allows a user to access and manage email. 
    
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. Syntax.........................................................2 
   3. Semantics......................................................2 
   4. Relation to X.400 gateways and Netnews.........................3 
   Security Considerations...........................................3 
   References........................................................3 
   Acknowledgments...................................................4 
   Author's Addresses................................................4 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
   This memo introduces a new header field called "Expires" for Internet 
   email [1] headers, which will enhance the email service. The 
   intention is to let a sender of an email state a date/time until 
   which a message will be relevant. Using this header field, the 
   receiving MUA can then automatically detect that a message has 
   expired and facilitate handling of such emails for the user. 
 
    
2. Syntax 
    
   This section specifies the syntax of the new field using the ABNF 
   rules from [2]. The syntax elements are defined in [1]. 
    
   Expires-field = "Expires:" CFWS date-time [CFWS] CRLF 
 
 
3. Semantics 
    
   The Expires header indicates a date-time at which this message 
   expires. The exact meaning of "expires" is: 
    
   "The sender believes this message will be irrelevant after the 
   indicated date/time." 
    
   This header is intended for use between senders and recipients and 
   their agents, rather than by message transport. It is suggested that 
   the default behavior of an MUA with respect to the expires header 
   field should be to display such a message in a distinguished way. For 
 
 
Welzl, Nolf, Palme      Expires - January 2008                    [Page 2] 

                     The Expires Header in E-mail                July 2008
 
 
   example, the message could be displayed with gray text rather than 
   black, or in a different font than normal, or (in summaries) with an 
   image of an hourglass with the sand at the bottom. 
    
   It is also suggested that MUAs allow setting of an expiration date as 
   an option when composing messages. 
    
   The Expires header is strictly advisory in nature: MUAs, Message 
   Stores, and MTAs, MUST NOT delete a message on the basis of an 
   Expired header field unless given explicit instructions to do so by 
   the recipient. Mail Filters MUST NOT consider an expired header field 
   as criteria to be considered for deleting the message unless given 
   explicit instructions to do so by the recipient. 
    
    
4. Relation to X.400 gateways and Netnews 
    
   A similar header to Expires is also defined in recommendations for 
   gatewaying [3] between X.400 [4] and Internet mail as a renamed 
   version of what was previously called "Expiry-Date". However, those 
   recommendations are only valid for gateways. By defining the field 
   here, it is made available for general Internet email usage. It is 
   additionally defined in a similar way in netnews [5]. 
    
   Note that the definition given in this document imposes a stricter 
   requirement on the field to be advisory than the other definitions: 
   in [3], the meaning of Expiry is specified as the "time at which a 
   message loses its validity", and [5] states that the Expires header 
   field "specifies a date and time when the poster deems the article to 
   be no longer relevant and could usefully be removed". Such automatic 
   removal without explicit instructions from the recipient is strictly 
   forbidden for general Internet mail. 
 
    
Security Considerations 
    
   One intention of "Expires" is to help recipients avoid seeing 
   messages with information which is not any longer valid. There 
   may of course be cases where a user might want to see an expired 
   message (e.g. a user might sometimes want to be informed of a 
   meeting, even after the time of the meeting). This is the reason for 
   the requirement that MUAs MUST NOT delete messages on the basis of 
   the Expires-field unless given explicit instructions to do so by the 
   recipient. 
 
    
   
 
 
Welzl, Nolf, Palme      Expires - January 2008                    [Page 3]

                     The Expires Header in E-mail                July 2008
 
References 
 
                                                                         
   [1]  Resnick, P. (Editor), "Internet Message Format", Internet-draft  
         draft-resnick-2822upd-06 (work in progress), February 2008. 
         EDITORIAL NOTE: TO BE REPLACED WITH RFC 2822 IN CASE OF 
         PUBLICATION BEFORE THIS I-D IS PUBLISHED. 
     
   [2]   Crocker, D. and Overell, P.(Editors), "Augmented BNF for Syntax 
         Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, Internet Mail Consortium and 
         Demon Internet Ltd., November 1997. 
    
   [3]   Kille, S. and Overell, P.(Editors), "MIXER (Mime Internet X.400 
         Enhanced Relay): Mapping between X.400 and RFC 822/MIME", 
         RFC 2156, January 1998. 
    
   [4]   ISO/ITU: "Message Handling Systems, Part 7: Interpersonal 
         Messaging System, ISO international standard 10021-7, ITU 
         recommendation X.420. 
    
   [5]   Murchison, K. (Editor), Lindsey, C., Kohn, D., "Netnews Article 
         Format", Internet-draft draft-ietf-usefor-usefor-12 (work in 
         progress), January 2007. 
         EDITORIAL NOTE: TO BE REPLACED WITH RFC 1036 IN CASE OF 
         PUBLICATION BEFORE THIS I-D IS PUBLISHED.  
    
    
Acknowledgments 
    
   The authors would like to thank the many people who provided their 
   help during fruitful discussions in the IETF-822 mailing list of the 
   internet mail consortium. This includes Frank Ellermann, Ned Freed, 
   Arnt Gulbrandsen, Charles Lindsey, Jeff Macdonald, Keith Moore and 
   Hector Santos. Specifically, Keith Moore provided text for the 
   semantic definition of Expiry. 
    
    
 
 
Welzl, Nolf, Palme      Expires - January 2008                    [Page 4]

                     The Expires Header in E-mail                July 2008
 
 
Author's Addresses 
    
   Michael Welzl 
   University of Innsbruck 
   Technikerstr. 21 A 
   A-6020 Innsbruck
   Austria 

   Phone: +43 (512) 507-6110 
   Email: michael.welzl@uibk.ac.at 

    
   Thomas Nolf 
   University of Innsbruck 
   Technikerstr. 21 A 
   A-6020 Innsbruck
   Austria 

   Email: thomas.nolf@student.uibk.ac.at

    
   Jacob Palme 
   Stockholm University / KTH 
   Skeppargatan 73 
   S-115 30 Stockholm
   Sweden 
 
   Email: jpalme@dsv.su.se









 
 
Welzl, Nolf, Palme      Expires - January 2008                    [Page 5]

                     The Expires Header in E-mail                July 2008


Full Copyright Statement 
    
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS 
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
Intellectual Property 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
    
    
Acknowledgment 
    
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF 
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA). 




Welzl, Nolf, Palme      Expires - January 2008                    [Page 6]

