


Network Working Group                                  M. Kucherawy, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                             April 7, 2016
Intended status: Experimental
Expires: October 9, 2016


   Process Experiment: Expanded Qualification of Nominating Committee
                           Selecting Members
                   draft-kucherawy-nomcom-procexp-00

Abstract

   The criteria by which one qualifies to be a selecting member of the
   IETF Nominating Committee are somewhat limited, having been developed
   long before the current IETF meeting model that allows for greater
   remote participation both during and between organized meetings.
   This document describes a process experiment whereby those criteria
   are extended to meet the IETF's current participation model.  If
   successful, the results of this experiment can be folded into our
   permanent NomCom procedures.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 9, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Kucherawy                Expires October 9, 2016                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          NomCom Process Experiment             April 2016


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Definition of the Experiment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Evaluating the Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   6.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5





































Kucherawy                Expires October 9, 2016                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          NomCom Process Experiment             April 2016


1.  Introduction

   This document describes an IETF Process Experiment as described in
   [RFC3933].  The goal of the experiment is to test a new model for
   qualification as a selecting member of the IETF Nominating Committee
   ("NomCom"), which is defined in [RFC7437].

   Since 1996, the criteria for qualifying as a selecting member of the
   NomCom required recent in-person attendance at several meetings; the
   first two NomCom documents said "two of the last three meetings", and
   the two that followed said "three of the last five meetings".  The
   purpose of this constraint is to prefer community members that have
   had an opportunity to observe the contributions and conduct of other
   members directly rather than purely through remote participation.

   This has served the IETF well, though recently it has been observed
   that this explicitly excludes participants whose contributions are
   primarily remote, and may select for people with the budgets to
   travel and pay registration fees yet actually contribute to the IETF
   less than some remote participants.  This is the issue that this
   process experiment seeks to resolve.

2.  Definition of the Experiment

   This experiment is defined to last for one year, starting with the
   first call for volunteers to serve as NomCom selecting members, and
   ending when that NomCom has completed its work and thus dissolves.
   The next NomCom after publication of this document is approved and
   published is the one that will carry out the experiment.

   For the NomCom cycle conducting the experiment, the Chair of that
   NomCom shall permit into the volunteer pool any person that chooses
   to volunteer.  Language soliciting volunteers shall especially
   encourage those with substantial IETF experience to volunteer,
   regardless of their in-person attendance record.

   The slate of selecting members shall then be chosen per the procedure
   in [RFC7437], but only after the various required Liaison seats have
   been filled, to allow for additional oversight of the experiment.

   The Chair then announces the list of selecting members, as specified
   in Section 4.17 of [RFC7437], with the following changes:

   1.  Those members who have not attended three of the last five
       meetings of the IETF are explicitly identified in the list.

   2.  The challenge period is extended to two weeks.




Kucherawy                Expires October 9, 2016                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          NomCom Process Experiment             April 2016


   3.  A new reason to challenge a selection is that a specific member
       who has not attended three of the last five meetings of the IETF
       is not suitable for the NomCom.  Such a challenge must be
       accompanied by an explanation of why that particular member is
       not suitable.

   If it becomes apparent that this experimental process is being abused
   or is otherwise not working, the NomCom Chair can immediately declare
   the experiment aborted.  In that instance, the pool of volunteers is
   purged of those who have not attended three of the last five meetings
   of the IETF, the seats held by selecting members not meeting that
   criterion are vacated, and those seats are then filled by the pure
   [RFC7437] process.

3.  Evaluating the Experiment

   Upon expiration or early termination of the experiment, the NomCom
   chair shall report to the IESG, to the extent practical given the
   NomCom's confidentiality constraints, the details for the success or
   failure of the experiment.  This report and any community comment the
   IESG wishes to solicit shall be used by the IESG to decide one of the
   following:

   1.  That the experiment has revealed that the selection criteria as
       they exist in [RFC7437] are serving the IETF well and no change
       is needed;

   2.  That the results of the experiment suggest an additional
       experiment should be run with different parameters;

   3.  That the results of the experiment suggest that the changes made
       in Section 2 should be made permanent via an update to [RFC7437];
       or

   4.  That the results of the experiment suggest that some variation of
       the changes made in Section 2 should be made permanent via an
       update to [RFC7437].

4.  IANA Considerations

   This document contains no actions for IANA.

   [RFC Editor: Please remove this section prior to publication.]

5.  Security Considerations

   This is an IETF process experiment related to the operation of the
   NomCom.  Any security issues are already covered by [RFC7437].



Kucherawy                Expires October 9, 2016                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          NomCom Process Experiment             April 2016


   The greatest threat is to the smooth operation of the NomCom and,
   indirectly, the bodies to which it appoints people.  The "abort"
   provision included in Section 2 allows the people already in charge
   of the operation of the IETF to close any loopholes the experiment
   introduces if it is perceived that they are creating a problem.

6.  Normative References

   [RFC3933]  Klensin, J. and S. Dawkins, "A Model for IETF Process
              Experiments", BCP 93, RFC 3933, DOI 10.17487/RFC3933,
              November 2004, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3933>.

   [RFC7437]  Kucherawy, M., Ed., "IAB, IESG, and IAOC Selection,
              Confirmation, and Recall Process: Operation of the
              Nominating and Recall Committees", BCP 10, RFC 7437,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7437, January 2015,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7437>.

Appendix A.  Acknowledgments

   Harald Alvestrand, Tony Hansen, and Barry Leiba provided reviews and
   comments during the development of this proposal.

Author's Address

   Murray S. Kucherawy (editor)
   270 Upland Drive
   San Francisco, CA  94127
   United States

   EMail: superuser@gmail.com




















Kucherawy                Expires October 9, 2016                [Page 5]

