


    Internet Draft                                      Bala Rajagopalan
    Expiration Date: August, 26, 1999		        NEC USA
			

	 IGP-Independent Routing Support for Traffic Engineering
 
                  draft-rajagopalan-igpfree-te-00.txt
                 


     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
     all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
     other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
     Drafts.

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
     documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
     Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
     "work in progress."

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


				ABSTRACT

	This draft proposes that routing mechanisms in support of
        traffic engineering be developed independent of specific IGPs.
        A modular constraint-based routing overlay approach is suggested 
        and its components are briefly described.
           


    1. INTRODUCTION
    
       Constraint-based routing (of traffic trunks) has been identified 
       as an important component of traffic engineering under MPLS [1]. 
       Also, dynamic load distribution using optimized multipath routing 
       has been proposed as a traffic engineering aid [7]. Other routing
       solutions in support of traffic engineering may evolve in the 
       future. Routing mechanisms to support traffic engineering needs 
       must therefore be flexible to accommodate possibly different 
       routing solutions under a common framework.

                                                                [Page 1]

    Internet Draft     draft-rajagopalan-igpfree-te-00.txt    Feb., 1999 


       This draft expands on the overlay model for constraint-based 
       routing (CR) as presented in [2].  The essential theme proposed 
       in this draft is the development of a modular intradomain routing 
       overlay that aids in traffic engineering, as an alternative to 
       extending each existing IGP separately to support traffic 
       engineering or other QoS requirements [3-5]. In this regard, the 
       present proposal differs from the general approach described in 
       [5] which deals with extensibility of existing IGPs, specifically, 
       link state protocols. 
       
       The main advantage of the overlay approach is that it permits 
       the development of routing mechanisms not constrained by any 
       limitations of the underlying IGP. Examples of such constraints 
       are: 
       
         - the narrow range of metric values provided by IS-IS [6] 

         - the overheads of flooding state information frequently (IS-IS 
           and OSPF), 

         - potential for incompatibility between any newly developed 
           hierarchical network state representations with the existing 
           representation and usage of aggregated routing information 
           in link state protocols (ISIS and OSPF), and

         - the inability to utilize distance or path vector IGPs to
           disseminate constraint-based routing information. 
        
       The overlay approach allows the development of a single standard 
       set of routing mechanisms that can be used over many existing 
       IGPs, including distance or path vector types [2]. Given that new 
       mechanisms such as explicit route set-up and new algorithms for 
       routing (e.g., OMP [7]) have to be deployed to support traffic 
       engineering, it might be flexible to completely decouple existing 
       IGPs from the new routing mechanisms.
   
       This draft recognizes the five components that need to be 
       developed for constraint-based routing. These are: routing 
       metrics definition, routing update propagation, network state 
       representation, route computation and path establishment. Given 
       the variety of solutions that may be developed to support traffic 
       engineering and QoS support, it is proposed that the overall 
       routing scheme be modular, with the ability to plug in different 
       instances of some of the above components. For instance, it 
       should be possible to employ different routing metrics and route 
       computation algorithms as desired in an autonomous system, without 
       requiring a new specification for each variant. 
   

 

                                                                [Page 2]

    Internet Draft     draft-rajagopalan-igpfree-te-00.txt    Feb., 1999 


    2. ROUTING METRICS
   
       It is proposed that individual ASs be given the ability to define 
       and use routing metrics as per their needs. The reason for this 
       is as follows. Many different routing strategies for traffic
       engineering and QoS support are possible and individual ASs must 
       be able to deploy proprietary routing solutions internally, using  
       any routing metric and route computation algorithm necessary [8]. 
       In this regard, the CR overlay will only specify the format of 
       the standard envelope for propagating any routing metric, and 
       not necessarily the encoding and the semantics of all possible 
       metrics. An example of such an envelope is the type-length-value 
       (TLV) format. The specification of the encoding and the semantics 
       of some metrics may be under user control. The encoding and the 
       semantics of certain basic metrics such as bandwidth may be 
       standardized, as proposed in [5]. 


    3. UPDATE PROPAGATION

       Under the modular approach proposed here, update propagation, 
       routing information representation and explicit path establishment
       are perhaps the items that require complete specification. Under 
       the overlay model, each router runs an overlay CR module that 
       utilizes an underlying IGP to build a forwarding tree for 
       propagating CR updates [2]. Update propagation must ensure 
       consistent state information at every router. Details of one 
       possible update propagation mechanism were described in [2].

       The main reason for extending an existing IGP to support traffic
       engineering requirements is the ability to use the IGP's update 
       propagation mechanism. This has the following disadvantages:

       - the IGP must necessarily be a link state scheme, since distance
         vector IGPs do not have any means to propagate link and nodal
         metrics required for constraint-based routing 
 
       - the only choice available for propagating updates, even 
         frequently changing state information, is flooding, and

       - the constraint-based routing updates must be handled like the 
         basic topology updates, for instance, requiring aging, periodic
         refresh, etc., while the processing of state updates is 
         simplified under the overlay model [2]. 
         
       An overlay update propagation mechanism permits constraint- 
       based routing implementation over both distance (or path) vector 
       and link state IGPs. Furthermore, the operation can be made 
       efficient. A drawback to implementing a separate update 
       propagation scheme over a link state IGP, of course, is the 
       duplication of some work. This is evident from the description in 
       [2]. The advantages of the overlay method, in our opinion, 
       outweighs the drawbacks. 
                                                                [Page 3]

    Internet Draft     draft-rajagopalan-igpfree-te-00.txt    Feb., 1999 
        

    4. NETWORK STATE REPRESENTATION 

       The overlay approach permits an IGP-independent representation of
       network state information used by route computation algorithms. 
       This has both advantages and disadvantages. The obvious dis-
       advantage is that each router must maintain separate representa-
       tions, one for the underlying IGP and one for constraint-based 
       routing. The advantages, however, are as follows. First, a 
       single representation may be developed for use over many IGPs. 
       Second, the representation can be IGP-independent, thereby 
       allowing new hierarchical encodings of aggregated state 
       information which are different from those of the underlying 
       IGPs. For example, an OSPF internal router presently maintains 
       only reachability information about destinations in external 
       areas and the path costs.  It is conceivable that constraint- 
       based routing representations of external areas may be more 
       complex. It therefore seems best to decouple the two 
       representations. Clearly, when the underlying IGP is not link 
       state, a state representation for CR is anyway required. 

       In this draft, we do not intend to describe a particular network
       state representation for the CR overlay. Certain basic features 
       of such a representation, however, are to be noted: the network
       state representation must encode the network topology. In the
       case of hierarchical routing, a representation of the aggregated
       topology information may be required. For each router in the 
       topology, a unique identifier (e.g., an IP address) would be 
       required. The representation of point-to-point and broadcast 
       links may be based on existing representations, such as in 
       OSPF [2,9]. The specification of link metrics would require 
       identification of links, via interface or subnet IP addresses. 
       Nodal metrics in addition to link metrics would have to be
       represented.

       The network state representation used by the CR overlay is 
       completely autonomous of the underlying IGP. The network state 
       information can be incrementally built in a router through the 
       receipt of CR update messages. In the case of a link state IGP, 
       the CR module at a router utilizes the link state IGP topology
       representation only to identify the local forwarding tree 
       branches, as described in [2].
        

    5. ROUTE COMPUTATION

       It must be recognized that a variety of schemes can be used to
       compute constraint-based routes. Indeed, entirely different
       routing paradigms may be used to support traffic engineering,
       from optimized multipath [7] to fine-grain flow-based routing. 
       In this regard, our view is that the routing mechanisms 
       developed for traffic engineering must provide broad support

                                                                [Page 4]

    Internet Draft     draft-rajagopalan-igpfree-te-00.txt    Feb., 1999 
        

       for different routing schemes. This essentially implies that
       it must be possible for an individual AS to use possibly
       proprietary route computation and forwarding scheme within the
       general framework of a (standard) overlay CR scheme. Such an
       approach also suggests that it must be possible to realize
       any proprietary routing metric that is required for path 
       computation. 

       The implication of these requirements is that constraint-based
       routing must be modular, with certain modules being dynamically
       replaceable. The implementation aspects of this are beyond the
       scope of this draft. 
   

    6. PATH ESTABLISHMENT

       While path establishment for traffic engineering might rely on 
       some explicit routing feature of protocols such as LDP or RSVP,
       additional mechanisms may be used for routing traffic. For 
       instance, per packet forwarding decisions over multiple paths
       may be made, as in OMP [7]. In general, explicit routing is an
       important mechanism to realize constraint-based routing and it 
       must be specified. Other forwarding mechanisms may be realized 
       in conjunction with the associated path computation procedures.
 
 
    7. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

       Constraint-based routing is composed of several components, as 
       described in this draft. Whether implemented as an overlay or
       through the extension of link state IGPs all these components must
       be realized. The extension of existing IGPs is useful in realizing 
       only one of these components, i.e., update propagation. Even the 
       representation of network state information may not be possible 
       via direct extension of an existing link state IGP. Other components 
       such as route computation and path setup require new mechanisms to 
       be developed. 

       This draft proposed the development of constraint-based routing 
       mechanisms independent of existing IGPs. This approach has some
       advantages, as described. The CR overlay may be considered a 
       separate routing protocol, just as any extension of existing IGPs 
       for CR results in a parallel routing protocol. However, as pointed 
       out in [2], a CR overlay can utilize the underlying IGP to build 
       and maintain the network topology view essential for forwarding 
       CR updates efficiently. 

       This draft also proposed that the CR overlay be modular, allowing
       new route computation procedures and metrics be implemented in a 
       dynamic manner. The details of this may be depend on specific 
       implementations and are outside the scope of this draft. 

                                                                [Page 5]

    Internet Draft     draft-rajagopalan-igpfree-te-00.txt    Feb., 1999 
        

    REFERENCES

    [1] D. Awduche, J. Malcolm, J. Agogbua, M. O'Dell, J. McManus,  
        "Requirements for Traffic Engineering Over MPLS", Internet
        Draft, draft-ietf-mpls-traffic-eng-00.txt, October 1998 

    [2] B. Rajagopalan and Q. Ma, "An Overlay Model for Constraint-
        Based Routing," Internet Draft, draft-rajagopalan-overlay-00.txt, 
        January, 1999.

    [3] H. Smit and T. Li, "IS-IS Extensions for Traffic Engineering,"
        Internet Draft, draft-ietf-isis-traffic-00.txt, February, 1999.

    [4] D. M. Yeung, "OSPF Extensions for Traffic Engineering," Internet
        Draft, draft-yeung-ospf-traffic-00.txt, February, 1999.

    [5] T. Li, G. Swallow and D. Awduche, "IGP Requirements for Traffic 
        Engineering with MPLS", Internet Draft, draft-li-mpls-igp-te-
        00.txt, February, 1999. 

    [6] R. Callon, "Use of OSI IS-IS for Routing in TCP/IP and Dual
        Environments," RFC 1195, December, 1990.

    [7] C. Villamizar, "MPLS Optimized Multipath (MPLS-OMP)," Internet
        Draft, draft-villamizar-mpls-omp-01.txt, February, 1999.

    [8] E. Crawley, R. Nair, B. Rajagopalan and H. Sandick, "A Framework
        for QoS-Based Routing," RFC 2386, August, 1998. 

    [9] J. Moy, "OSPF Version 2", RFC 2328, April, 1998.

 

    Author's Address

    Bala Rajagopalan
    NEC C&C Research Labs
    4 Independence Way
    Princeton, NJ 08540
    U.S.A
    Ph: +1-609-951-2969
    Email: braja@ccrl.nj.nec.com



               *** This draft expires on August, 26, 1999 *** 

                                                                [Page 6]
