
Network Working Group                                        A. Williams
Internet-Draft                                                     NICTA
Expires: January 11, 2005                                  July 12, 2004



                         Bridging IP at Layer-3
                   draft-williams-ipvlx-ipbridging-00


Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.


   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."


   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 11, 2005.


Copyright Notice


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved.


Abstract


   Joining incompatible links together as an IP subnet by bridging IP
   packets at Layer-3 is an attractive goal.  Several challenges that
   need to be addressed before IPbridging becomes a reality are listed
   in this document.












Williams                Expires January 11, 2005                [Page 1]
Internet-Draft           Bridging IP at Layer-3                July 2004



Table of Contents


   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Complications with IPbridging  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  IPbridging and Rbridge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Other Notes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.1   IPv4 DHCP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.2   Multicast forwarding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.3   IPv6 ND-proxy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . .  8







































Williams                Expires January 11, 2005                [Page 2]
Internet-Draft           Bridging IP at Layer-3                July 2004



1.  Introduction


   IP protocols are widely used to build networks from multiple links of
   differing types by assigning IP address ranges to each link and
   connecting links with an IP router.  Assignment of address ranges to
   links is usually a manual process unsuited to plug-and-play
   networking.  Automatic assignment of address ranges to links is
   possible with inefficient use of address space, possible link
   renumbering with changes in network topology and host renumbering
   when changing attachment point.


   802-style LAN bridging provides a good example of plug and play
   networking, however it too has some drawbacks.  Layer-2 bridging
   cannot be used between links with different L2 address types,
   problems arise bridging links with the same L2 address type but
   differing MTUs and multicast addressing semantics can differ between
   links with the same L2 address type.  Furthermore, L2 spanning trees
   result in inefficient paths between end nodes and concentrates
   traffic on a subset of the available links.  See [Deering-email] and
   [Rbridge] for more details.


   A device connecting several links in an IP subnet together by
   bridging IP packets at Layer 3 (an IPbridge) could combine the best
   of both worlds and achieve plug and play operation over links that
   cannot be bridged at Layer-2.  IPbridges would behave as IP routers
   with a host route for each IP device in the subnet.  IPbridges could
   use a more sophisticated routing protocol than spanning tree
   resulting in more efficient paths and spreading of traffic over the
   available links.























Williams                Expires January 11, 2005                [Page 3]
Internet-Draft           Bridging IP at Layer-3                July 2004



2.  Complications with IPbridging


   Although IPbridging appears superficially similar to LAN bridging
   there are a number of complicating differences:


      IP address bootstrapping:
         IP addresses are not pre-configured into devices like EUI-48
         MAC addresses and therefore IPbridges must support address
         autoconfiguration protocols (e.g.  DHCP and IPv6 Stateless
         Autoconfiguration) in a network without IP addresses.
         Autoconfiguration protocols are hard to handle with vanilla
         IPbridging because the device does not yet have a "bridgeable"
         IP address and link specific information is often used.
         IPbridges carrying out the normal functions of an IP router
         (e.g.  fragmenting packets, decrementing the IP TTL, issuing
         redirects) will also need an IP address to use as a source
         address in ICMP messages.


      IP address to link address mapping:
         Final delivery of an IP packet to an end device often requires
         mapping the destination IP address to a link layer address.
         This mapping is link specific and is not required in LAN
         bridging because the link layer address is assumed to be the
         same.


      Discovery and use of exit routers:
         IP networks are usually connected to other IP networks and to
         the Internet via routers.  IPbridges forwarding packets to
         destinations outside the local IP subnet need to decide which
         exit router should be used.  Protocols like DHCP pass default
         router information to the client -- should IPbridges honour
         that or should they discover all available exit routers and
         choose?  Should clients using router discovery see IPbridges or
         routers?  Should redirects from exit routers affect routing
         between IPbridges or only the clients?


      Protocol semantics:
         Various IP protocols (e.g.  IPv6 Neighbor Discovery, DHCP,
         IGMP/MLD) assume that certain types of broadcast and multicast
         messages are not forwarded by IP routers and that they are
         delivered to all instances of a particular network service
         within a subnet.  Many of these protocols set and check the IP
         TTL field to ensure that forwarding does not occur or detect
         when it has.  For these protocols, an IPbridge would need to
         proxy services (e.g.  act as a DHCP relay or default router) or
         proxy the required information (e.g.  IGMP/MLD).






Williams                Expires January 11, 2005                [Page 4]
Internet-Draft           Bridging IP at Layer-3                July 2004



3.  IPbridging and Rbridge


   Rbridge [Rbridge] is an improved system for bridging 802 addressed
   networks.  L2 frames are encapsulated for transport between rbridges
   and decapsulated for transmission onto the destination link.  The
   encapsulation header contains a hop count which is decremented each
   time the packet is forwarded by an Rbridge.  Packets are discarded
   when the hop count reaches zero preventing catastrophic packet
   looping.  Rbridges run a link state routing protocol to exchange end
   node reachability information, to compute optimal network paths and
   to support fast fast recovery after link failure.


   Since a great deal of traffic on 802 networks is IP traffic and since
   IP packets already have a TTL, forwarding IP packets without rbridge
   encapsulation is an attractive optimisation for Rbridges.  In this
   case the Rbridge would behave as an IPbridge and decrement the IP TTL
   when forwarding a packet.


   An Rbridge forwarding bare IP packets is not restricted to pure
   IPbridge operation -- for example, it can make use of the L2
   forwarding information for an destination IP address it does not know
   how to reach.  When an Rbridge is bridging between two incompatible
   links using bare IP packets it is operating as a pure IPbridge.  In
   general, it may make sense for Rbridges using optimised IP forwarding
   to treat some IP traffic as L2 traffic in order to avoid the issues
   described above.


























Williams                Expires January 11, 2005                [Page 5]
Internet-Draft           Bridging IP at Layer-3                July 2004



4.  Other Notes


4.1  IPv4 DHCP


   DHCP, as typically deployed on a bridged 802 network, will not
   operate in an IPbridged network.  There are several issues.  Firstly,
   DHCPDISCOVERs and other messages are sent to a local IPv4 broadcast
   address 255.255.255.255 that should not be forwarded by an IPbridge.
   Secondly, DHCPOFFERs can be unicast to the requesting client using
   the MAC address supplied in the DHCPDISCOVER message.  There has been
   no information before the DHCPOFFER that would allow an IPbridge to
   correctly forward to the requesting client without using L2
   information.


   An alternative is for IPbridges to act as a DHCP relays.  This would
   work however configuration is required.  Configuration information
   for the DHCP relay could be distributed in the routing protocol.


4.2  Multicast forwarding


   Currently, Rbridge and 802.1 Spanning Tree variants distribute
   multicast over a single spanning tree.  Multicast forwarding in
   Rbridged/IPbridged networks could be made more efficient by snooping
   and distributing group membership and multicast source information
   via the link state routing protocol.  This approach was used for
   MOSPF [RFC1584][RFC1585]..  Rbridges may still need to generate IGMP
   packets to build efficient paths through the L2 networks between
   Rbridges.


4.3  IPv6 ND-proxy


   [IPv6-multilink] describes a method for connecting multiple links
   sharing a common IPv6 prefix with routers that perform Neighbor
   Discovery proxying for hosts not connected to the local link.
   Topologies with loops are not supported.

















Williams                Expires January 11, 2005                [Page 6]
Internet-Draft           Bridging IP at Layer-3                July 2004



5.  Security Considerations


   None.


6  References


   [Deering-email]
              Deering, S., "Four problems with link layer bridging", Oct
              2002.


              http://internet.motlabs.com/pipermail/zerouter/
              2002-October/000029.html


   [IPv6-multilink]
              Thaler, D. and C. Huitema, "Multi-link Subnet Support in
              IPv6", draft-ietf-ipv6-multilink-subnets-00 (work in
              progress), July 2002.


   [RFC1584]  Moy, J., "Multicast Extensions to OSPF", RFC 1584, March
              1994.


   [RFC1585]  Moy, J., "MOSPF: Analysis and Experience", RFC 1585, March
              1994.


   [Rbridge]  Perlman, R., "RBridges: Transparent Routing",
              draft-perlman-rbridge-00 (work in progress), May 2004.



Author's Address


   Aidan Williams
   National ICT Australia (NICTA)
   Bay 15, Locomotive Workshop
   Australian Technology Park
   Eveleigh, NSW  1430
   Australia


   Phone: +61 2 8374 5558
   EMail: aidan@nicta.com.au
   URI:   http://nicta.com.au/












Williams                Expires January 11, 2005                [Page 7]
Internet-Draft           Bridging IP at Layer-3                July 2004



Intellectual Property Statement


   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.


   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.



Full Copyright Statement


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved.


   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.


   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.


   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION




Williams                Expires January 11, 2005                [Page 8]
Internet-Draft           Bridging IP at Layer-3                July 2004



   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



Acknowledgment


   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.












































Williams                Expires January 11, 2005                [Page 9]