Internet Engineering Task Force                               (Page 1)
INTERNET-DRAFT
Thomas J. Happel
Expires: January 2004
Submitted:  July, 2003

     Web Site Password Considerations for IETF Standard Protocols
                      <draft-happel-password-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance
     with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.

     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
     other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
     Drafts.

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
     documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use
     Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than
     as "work in progress."

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

Abstract

     User security has been compromised at many visited web sites due
     to the wide variety of password construction requirements being
     presented to Internet users. One single, flexible, password
     construction requirement accepted throughout the global Internet
     community would promote web site user security by establishing a
     construct, wherein any user established password would be
     universally acceptable to any web site contacted.

Defacto Standard

     The original IP password construct used a simple sixteen
     character alphanumeric requirement for providing user access to
     the Internet. This construct permitted use of any combination of
     alphabetic (not all lower case) or numeric characters to a
     maximum length of sixteen.

Web Site Requirements

     For every different web site password requirement, the user must
     somehow document either the actual password used, or how the
     rules differ so that a derivation of the user's original password
     could apply, and could be reconstructed by knowing how the rules
     differ from the rules that the user employed to construct the
     original password. Most users it would seem, prefer to use the
     same password at multiple sites to avoid security breakdown by
     having to record actual different passwords used at each site.
     Sometimes more than one password is required at a given site when
     linked-to related sites have different requirements than the
     parent site; avoidance of this problem would typically take
     the form of using a password that complied with the most
     restrictive rules encountered at a particular web site, which
     would assure compatibility with all links encountered; in any
     event the variance from the original user established password
     would have to be documented, and security that passwords are
     employed to provide (using this scenario) quickly disappears with
     the ensuing documentation. The need for simple password construct
     rules would seem to be obvious.  Following are some of the
     password construct rules that I have encountered at various web
     sites visited:

     * Use from 6 to 10 characters; at least one must be numeric.
     * Use up to 10 alphanumeric characters.
     * Use 4 numeric characters.
     * Use 7 numeric characters (consider how many of these will be
       phone numbers).
     * Use 8 cryptic alphanumeric characters supplied by the web site.
     * Use up to 16 alphanumeric characters.
     * Use 8 alphabetic and numeric characters in prescribed password
       positions.
     * Use alphanumeric characters and supply other personal
       information.

     This list could go on and on.

     For example, password "Sebastian2510" was developed using the
     following rule:
     "13 characters alphanumeric where the first character is
     uppercase alphabetic and the following 8 characters are lowercase
     alphabetic followed by 4 numeric characters". A visited web site
     has the following rule:
     "Use from 6 to 10 characters; at least one must be numeric". The
     resultant password derived by application of the web site rule
     would be: "Sebastian2". If the original password had been
     "blumenthal" or "frog", then the process becomes even more
     complicated. In the final analysis, user password documentation
     will compromise security that the password itself was intended to
     provide.

     I favor the simplicity of using 4-16 alphanumeric characters
     supported by a browser link which would provide user help for
     construction of a reasonably secure, viable password, which would
     be acceptable at all web sites requiring user password(s).

Author's Address (please reply by email):

     Thomas J. Happel
     1436 Woodlawn Commons
     Grand Haven, MI 49417-2323
     Email: tjsomerset@charter.net

Happel                  Expires January 2004                   (Page 2)

