Internet Engineering Task Force                     Georgios Karagiannis
Internet-Draft                                      University of Twente
Intended status: Informational                        Alexandru Petrescu
Expires: December 15, 2014                                           CEA
                                                   Dimitri Papadimitriou
                                                          Alcatel-Lucent
                                                       Bastiaan Wissingh
                                                                     TNO
                                                           June 15, 2014


               Problem Statement for Internet-wide Geo-networking
                draft-karagiannis-geonet-problem-statement-00

Abstract

   This document describes the need of intertwining of IP networking 
   with geographical addressing. As used today, IP routing and 
   addressing are completely unaware of geographic parameters such as 
   coordinates or postal addresses. Possible applications of future 
   Internet-wide geo-networking mechanisms include, but are not limited 
   to, dissemination of IP packets to geographical areas, or precise 
   tracking of package positions during a shipping process, with more 
   use-cases under discussion.
   

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 15, 2014.
   
Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.   

Karagiannis, et al.   Expires December 15, 2014                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Problem statement for GeoNet             June 2014

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Table of Contents

1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2 
2. Challenges and main goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4
3. Internet-wide Geo-networking use cases . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
4. Assumptions and Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
5. Relationships between GeoNet and other IETF Working Groups . .  8
6. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
7. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
8. Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
9. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
10. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
11. Authors' Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
12. Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10



1.  Introduction

   Internet-based applications are currently using IP addresses to 
   address interfaces of a node that can be for example a host, a 
   server or a router. IP routing and addressing are completely unaware 
   of geographic parameters such as coordinates or postal addresses. 

   Future applications and use cases have been identified that need to 
   support among others the (1) dissemination IP packets to geographical 
   areas, (2) precise tracking of package positions during a shipping 
   process, (3)dissemination of traffic safety, traffic efficiency & 
   management, and infotainment type of vehicular information to fixed 
   and mobile Road Side Units (RSUs) through the Internet, (4) tracking 
   and communicating with people or objects located in certain 
   geographical areas, e.g., Oiler Riggers, where Oil companies want to 
   track employees in the field, where the conditions can be dangerous 
   and the employee's safety needs to be verified. 
   In order to support such future applications and use cases Internet- 
   wide Geo-networking solutions need to be specified within the context 
   of the new and to be started GeoNet IETF working group. 
   Internet-wide Geo-networking can be considered as the solution space 
   that includes mechanisms and protocols used to disseminate packets 
   sent by authorized source nodes located anywhere in the Internet to 
   other nodes in areas described by geographical parameters.

   An example scenario that can be used for the support of 
   Internet-wide geo-networking is shown in Figure 1. This scenario 
   shows a source node, which can be located anywhere in the Internet, 
   and is interconnected with access routers via the Internet. The 
   packets generated by the source are disseminated through the Internet 
   to other nodes in areas described by geographical parameters.

Karagiannis, et al.   Expires December 15, 2014                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Problem statement for GeoNet             June 2014

                                                     Coverage
                                                       Area
                                                       - ~ -
                                                     `       `
                                                   '           '
                                    +------+     `               `
                                 ___|Access|____`                 `
                +----------+    /   |Router|   +`-----------------`+
               /            \  /    +------+   | `          O    ` |
  +------+    /              \/                |   '   - ~ -   '   |
  |Source|___/    Internet    \                |     `   O   `     |
  | Node |   \                /                |   '   - ~ -   '   |
  +------+    \              /\     +------+   | `               ` |
               \            /  \____|Access|____,             O   `|
                +----------+        |Router|   |`                 `|
                                    +------+   | `               ` |
                                               |   '           '   |
                                               |     ` - ~ - `     |
                                               |  Destination Area |
                                               +-------------------+

                                                  O Destination Nodes
                 Figure 1: Internet-wide geo-networking scenario

1.2.  Terminology 

   Internet-wide Geo Networking 

      the solution space that includes mechanisms and protocols used to 
      disseminate packets sent by authorized source nodes located 
      anywhere in the Internet to other nodes in areas described by 
      geographical parameters.

   Geographic coordinate system:
 
      a coordinate system that enables every location on the Earth to be 
      specified by a set of numbers or letters.

   Road Side Unit (RSU)

      equipment located along highways, at traffic intersections and
      other type of locations where timely communications with vehicles
      are needed.  Each RSU includes DSRC (Direct Short Range Radio, 
      e.g., IEEE 802.11p) radio, a positioning system and a router to 
      route packets back through the infrastructure network.  RSU is 
      also known as RSE (Road Side Equipment)

   Traffic safety application

      application that is primarily applied to decrease the probability
      of traffic accidents and the loss of life of the occupants of
      vehicles.



Karagiannis, et al.   Expires December 15, 2014                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Problem statement for GeoNet             June 2014

   Traffic efficiency & management application: 

     application that is primarily applied to improve vehicle traffic 
     flow, traffic coordination and traffic assistance and provide 
     updated local information, maps and in general, messages of 
     relevance bounded in space and/or time 

   Infotainment applications: 

     all other types of Internet based applications, for example media 
     downloading


1.4. Organization of This Document

   This document is organized as follows. Section 2 describes several 
   challenges and open issues associated with Internet-wide Geo-
   networking solutions. Furthermore, Section 2 emphasizes the main goal  
   of the GeoNet IETF working group. Section 3 provides a brief 
   description of Internet-wide Geo-networking use cases. Section 4 
   lists the Internet-wide Geo-networking assumptions and 
   requirements. The relationships between GeoNet and other IETF working 
   groups are given in Section 5. Section 6 describes the security 
   considerations. The IANA considerations are listed in Section 7. 
   Section 8 provides the acknowledgements.


2 Challenges and main goal

2.1 Challenges and open issues

   The challenges and open issues that need to be addressed by Internet-
   wide Geo-networking solutions are: 

   o) Mechanisms and protocol solutions are needed for the accurate 
      (i.e., precise and up to date) representation of geographic areas 
      using (1) geo-locators such as names and (2) geographic 
      coordinates.

   o) Mechanisms and protocol solutions are needed to ensure that 
      geographical area information (e.g. geo-locators, names, 
      geographic coordinates) is accurately mapped to an IP 
      locator, i.e. an IP address. Mapping data bases can be maintained 
      at the source nodes, intermediate or edge nodes, and at specific 
      IP locator nodes.

   o) Mechanisms and protocol solutions are needed to ensure that the IP 
      addresses of access routers, Road Side Units (RSUs), and so on can 
      be accurately mapped to geographic area information (geo-locators, 
      names, and geographic coordinates).  Mapping data bases 
      can be maintained at the source nodes, intermediate or edge nodes, 
      and at specific IP locator nodes.



Karagiannis, et al.   Expires December 15, 2014                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Problem statement for GeoNet             June 2014

   o) Mechanisms and protocol solutions are needed to ensure that data 
      packets generated by source nodes placed arbitrarily in the 
      Internet can be disseminated over multiple hops by using, where 
      possible, geographic coordinates of (1) the destination node(s) 
      and/or (2) the intermediate nodes for the routing decisions, 
      instead of using their IP addresses. Note that in order to solve 
      the above challenge it is NOT mandated that all nodes located on 
      the path from source to destination nodes are able to forward 
      packets using the geo-coordinates of (1) the destination node(s) 
      and/or (2) the intermediate nodes for the routing decisions. This 
      is emphasized by using the words "where possible".

2.2 Goal

   Mechanisms and IETF protocols are needed for authorized source nodes 
   anywhere in the Internet to disseminate packets to other nodes in 
   areas described by geographical parameters, all while respecting 
   privacy concerns of sender and receiver.  Parameters such as 
   geographical coordinates and other geo-locators such as civic 
   addresses should be used.


3.  Internet-wide Geo-networking use cases
 
   This section provides a brief description of the Internet-wide Geo-
   networking use cases. The detailed description of each of these use 
   cases is provided in separate Internet drafts.

3.1 Dissemination of IP packets to geographical areas 

   A source node, which may be located anywhere, sends packets to a 
   an access router through the Internet. Those access 
   routers are selected based on geographical location information, and 
   traffic is routed to them using the IP address of the router and 
   conventional IP routing. Each of the destination access routers then 
   copies and broadcasts the received packets to listeners within its 
   (1) radio coverage for wireless access routers or (2) IP subnet for 
   wired access routers.

3.2 Precise tracking of package positions during a shipping process

   A good delivered by a shipping organization has a provider 
   independent IP address. This good is tracked in that its geographical 
   position is known to end-users continuously throughout the entire 
   delivery process. The IP address of the good is associated to the 
   geographical coordinates of the router to which it connects. Using IP 
   addresses enables very finely grained and precise tracking. An 
   important issue that needs to be taken into consideration in this use 
   case is the protection of privacy, i.e., provide confidentiality to 
   personal data and protect leaking information through protocol 
   behavior, such as relation between identifier and location.

3.3 Dissemination of ITS (Intelligent Transportation System) information 
    to fixed and mobile RSUs via Internet

Karagiannis, et al.   Expires December 15, 2014                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Problem statement for GeoNet             June 2014

   In this use case traffic safety, traffic efficiency & management, and 
   infotainment type of vehicular information is disseminated to fixed 
   and mobile Road Side Units (RSUs) through the Internet. Most RSUs are 
   placed at a fixed geographical location that will most likely not be 
 

   changed until the device either reaches its end of life or is no 
   longer needed at that location. A so called 'Mobile RSU' on 
   the other hand is portable and not "torn down" while moving, meaning 
   that among other settings its geographical position adjusts according 
   to the location where it is positioned. Such a 'Mobile RSU' 
   is very flexible for use in multiple situations. Examples of such 
   situations include the case that a permanently installed unit fails 
   and needs a temporarily backup unit or during road construction. In 
   the latter case, a road worker could take a Mobile RSU, position it 
   somewhere at the road works site, and start sending warning messages 
   to approaching vehicles. The next day the mobile RSU can be 
   positioned elsewhere. The protection of privacy is an important issue 
   for this use case and needs to be taken into consideration.

3.4 Tracking and communicating with people or objects located in certain 
    geographical areas

   Companies, like Oil companies want to track employees in the field, 
   where the conditions can be dangerous and the employee's safety needs 
   to be verified. Such a dangerous situation can be the explosion (or 
   the high risk of explosion) of an Oil rigger. In such a situation the 
   Oil company needs to be able to disseminate recovery instructions to 
   all employees that are within a certain radius of the explosion 
   (e.g., 1 mile).


4. Assumptions and Requirements

   This section includes the assumptions and the requirements that need 
   to be fulfilled by Internet-wide Geo-networking solutions.

4.1 Assumptions

   The assumptions associated with the Internet-wide geo-networking 
   solutions are: 

      o) The destination nodes can be static or moving entities, such as
         hosts, vehicles, goods sensors and actuators, that are spread 
         in a certain target/destination geographic area.

      o) existing IETF mechanisms and protocols like the ones 
         specified and standardized by the IETF WGs: LISP [LISP], 
         GEOPRIV [GEOPRIV], ECRIT [ECRIT] will be taken into 
         consideration during the design phase.





Karagiannis, et al.   Expires December 15, 2014                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Problem statement for GeoNet             June 2014

      o) The document "ISO 19107: Geographic information - Spatial 
         Schema" [ISO19107] will be considered for the representation of 
         spatial characteristics of geographic features (including 
         geometries), and a set of spatial operations consistent with 
         these schemas.  This document treats of vector geometry and 
         topology of up to three dimensions. Geometries range from 
         point, multipoint, to polygon, to Bezier curves and to 
         Clothoids.

      o) Documents from IEEE P1609.2 [IEEE1609.2] may be considered for 
         security and privacy support on IEEE 802.11p [IEEE802.11p] 
         links.

4.2 Requirements

   The specified Internet-wide geo-networking mechanisms and protocol 
   solutions:

      o) SHOULD ideally support IPv4 and IPv6

      o) MUST at a minimum support IPv6

      o) MUST be able to use and insert geographic area information for 
         selection of receivers

      o) MUST be able to disseminate the information from senders to the
         destination nodes located in the destination geographic area in 
         a point to multipoint manner.

      o) SHOULD be able to scale, leveraging stable and deterministic   
         under-layers when available, and maintain its performance and
         precision to acceptable levels even if it is applied in 
         contexts of:
           (1) global coverage with small destination geographic areas, 

           (2) large traffic volumes or large flows, 

           (3) large number of simultaneously active sources.

      o) MUST be able to provide accurate representation of geographic 
         areas using: (1) standardized geo-locators where available 
         and/or (2) geographic physical coordinates.

      o) MUST be able to ensure that geographical area information
        (geo-locators, names and geographic physical coordinates) is 
        accurately mapped to an IP address, even if the relation between     
        geographical area information and IP address is not a one-to-one 
        relationship.

      o) MUST be able to ensure that an IP address can be accurately 
         mapped to a geographic area information (geo-locators, names 
         and geographic physical coordinates), even if the relation 
         between locator and geographical information is not a one-to-
         one relationship.

Karagiannis, et al.   Expires December 15, 2014                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Problem statement for GeoNet             June 2014

      o) MUST be able to ensure that the used mapping data bases of IP
         locators to a geographic area information are up to date.

      o) MUST support security and privacy: Given the sensitivity of 
         location data and the possibility of the technology being used 
         in emergency and/or road traffic management scenarios a 
         particular attention must be paid to security and privacy.  A 
         thorough threat analysis should be conducted, and mitigations 
         specified; this applies to any protocol documents in this 
         context, for any communication modes. Security objectives 
         particularly include integrity, privacy and non-repudiation and 
         SHOULD protect the network and transport layer protocol 
         headers.  In addition any potential Internet-wide geo-
         networking solution MUST also protect privacy, i.e. provide 
         confidentiality to personal data and protect leaking 
         information through protocol behavior, such as the relation 
         between identifier and location.

      o) SHOULD support timely and guaranteed delivery of information.   

5. Relationships between GeoNet and other IETF Working Groups

   Any new use-cases that the GeoNet WG comes up with that require 
   protocol changes for any overlay technology, such as LISP, can be 
   done in the appropriate protocol working groups, such as the LISP WG.

   The following relationships between GeoNet and other IETF WGs have 
   been identified:

      o) The GEOPRIV WG [GEOPRIV] concentrates on protocols that allow 
         applications to represent location/geography objects and to 
         allow users to express policies on how these representations 
         are exposed and used. Moreover, the GEOPRIV WG analyses the 
         authorization, integrity, and privacy requirements that must be 
         met when these representations of location/geography are 
         created, stored, and used.  GeoNet mainly focuses on how IP 
         routing and addressing uses such location/geography 
         representations.

      o) The LISP WG [LISP] mainly focuses on network-layer-based 
         protocol solutions that enable the separation of routing 
         locators (where you are attached to the network) and 
         identifiers (who you are) in one number space.  GeoNet mainly 
         focuses on how IP routing and addressing uses geography 
         parameters, like geographical coordinates to
         disseminate packets sent by a sender located anywhere in the 
         Internet to nodes that are located in the area specified by 
         these geography parameters.

      o) The ECRIT WG [ECRIT] mainly focuses on how location data and 
         call routing information are used to enable communication 
         between a user and a relevant emergency response center. 



Karagiannis, et al.   Expires December 15, 2014                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Problem statement for GeoNet             June 2014

         In particular, the ECRIT WG has specified protocols to map 
         emergency services identifiers and geodetic or civic location 
         information to service contact URIs. GeoNet mainly focuses on 
         how IP routing and addressing uses geodetic or civic location 
         information to disseminate packets sent by a sender located 
         anywhere in the Internet to nodes that are located in the area 
         specified by this geodetic or civic location information.

6.  Security Considerations 
    
   Due to the sensitivity of location data and the possibility of the 
   technology being used in emergency and/or road traffic management 
   scenarios a particular attention must be paid to security and 
   privacy. Security objectives  particularly include integrity, privacy 
   and non-repudiation and SHOULD protect the network and transport 
   layer protocol headers. In addition any potential Internet-wide Geo-
   networking solution MUST also protect privacy, i.e. provide
   confidentiality to personal data and protect leaking 
   information through protocol behavior, such as the relation between 
   identifier and location.

7.  IANA Considerations  
   No IANA considerations are considered in this document.
    
8.  Acknowledgments 
    
   We would like to thank the members of the IETF ITS and GeoNet 
   community for their comments and discussions. In particular, we would 
   like than the following contributors: Melinda Shore, Dino Farinacci, 
   Geert Heijenk, Andreas Festag, Alison Chaiken, Duan Shihui, Rex 
   Buddenberg, Carl Reed, Brian Rosen, Yong-Geun Hong, Robert Moskowitz, 
   Ray Bellis.
   
9.  Normative References 
    
10.  Informative References 

   [ISO19107] International standard ISO 19107, "Geographic information  
   - Spatial Schema", International Standards Organization (ISO), 01-05-
   2003

   [IEEE1609.2] IEEE 1609.2, "Trial-Use Standard for Wireless   
   Access in Vehicular Environments - Security Services for Applications 
   and Management Messages", IEEE, (date Original version) July 6 2006; 
   Revised on October 17, 2013

   [IEEE802.11p] IEEE Std 802.11p(TM)-2010, "IEEE Standard for 
   Information Technology - Telecommunications and information exchange 
   between systems - Local and metropolitan area networks -Specific 
   requirements, Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and 
   Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications,  Amendment 6: Wireless Access in 
   Vehicular Environments", IEEE, 2010, document freely available at URL 
   http://standards.ieee.org/getieee802/download/802.11p-2010.pdf


Karagiannis, et al.   Expires December 15, 2014                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        Problem statement for GeoNet             June 2014

   [ECRIT] official website of IETF WG ECRIT (Emergency Context 
   Resolution with Internet Technologies),  
   http://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/ecrit/

   [GEOPRIV] official website of IETF WG GEOPRIV (Geographic 
   Location/Privacy), http://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/geopriv/

   [LISP] official website of IETF WG LISP (Locator/ID Separation 
   Protocol), http://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/lisp/

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

11.  Authors' Address 

   Georgios Karagiannis
   University of Twente
   P.O. Box 217
   7500 AE Enschede,  
   The Netherlands 
   EMail: g.karagiannis@utwente.nl  

   Alexandru Petrescu
   CEA
   Communicating Systems Laboratory, Point Courrier 173
   Palaiseau,   F-91120
   France
   Phone: +33(0)169089223
   Email: alexandru.petrescu@cea.fr

   Dimitri Papadimitriou
   Alcatel-Lucent
   Copernicuslaan, 50
   2018 Antwerpen, Belgium
   Phone: +32 3 240 8491
   EMail: dimitri.papadimitriou@alcatel-lucent.com

   Bastiaan Wissingh
   TNO
   Brassersplein 2
   Delft  2612CT
   the Netherlands
   EMail: bastiaan.wissingh@tno.nl

12. Contributors

   Melinda Shore
   No Mountain Software
   PO Box 16271
   Two Rivers, AK  99716
   US
   Phone: +1 907 322 9522
   EMail: melinda.shore@nomountain.net


Karagiannis, et al.   Expires December 15, 2014               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        Problem statement for GeoNet             June 2014


   Dino Farinacci
   lispers.net
   San Jose, California
   USA
   Phone: 408-718-2001
   Email: farinacci@gmail.com

   Geert Heijenk
   University of Twente
   P.O. Box 217
   7500 AE Enschede,  
   The Netherlands 
   EMail: geert.heijenkg@utwente.nl  

   Andreas Festag
   Technical University Dresden & NEC Laboratories Europe
   Germany
   Email: andreas.festag@ifn.et.tu-dresden.de?;

   Alison Chaiken
   Mentor Embedded Software Division
   46871 Bayside Parkway
   Fremont, CA 94538
   USA   Email: alison@she-devel.com

   Duan Shihui
   RITT
   EMail: duanshihui@ritt.cn

   Rex Buddenberg
   EMail: buddenbergr@gmail.com

   Carl Reed
   Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC)
   EMail: creed@opengeospatial.org

   Brian Rosen
   Neustar
   470 Conrad Dr
   Mars, PA  16046
   USA
   EMail: br@brianrosen.net

   Yong-Geun Hong
   ETRI
   218 Gajeong-ro Yuseung-Gu
   Daejeon  305-700
   Korea
   Phone: +82 42 860 6557
   Email: yghong@etri.re.kr




Karagiannis, et al.   Expires December 15, 2014               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        Problem statement for GeoNet             June 2014


   Robert Moskowitz 
   Verizon
   1000 Bent Creek Blvd, Suite 200
   Mechanicsburg, PA
   USA
   EMail: robert.moskowitz@verizon.com

   Robert Moskowitz 
   Verizon
   1000 Bent Creek Blvd, Suite 200
   Mechanicsburg, PA
   USA
   EMail: robert.moskowitz@verizon.com

   Ray Bellis
   Nominet UK
   Edmund Halley Road
   Oxford  OX4 4DQ
   United Kingdom
   Phone: +44 1865 332211
   Email: ray.bellis@nominet.org.uk

































Karagiannis, et al.   Expires December 15, 2014               [Page 12]
