

Network Working Group                                          R. Sparks
Internet-Draft                                               dynamicsoft
Expires: April 25, 2003                                 October 25, 2002


            AVT Tones (RFC 2833) Interoperability Statement
                    draft-sparks-avt-2833-interop-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 25, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   It is required to demonstrate interoperability of AVT Tones
   implementations in order to move that specification to draft
   standard.  This memo outlines those features to be tested, as the
   first stage of an interoperability statement.











Sparks                   Expires April 25, 2003                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                2833-interop                  October 2002


Table of Contents

   1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2. Features and Options Required to Demonstrate Interoperability  . 3
      References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
      Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
      Full Copyright Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5












































Sparks                   Expires April 25, 2003                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                2833-interop                  October 2002


1. Introduction

   TBD - will borrow heavily from rtp-interop

   Use of 2198 to be tested separately

2. Features and Options Required to Demonstrate Interoperability

   1.   Demonstrate use of same sequence number and time-stamp base as
        remainder of audio stream

   2.   Demonstrate correct use of marker bit to indicate beginning of
        new event

        *  Cisco Digium Pingtel Polycom

   3.   Demonstrate correct exchange of volume, duration, and end bit

        *  Cisco Digium Pingtel Polycom

   4.   Demonstrate correct indication of supported named events via SDP

        *  Cisco Pingtel

   5.   Interoperable exchange of data packets containing the required
        DTMF events

        *  Cisco Polycom Digium - no ABCD

   6.   Events spanning more than one RTP packet

        *  Polycom->Cisco

        *  Cisco->Digium

   7.   Interoperable exchange of data packets containing the Flash
        event

   8.   Interoperable exchange of data packets containing Data Modem and
        Fax Events

   9.   Interoperable exchange of data packets containing Line Events

   10.  Interoperable exchange of data packets containing Extended Line
        Events

   11.  Interoperable exchange of packets containing Trunk Events




Sparks                   Expires April 25, 2003                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                2833-interop                  October 2002


   12.  Interoperable exchange of packets containing Tone payloads

   13.  Interoperable exchange of packets containing combined tone and
        event payloads

References

   [1]  Schulzrinne, H. and S. Petrack, "RTP Payload for DTMF Digits,
        Telephony Tones and Telephony Signals", RFC 2833, May 2000.

   [2]  "RTP Payload for Redundant Audio Data", RFC 2198, September
        1997.


Author's Address

   Robert J. Sparks
   dynamicsoft
   5100 Tennyson Parkway
   Suite 1200
   Plano, TX  75024

   EMail: rsparks@dynamicsoft.com




























Sparks                   Expires April 25, 2003                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                2833-interop                  October 2002


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Sparks                   Expires April 25, 2003                 [Page 5]

