


Mobility Optimizations RG                                      D. Corujo
Internet-Draft                                                  A. Matos
Intended status: Experimental                                  R. Aguiar
Expires: September 1, 2007                                     IT Aveiro
                                                                T. Melia
                                                              J. Abeille
                                                                     NEC
                                                       February 28, 2007


  Problem Statement for Common Interface Support in Localized Mobility
                               Management
                draft-corujo-ps-common-interfaces-lmm-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 1, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).









Corujo, et al.          Expires September 1, 2007               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        PS Common Interfaces for LMM         February 2007


Abstract

   This memo is a problem statement on the use of link events for
   enhanced handover control in network based localized mobility
   management.  Starting from existing solutions for fast link detection
   the document aims at discussing possibilities for a layer 2.5
   interface between MN and AR for handover control.  The document also
   presents a set of considerations and identifies conditions where a
   layer 2.5 based interface offers significant advantages compared to a
   pure layer three solution.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Problem Space  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1.  DNA and FRD with 802.21 Integration  . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       3.1.1.  DNA and FRD considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       3.1.2.  802.21 Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  Localized Mobility Management  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       3.2.1.  Proxy Mobile IPv6  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       3.2.2.  Protocol for Network based Localized Mobility
               Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       3.2.3.  MN/AR Interfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       3.2.4.  Fast Handovers for Proxy Mobile IPv6 . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.3.  Providing interfaces with 802.21 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     3.4.  Issue Summary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   4.  Scenarios and Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     4.1.  Scenarios  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       4.1.1.  Boot-up  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       4.1.2.  Proactive handover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       4.1.3.  Reactive handover  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       4.1.4.  LMP Engine as an MIH user  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       4.1.5.  Co-located ARs and APs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     4.2.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     8.1.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     8.2.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 24







Corujo, et al.          Expires September 1, 2007               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        PS Common Interfaces for LMM         February 2007


1.  Introduction

   Recently, there have been proposals advocating the use of IEEE 802.21
   services supporting different mobility related procedures.  Starting
   from [I-D.ietf-dna-frd], where the IEEE 802.21 event service
   notification system is used for fast link change detection,
   [I-D.xia-netlmm-fmip-mnagno] further exploits the possibility to use
   link events to improve handover procedures in environments deploying
   network based localized mobility management.  The fact that network
   based localized mobility management protocols do not require host
   modifications as described in [I-D.ietf-netlmm-nohost-ps] suggests
   the design of a single interface between mobile node and access
   router, technology independent, and, potentially, non IP based.

   In [I-D.ietf-netlmm-mn-ar-if] a first attempt to design such
   interface is provided.  We argue, however, that having a solution
   that relies on layer three connectivity for link change detection and
   consequent IP address configuration update is time consuming,
   especially in environment offering real time services (e.g.  VoIP).
   A first attempt to speed up such procedure is provided in
   [I-D.ietf-dna-frd].

   We suggest another approach, which would be the design of a single
   interface between mobile node and access router, technology
   independent, and, potentially, non-IP based.  In this document we
   explore the definition of such an interface based on the upcoming
   IEEE 802.21 standard.  The document aims at providing a general
   overview on current draft solutions arguing the need for a
   generalized interface framing existing and upcoming solutions.






















Corujo, et al.          Expires September 1, 2007               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        PS Common Interfaces for LMM         February 2007


2.  Terminology

   o  PoA (Point of Access) - Network side endpoint of an L2 link
      including the host as the other endpoint.

   o  LMD (Local Mobility Domain) - A domain where mobility is
      transparent to the core network.

   o  MIH (Media Independent Handovers) - A set of services and
      procedures that enable more optimized handovers.

   o  MIHF (Media Independent Handovers Function) - An implementation,
      both at network entities and hosts, of MIH services.

   o  Link-layer events - triggers, originated at the link layers,
      indicating changes in sate and transmission behavior of those
      layers.

   o  802.21 Protocol [802.21]- A protocol that allows 802.21 services
      to be exchanged remotely between MIH Functions.

   o  Access Router (AR) - entity responsible for managing the last hop
      packet communication in the Access Network




























Corujo, et al.          Expires September 1, 2007               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        PS Common Interfaces for LMM         February 2007


3.  Problem Space

   As described in Section 1 this document aims at identifying a common
   problem space for the design of a MN-AR multi-purpose interface
   covering fast link change detection, proactive and reactive handovers
   in LMD environments (such as Proxy MIPv6 solutions).  To identify
   similarities among available approaches we report in the following a
   brief summary focusing on the support of the link layer events and
   their relation with the IEEE 802.21 upcoming standard.

3.1.  DNA and FRD with 802.21 Integration

   This section presents current considerations from the Detecting
   Network Attachment procedure, including Fast Router Discovery with L2
   support.  We also present key points for 802.21 integration with DNA
   and Fast Router Discovery.

3.1.1.  DNA and FRD considerations

   The validity of an IP configuration requires that the host checks for
   link change.  DNA [I-D.ietf-dna-protocol] is the procedure of
   detecting that the IP subnet has changed (after L2 link change) then
   initiating a new IP configuration.  When the host verifies that it
   has remained in the same link, it can assume its IP configuration is
   still valid.  Otherwise, the present one is invalid and a new
   configuration must be obtained.  During the process of checking for a
   link change, the host may obtain some of the required configuration
   information, and use it to reduce handover delay and minimize
   signalling in obtaining a new IP configuration.  DNA schemes are
   typically run per interface and the DNA process does not include the
   actual IP configuration procedure.

   In order for the DNA procedure to take place, a trigger is required.
   Network-layer indications can be helpful in detecting subnet changes,
   but they can not always be readily available after changing its point
   of attachment.  Link-layer events, on the other hand, can report that
   the host has established a new link-layer connection allowing the
   node to probe the network for configuration changes.  In
   [I-D.ietf-dna-link-information] a catalogue of available link-layer
   events from various access technologies is provided.  More
   concretely, the most important type of trigger in a DNA scheme is the
   "Link Up" event, which is a notification that is delivered when a L2
   connection is established on a specific link interface, and it is
   capable of communicating data frames.  This event can aid in
   detecting a change of subnet, triggering the DNA procedure.  Also,
   additional information can be supplied along with the event,
   containing network configuration parameters and identifiers.




Corujo, et al.          Expires September 1, 2007               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        PS Common Interfaces for LMM         February 2007


   The importance of link-layer events is also reflected on their
   source.  On one hand, the event be triggered on the host and
   processed thereon to trigger the DNA procedure on the host.  On the
   other hand, said trigger can instead be sent by the Point of Access
   to the Access Router and, according to [I-D.ietf-dna-frd], trigger an
   unicast Router Advertisement.  In cellular environments, the use of
   unicast RAs is a more cost-effective procedure than broadcasting the
   RA over the wireless link.  When the trigger is supplied to the
   Access Router, it is even possible to obtain the said trigger without
   forwarding from the Point of Access, as is the case of host
   authentication to an AR in a WiMAX network.  It is also possible for
   the Point of Access to use the event to send a previously cached
   Router Advertisement.  This caching can either be done through manual
   configuration, or scanning L2 frames for RA messages, and issuing a
   802.21 command to the AR requesting a RA message.  However, under a
   PMIP environment, since the terminal has to be supplied with a RA
   advertising the Home Address prefix of the terminal, it might not be
   feasible to cache RAs at the PoA: the PoA will have to supply
   different RAs per terminal, per home network.

3.1.2.  802.21 Integration

   Regarding DNA, more specifically Fast Router Discovery, some
   integration work is already under discussion. 802.21 services are
   used in [I-D.ietf-dna-frd] to add fast Router Advertisement
   triggering (or proxying, in case the Point of Access sends the Router
   Advertisement for itself) on a Point of Access, without changing the
   IPv6 standard.  More concretely, the MIH event "Link Up", containing
   the host's MAC address, is forwarded by the Point of Access to the
   Access Router upon attachment detection.  Also, a new 802.21 command
   is defined for a Point of Access to request a Router Advertisement
   message from an Access Router and permission to proxy the RA.
   Similarly, the Access Router can use the command and MIH Protocol to
   send a suitable Router Advertisement to the Point of Access and
   delegate the Point of Access to deliver the Router Advertisement to a
   new host upon network attachment.

3.2.  Localized Mobility Management

   Localized Mobility Management poses several news challenges deriving
   from the stated requirements in [I-D.ietf-netlmm-nohost-req].  The
   currently proposed architectures required unmodified, vanilla network
   stacks.  While this allows unaware mobility of the MN, it lacks in
   control mechanisms, in order to provide different approaches to
   mobility - reactive and proactive - that are mostly controlled by the
   LMD.





Corujo, et al.          Expires September 1, 2007               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        PS Common Interfaces for LMM         February 2007


3.2.1.  Proxy Mobile IPv6

   Proxy Mobile IPv6 (PMIPv6), as explained in
   [I-D.sgundave-mip6-proxymip6], is a network-based mobility management
   protocol aimed at local mobility support, while reusing when possible
   Mobile IPv6 (MIPv6) [RFC3775] entities and concepts.  In this
   protocol the mobile nodes (MN), are differentiated by an identifier
   (e.g.  NAI), which has an associated set of information stored on the
   network, such as a profile containing the home prefix.  This
   information is typically kept in a policy store (e.g.  AAA),
   accessible by all the PMIPv6 entities in the LMD.

   PMIPv6 assumes that upon L2 network attachment, the node is
   authenticated.  This attachment provides the necessary information
   (e.g. the nodes NAI) to ensure that the network is able to retrieve
   the Home Network prefix.  The prefix will then be used in Router
   Advertisements to the node, informing that it is on the Home Domain.
   In this scenario the MN configures its Home Address on the network
   interface, even when roaming across foreign networks, transforming
   the visited LMD into a single link, from the node's point of view.

   While it is possible to use any type of identifier as MN_ID, current
   trends point to the use of MAC Address, since it is the identifier
   assured to be sent upon the L2 attachment process.  This is
   restrictive, since the MN is restricted to the L2 address.  For
   instance, using a multihomed terminal, the MN_ID changes with each
   interface and limits the solution space for multihoming on the LMD.
   It would be desirable to have mechanisms that allow an exchange of a
   pre-selected identifier during or after the L2 attachment process,
   possibly using Layer 2.5 technology such as 802.21.

   The Proxy Mobile Agent (PMA), located in the access router, performs
   signaling on behalf of the node and is also the entity that retrieves
   the MN information and sends the customized Router Advertisements,
   emulating the home network behavior.  The PMA mobility signaling
   consists on Binding Updates to the MN's Home Agent, informing the HA
   that the current Care-of Address of the registered MN is the PMA's
   address.  These procedures also lead to the establishment of tunnels
   between HA and PMA.

3.2.2.  Protocol for Network based Localized Mobility Management

   The Protocol for Network based Localized Mobility Management (PMIP-
   LMM), as described in [I-D.singh-netlmm-protocol], includes several
   entities: the Mobility Access Gateway (MAG), the Proxy MIP Client
   (PMIP-Client) and the Local Mobility Anchor (LMA).  The behavior
   differs from the previously presented solution in both operation and
   addressing.  While on visited networks the MN aquires a proxy Home



Corujo, et al.          Expires September 1, 2007               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        PS Common Interfaces for LMM         February 2007


   Address (pHoA), which is the MN's address on the LMD.  The acquired
   pHoA is in fact the CoA registered at the Home Agent, in Binding
   Update procedures.  The address representing the MN's location inside
   the LMD is the Proxy Care-of Address (pCoA), which corresponds to the
   Mobility Access Gateway (MAG) address, currently serving the MN.

   Upon L2 attachment of the MN to the LMD, the MAG obtains the MN's
   Link Layer ID (LL_ID).  The MAG than sends a RAdv to the node,
   allowing it configure the pHoA, which can be used on to update the
   Home Agent.  With the pHoA and the LL_ID, the MAG registers the MN on
   the PMIP Client, storing the current pHoA and the pCoA, which are
   later used in Proxy Binding Updates (PBU) to the LMA, creating the
   necessary tunnels for packet delivery inside the LMD.

   As in PMIP , PMIP-NetLMM relies on the L2 attachment process to
   provide the MN_ID, typically the Link Layer address, suffering from
   the same lack of flexibility as explained before.

   When performing handovers, the protocol suggest that context transfer
   could be used, and is sometimes indispensable since there can be more
   than one PMIP-Client per LMD.  The context transfer period can be
   used to inform the new MAG (nMAG) of the following information:
   MN_ID, pHoA and Current PMIP-CLient Identifier.  There is an optional
   period of packet duplication to minimize the effects of the handover.

   While performing context transfer is a time gaining procedure,
   providing seamless mobility, doing it at Layer 3 becomes a subversive
   procedure since the node is required to have a vanilla network stack.
   Moving it to Layer 2.5, with well defined standards such as 802.21,
   that are able to cope with such requirements is a better solution
   since the protocol shall be incorporated with default mechanisms and
   part of the vanilla stack for 802.21 enabled architectures.

3.2.3.  MN/AR Interfaces

   Draft [I-D.ietf-netlmm-mn-ar-if] specifies a mechanism to trigger the
   localized mobility management protocol while terminals roam across
   access routers belonging to the same LMD.  While it focuses on
   initial proposed protocols for NetLMM, it could be applied to other
   LMM protocols.  The proposed interfaces assume that there is no
   specific layer two solution available on the terminal side and
   exposes a solution based on existing IP protocols, namely SEND
   [RFC3971], CGA [RFC3972] and DNA [I-D.ietf-dna-protocol].

   In case of stateless auto-configuration, when a mobile terminal
   powers on in a NetLMM domain it generates a link local address based
   on its public key (CGA).  Upon ND exchange (DAD) the access router
   updates the LMA for routes setup using the MN's public key as MN_ID.



Corujo, et al.          Expires September 1, 2007               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        PS Common Interfaces for LMM         February 2007


   After DAD is completed, the RS/RA exchange allows the MN to configure
   one or more global CGA addresses which need to be all registered in
   the LMA.  In case of DHCP the main difference is the use of DHCP
   SOLICIT/REPLY messages for global addresses configuration.  While
   abstractions provided by extended interfaces, such as 802.21, cannot
   play a big role in a boot-up scenario because the DAD procedures need
   to be performed, they can enhance the information exchange.
   Furthermore, once the address is correctly assigned and granted
   access to the LMD then technologies such as 802.21 could be of great
   help because there is no need to further perform DAD mechanisms,
   there is just the need to detect that the link did change and trigger
   the LMP engine.

   When the terminal moves into a NetLMM domain it first performs a link
   detection as per [I-D.ietf-dna-protocol].  Upon link detection the
   terminal discards the current address, performs DAD on the link local
   and configures global IPv6 addresses by means of stateless auto-
   configuration or via DHCP.  In this scenario, the terminal needs to
   perform DAD to defend the address while entering into the NetLMM
   domain.  But, even in these non proactive conditions, common
   interfaces such as 802.21, can help by aiding the link detection
   process as defined in [I-D.ietf-dna-frd] by means of fast Router
   Advertisements.

   MN/AR interfaces entirely based on the Neighbor Discovery Protocol
   (NDP) [RFC2461] provide a consistent platform regardless of L2
   technology.  Furthermore, if secured with SEND, it also has the added
   value of security.  But, while security is a very important issue,
   the MN/AR interface must address a wider set of issues, such as
   proactive and reactive handovers, alongside with information
   provisioning interfaces, PoA information exchange and MN
   identification.  They also can be used to speedup the attachment
   process.

3.2.4.  Fast Handovers for Proxy Mobile IPv6

   In [I-D.xia-netlmm-fmip-mnagno] the possibility of using link layer
   events to improve handover procedures in environments deploying
   network based localized mobility management is exploited, as well as
   using Fast MIPv6 [RFC4068] PAR-NAR signalling to improve handover
   performance.  This scheme relies on 802.21 link layer events to
   trigger the establishment of a tunnel between the PAR and the NAR,
   prior to handover.  Upon attachment to the new access point, another
   link layer event triggers the NAR to send a Router Advertisement to
   the host, facilitating the MN to send packets.






Corujo, et al.          Expires September 1, 2007               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        PS Common Interfaces for LMM         February 2007


3.3.  Providing interfaces with 802.21

   The IEEE 802.21 Media Independent Handover [802.21] standard provides
   with a Media Independent Function which can abstract different access
   technologies to higher level entities (or MIH-users), and contains a
   set of services that can be used to provide input to the DNA
   procedures.  The Event Service provides event classification,
   filtering and reporting.  The Command Service enables MIH users to
   manage and control link behavior.  Information services can provide
   information to a MIH-User using a request/reply mechanism.
   Furthermore, these services can either operate on a local-stack
   level, or remotely, between different network entities, using the MIH
   Protocol [draft-hepworth-mipshop-mih-design-considerations-01].

   MIH-users can also register for receiving specific events, allowing
   them to be collected not only to the IP stack, triggering DNA
   procedures, but also to other entities such as a Localized Mobility
   module.  MIH-enabled entities can announce and discover MIH
   capabilities, allowing MIH-users to identify events to which they can
   register, and obtain link layer information.  They can also verify
   which link commands are supported, enabling MIH-users to control
   lower layers at remote entities.

                                         ACCESS ROUTER
                                       ..................
                                       |      ........  |
                                       |      | LMP  |  |
                                       |      |ENGINE|  |
                                       |       `''''''  |
                                       |        / \     |
                                       | MIH   /   \    |
                                       |EVENT   | |     |
                           LINK EVENT  |        | |     |
                             ____________ +----------+  |
                     FROM MN             \|   MIH    |  |
                      OR PoA ____________/| FUNCTION |  |
                                       |  +----------+  |
                                       ..................

           Figure 1: MIH User receiving remote link layer event

   802.21 can also help dealing with access technologies issues
   identified in [RFC4135].  For example, regarding the unpredictable
   radio conditions that in one instant produce a link-layer event that,
   in the next instant, is no longer viable, 802.21 allows the
   configuration of thresholds that can trigger events whenever these
   are crossed.  This functionality allows, for example, events to
   reflect situations long enough for the DAD procedure to be executed.



Corujo, et al.          Expires September 1, 2007              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        PS Common Interfaces for LMM         February 2007


   Optionally, these events can also be reported on a periodic basis.

   Regarding identifiers, each entity's MIHF has an identifier used to
   identify MIHF endpoints involved in a 802.21 protocol transaction.
   This MIH ID, for example, allows the 802.21 protocol to be transport
   agnostic, because it involves two unique identifiers.  This MIHF ID
   can be assigned to the MIHF during the configuration process.  The
   MIHF can be viewed as an entity which abstracts the underlying
   technologies available at a host, allowing it to surpass a limitation
   of identifying the host by a single L2 address, which can be limiting
   in multihomed hosts scenarios.

3.4.  Issue Summary

   o  Using the Link Layer address is the common procedure to uniquely
      identify a node.  It would be preferable to have a common
      interface to exchange the MN Identifier, for more flexible
      solutions to problems such as Multihoming and Security.

   o  Context transfer on proactive, and even reactive, handovers is
      desired feature.  Performing it at the network layer is subversive
      to the NetLMM requirements [I-D.ietf-netlmm-nohost-req], and
      should be considered on a lower layer (2.5) and as part of the
      standard operation procedure.

   o  There is the need to clearly define at least the interfaces
      between the MN and Access Routers, either PMAs or MAGs, to enable
      extension for proactive and reactive handover scenarios to work,
      regardless of the LMD protocol.  This also requires the need to
      understand what are the common interfaces and how they should be
      provided.

   o  RA caching is not considered worthy due to PMIP mechanisms: the
      Router Advertisement that is sent to the terminal always includes
      the host's Home Address.  Due to the multiple number of terminals
      that can handover to a specific Access Point, all with their own
      Home Address being advertised, we believe it is not worthy to
      cache Router Advertisements at the Access Point.

   o  802.21 allows MIH-users to register for link layer events.  If no
      restrictions are posed for this matter, a single event can trigger
      more than one high level entity, stimulating different behaviors
      which will proceed in parallel causing concurrency issues.  For
      example, the Link Up event might be used to trigger both the IP
      stack (for DNA) and the LMP Engine.

   o  Another issue that has to be considered is the 802.21 Capability
      Discovery procedure that is required for hosts and network



Corujo, et al.          Expires September 1, 2007              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        PS Common Interfaces for LMM         February 2007


      entities to verify which events and commands are available.
      Although L2 management frames can be used to broadcast this
      capability, certain events may need to be forwarded to the network
      entities in the exact time of attachment (i.e., the Link Up
      event), which indicates that previous event registration already
      occurred.













































Corujo, et al.          Expires September 1, 2007              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft        PS Common Interfaces for LMM         February 2007


4.  Scenarios and Requirements

   This section provides scenarios and requirements for enabling the
   MN/AR interface with 802.21 mechanisms under a common framework.

4.1.  Scenarios

   The scenarios presented in this section consider a terminal
   booting-up inside an LMD, proactive and reactive handovers, and the
   LMP engine as an MIH user.  Also, scenarios where APs and ARs are co-
   located are also considered.

4.1.1.  Boot-up

   The boot-up scenario encompasses a host which has activated its
   interface(s) inside an LMD.  In this case, it can be assumed that the
   host contains no information from a previously connected subnet
   (i.e., network prefix, gateway, etc.).

   In this scenario, the host should be able to supply link layer events
   (such as supplying the list of possible points of attachment detected
   at boot-up, using for example the Link Detected event), and
   indications of successful attachments if they occur (using for
   example the Link Up event).  Also, the PoA to which the terminal
   associates can also trigger link events to the AR, supplying
   information regarding the host.

4.1.2.  Proactive handover

   A proactive handover scenario is verified when the terminal is able
   to supply to the AR that a new AP was found, and that actual
   conditions at the current PoA are deteriorating.



















Corujo, et al.          Expires September 1, 2007              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft        PS Common Interfaces for LMM         February 2007


         +-----+    Inter AR Comm.   +-----+
         | oAR | <-----------------> | nAR |
         +-----+                     +-----+
            |                           |
            |                           |
            |                           |
            |                           |
         +----+                       +----+
         |oPoA|                       |nPoA|
         +----+                       +----+
            ^
            |
      ..............
      |   Event w/ |
      |{nAR_ID,    |  +--+
      | LINK_      |--|MN| ----------->
      | CONDITIONS}|  +--+   Movement
      ..............


                       Figure 2: Predictive handover

   This information can be obtained through link layer events detected
   at the host, and be used by the oAR to transfer information from the
   nAR.  Also, link-layer information can be directly sent from the oPoA
   to the nPoA.  This information is available to the terminal upon
   attachment to the nPoA.  This attachment can be indicated by a Link
   Up event (supplied by either the host of the nPoA), initiating DNA
   procedures.

4.1.3.  Reactive handover

   In a reactive handover scenario, the host can supply a link layer
   event indicating attachment.

















Corujo, et al.          Expires September 1, 2007              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft        PS Common Interfaces for LMM         February 2007


                +---+
                |AAA|
                +---+
                  ^
                  | Get Information  +-----+
                  ------------------ | nAR |
                  |                  +-----+
                  v                     |
                +-----+                 |
                | oAR |                 |
                +-----+                 |
                                      +----+
                                      |nPoA|
                                      +----+
                                        ^
                                        |
                                   ............
                       +--+        | Event w/ |
                       |MN|--------|{pAR_ID,  |
                       +--+        | previous |
                                   | net_info}|
                                   ............



                        Figure 3: Reactive handover

   Also, it can provide information from the previous network
   configuration to the AR, which can trigger it to obtain further
   information from the previous AR or from some kind of AAA entity, or
   use that information to more rapidly infer the host's new
   configuration.

4.1.4.  LMP Engine as an MIH user

   Having a LMP Engine as the high-level entity that collects the
   terminal's and PoAs link layer events, can enhance localized mobility
   mechanisms to operate based on information supplied at L2 level.

4.1.5.  Co-located ARs and APs

   Co-located ARs and APs is an envisioned possibility in today's
   network design.  An envisioned framework where MIH-users register for
   receiving events allows flexibility on which network points they can
   reside.  Also, when APs and ARs are not co-located, the MIHF can work
   as a kind of proxy, forwarding link layer events from the terminal to
   the AR.




Corujo, et al.          Expires September 1, 2007              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft        PS Common Interfaces for LMM         February 2007


4.2.  Requirements

   This section reports requirements inferred from the previous
   scenarios.

   o  This framework should accommodate with future instances of the
      NetLMM protocol, and be flexible enough to allow and support
      possible optimizations of the NetLMM procedures.

   o  This framework does not aim at replacing L3 procedures rather to
      improve them by facilitating the information exchange between the
      host and the AR even prior to full network configuration.

   o  While section Section 4.1 presents possible deployments of the
      MIHF and its relation to the upper layers (IP stack, LMP engine),
      a more clear communication model needs to be agreed and specified.

   o  Previous sections described the use of several identifiers at
      different levels (e.g.  L2 identifiers in LMP protocols, MIHF ID
      for 802.21).  To improve protocol interaction it would be
      desirable to align identifiers under a common policy.

   o  Link layer events have to be carefully registered by whoever can
      use them to trigger procedures.  A single event can be forwarded
      to more than one high level entity, inducing parallel behavior
      that might not be desirable.

   o  The host must be able to store the previous network configuration
      information, both for detecting subnet changes upon attachment,
      and also to report it to the nAR upon a reactive handover.

   o  Sufficient authentication of devices supplying link-layer events
      has to be considered.  For example, reachibility and attachment
      notifications may be falsely asserted by an attacker.

















Corujo, et al.          Expires September 1, 2007              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft        PS Common Interfaces for LMM         February 2007


5.  Security Considerations

   As stated in [RFC4135] unsufficiently authenticated devices can
   originate wrong events, causing unecessary signalling and
   configuration on other devices, and making a host preferentially
   select a particular configuration or network access.  The problem
   statement described herein focuses on the use of 802.21 mechanisms to
   complement layer three solutions such as the SEND/CGA approach.  A
   framework considering the approaches defined here should not affect
   in any way the well established security mechanisms.

   Also, part of the upcoming work considering the mechanisms involved
   in the framework is to identify potential problems, and to consider
   other on-going work.  For example, security solutions being developed
   within the IEEE 802.21 standard, envolving authentication and
   freshness of link-layer information as well as transport, are assumed
   and have to be considered.  Although the framework considers layer
   two information, in case it is deemed to rely on layer three
   transport, the MIPSHOP Design Team is expected to draw a solution for
   MIH transport.































Corujo, et al.          Expires September 1, 2007              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft        PS Common Interfaces for LMM         February 2007


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.
















































Corujo, et al.          Expires September 1, 2007              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft        PS Common Interfaces for LMM         February 2007


7.  Acknowledgements


















































Corujo, et al.          Expires September 1, 2007              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft        PS Common Interfaces for LMM         February 2007


8.  References

8.1.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-dna-frd]
              Choi, J., "Fast Router Discovery with L2 support",
              draft-ietf-dna-frd-02 (work in progress), August 2006.

   [I-D.ietf-dna-link-information]
              Yegin, A., "Link-layer Event Notifications for Detecting
              Network Attachments", draft-ietf-dna-link-information-06
              (work in progress), February 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-dna-protocol]
              Kempf, J., "Detecting Network Attachment in IPv6 Networks
              (DNAv6)", draft-ietf-dna-protocol-04 (work in progress),
              February 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-netlmm-mn-ar-if]
              Laganier, J., "Network-based Localized Mobility Management
              Interface between Mobile Node  and Access Router",
              draft-ietf-netlmm-mn-ar-if-01 (work in progress),
              June 2006.

   [I-D.ietf-netlmm-nohost-ps]
              Kempf, J., "Problem Statement for Network-based Localized
              Mobility Management", draft-ietf-netlmm-nohost-ps-05 (work
              in progress), September 2006.

   [I-D.ietf-netlmm-nohost-req]
              Kempf, J., "Goals for Network-based Localized Mobility
              Management (NETLMM)", draft-ietf-netlmm-nohost-req-05
              (work in progress), October 2006.

   [I-D.sgundave-mip6-proxymip6]
              Gundavelli, S., "Proxy Mobile IPv6",
              draft-sgundave-mip6-proxymip6-01 (work in progress),
              January 2007.

   [I-D.singh-netlmm-protocol]
              Bedekar, A., "A Protocol for Network-based Localized
              Mobility Management", draft-singh-netlmm-protocol-01 (work
              in progress), February 2007.

   [I-D.xia-netlmm-fmip-mnagno]
              Xia, F. and B. Sarikaya, "Mobile Node Agnostic Fast
              Handovers for Proxy Mobile IPv6",
              draft-xia-netlmm-fmip-mnagno-00 (work in progress),



Corujo, et al.          Expires September 1, 2007              [Page 20]

Internet-Draft        PS Common Interfaces for LMM         February 2007


              February 2007.

8.2.  Normative References

   [802.21]   "Draft IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area
              Networks: Media Independent Handover Services", IEEE
              P802.21 D3.00, November 2007.

   [RFC2461]  Narten, T., Nordmark, E., and W. Simpson, "Neighbor
              Discovery for IP Version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 2461,
              December 1998.

   [RFC3775]  Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support
              in IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [RFC3971]  Arkko, J., Kempf, J., Zill, B., and P. Nikander, "SEcure
              Neighbor Discovery (SEND)", RFC 3971, March 2005.

   [RFC3972]  Aura, T., "Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGA)",
              RFC 3972, March 2005.

   [RFC4068]  Koodli, R., "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6", RFC 4068,
              July 2005.

   [RFC4135]  Choi, JH. and G. Daley, "Goals of Detecting Network
              Attachment in IPv6", RFC 4135, August 2005.

























Corujo, et al.          Expires September 1, 2007              [Page 21]

Internet-Draft        PS Common Interfaces for LMM         February 2007


Authors' Addresses

   Daniel Corujo
   IT Aveiro
   Campus Universitario de Santiago
   Aveiro  P-3810-193
   Portugal

   Phone: +351 234 377900
   Fax:   +351 234 377901
   Email: dcorujo@av.it.pt


   Alfredo Matos
   IT Aveiro
   Campus Universitario de Santiago
   Aveiro  P-3810-193
   Portugal

   Phone: +351 234 377900
   Fax:   +351 234 377901
   Email: alfredo.matos@av.it.pt


   Rui L. Aguiar
   IT Aveiro
   Campus Universitario de Santiago
   Aveiro  P-3810-193
   Portugal

   Phone: +351 234 377900
   Fax:   +351 234 377901
   Email: ruilaa@ua.pt


   Telemaco Melia
   NEC Europe Network Laboratories
   Kufuerstenanlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 6221 4342 142
   Email: telemaco.melia@netlab.nec.de








Corujo, et al.          Expires September 1, 2007              [Page 22]

Internet-Draft        PS Common Interfaces for LMM         February 2007


   Julien Abeille
   NEC Europe Network Laboratories
   Kufuerstenanlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 6221 4342 115
   Email: julien.abeille@netlab.nec.de











































Corujo, et al.          Expires September 1, 2007              [Page 23]

Internet-Draft        PS Common Interfaces for LMM         February 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Corujo, et al.          Expires September 1, 2007              [Page 24]

