

      IETF ENUM Working Group                                              
      Internet Draft                                        Richard Shockey 
      Document: draft-ietf-enum-privacy-security-01.txt         NeuStar,Inc 
                                                                John Morris 
                                                                 Center for 
                                                              Democracy and 
                                                                 Technology 
      Expires: January 2004                                      July 2003 
       
       
                 Privacy and Security Considerations in ENUM 
       
       
   Status of this Memo 
       
      This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance 
      with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
       
      This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance 
      with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 except that the 
      right to produce derivative works is not granted.  
       
      Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
      Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
      other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
      Drafts. 
       
      Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
      months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
      documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
      Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work 
      in progress." 
       
      The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
           http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
      The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
           http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
       
       
      This Internet-Draft will expire on January 1, 2004. 
       
   Copyright Notice 
       
      Copyright (c) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved. 
       
       
   Abstract 
       
      Many individuals and groups have expressed concerns about the 
      privacy and security of personal information to be contained in 
    
    
   Shockey Et.Al            Expires January 2004                 [Page 1] 


                                       
   draft-ietf-enum-privacy-security-01.txt                      July 2003 
    
    
      implementations of ENUM. This document discusses some of the 
      technical as well as security and privacy considerations national 
      implementations of ENUM should consider. 
       
      This is a work in progress. 
       
      Discussion of this document is welcomed on the IETF ENUM mailing 
      list.  
       
      General Discussion:enum@ietf.org 
      To Subscribe: enum-request@ietf.org 
      In Body: subscribe 
      Archive: ftp://ftp.ietf.org/ietf-mail-archive/enum/ 
       
      Conventions used in this document 
       
      The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL 
      NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and 
      "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in 
      [RFC2119]. 
       
      Table of Contents 
       
      1.0 INTRODUCTION.................................................3 
      2.0 THE RATIONALE FOR ENUM.......................................3 
      3.0 VIEWS OF ENUM................................................4 
         3.1 NUMBER TRANSLATION DATABASE...............................4 
         3.2 CALLED PARTY CONTROL OF ENUM ENABLED COMMUNICATIONS.......5 
         3.3 CALLING PARTY CONTROL OF COMMUNICATIONS...................5 
      4.0 PROCEDURES FOR ENUM REGISTRATION.............................6 
      5.0 SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS IN ENUM..............................7 
         5.1 SECURITY IN ENUM PROVISIONING.............................7 
         5.2 SECURITY OF THE DNS.......................................7 
      6.0 PRIVACY CONSIDERATIONS IN ENUM...............................8 
         6.1 PRIVACY CONCERNS INHERENT IN ENUM'S RELIANCE ON THE DNS...8 
         6.1.1 CALLED PARTY VERSUS CALLING PARTY CONTROL...............8 
         6.1.2 SIP AS A TOOL FOR ENABLING PRIVACY......................9 
         6.1.3 THE USE OF REAL AND OR ALIAS NAMES.....................10 
         6.2 PRIVACY CONCERNS RAISED BY IMPLEMENTATION DECISIONS......11 
         6.2.1 PRIVACY OF REGISTRATION INFORMATION....................11 
         6.2.2 OPT-IN NATURE OF ENUM..................................12 
         6.2.3 CONTROL OVER DATA IN ENUM RECORD.......................13 
      7.0 FAIR INFORMATION PRACTICES..................................13 
      8.0 REFERENCES..................................................14 
      Acknowledgments.................................................16 
         Author's Addresses...........................................16 
       

    
    
   Shockey,et.al.          Expires - January 2004                [Page 2] 


                                       
   draft-ietf-enum-privacy-security-01.txt                      July 2003 
    
    
    
   1.0 INTRODUCTION 
       
      Many individuals groups have expressed concerns about the privacy 
      and data security implications of ENUM as it moves forward toward 
      global deployment. For example, see [EPIC], [CLARKE], [CDT]. In 
      that context there are several different views of what ENUM is, 
      what it does, and how a global ENUM system may affect personal 
      privacy and the security of data contained in the global ENUM 
      system. 
       
      It is important to note that ENUM is first and foremost a system 
      that works within the DNS. Specifically ENUM is a system that 
      translates phone numbers [ITU-T] into Fully Qualified Domain 
      Names that can be queried to return a specific set of data 
      (URI's) in the form of NAPTR records [RFC 3403]. The global and 
      distributed nature of the DNS means delegation and control can 
      occur at any point within the FQDN. Many entities (service 
      providers, enterprises and indeed some consumers) could control 
      their own DNS servers for ENUM registered domain names. 
       
      As noted in [ENUM] and other documents, the utility of the DNS is 
      essentially that it is open and globally accessible to any one on 
      the Internet.  
       
      There are two forms of data required for the global ENUM system 
      to work. First is the actual data to be entered into the DNS 
      system -- the NAPTR records to be associated with an appropriate 
      ENUM Fully Qualified Domain Name. Second is the data that will be 
      required to maintain appropriate authentication, valid 
      registration, administrative and technical contact for ENUM 
      records stored in DNS servers.  Both forms of data raise privacy 
      and security issues. 
       
      The agreements between the IAB and the ITU over the management 
      and control of the e164.arpa namespace [RFC 3026, RFC 3245] for 
      those portions of the E.164 global numbering plan clearly 
      articulates that the administration, management and control of 
      the zones and administrative portions of the E.164 plan are 
      nation-state issues governed by appropriate national laws and 
      regulations, many of which have yet to be determined. 
    
    
   2.0 THE RATIONALE FOR ENUM 
       
      Before a discussion of privacy and security issues raised by the 
      global ENUM system, it is valuable to note why the IETF technical 
      community developed ENUM, what applications it was designed to 
    
    
   Shockey,et.al.          Expires - January 2004                [Page 3] 


                                       
   draft-ietf-enum-privacy-security-01.txt                      July 2003 
    
    
      serve and the implications of those applications for privacy and 
      security issues. 
       
      Since telephone numbers are the global naming scheme for Public 
      Switched Telephony, ENUM is designed to map phone numbers with 
      the Internet DNS and its naming and addressing conventions (IP 
      numbers and Domain Names). As such ENUM exists primarily to 
      facilitate the interconnection of systems that rely on telephone 
      numbers with those that use URI's to route transactions. 
      Therefore in and of itself ENUM has no specific application 
      value. It is only the applications themselves that are mapped to 
      phone numbers that users direct interact with. 
       
      Many businesses and consumers are very comfortable with using 
      telephone numbers for communications. The ITU developed E.164 
      numbering plan is a well organized and internationally recognized 
      system that is essential to the proper functioning of the PSTN. 
      Though it is clear that ENUM can and will be used for service 
      routing of a variety applications, the principal focus of 
      attention on ENUM application development has been focused on 
      voice communications based on SIP [RFC 3261], the ITU developed 
      H.323, and the general concept of convergence of the IP and PSTN 
      networks. 
       
      ENUM is, consequently, part of the list of technologies developed 
      in the IETF and the ITU that attempt to extend the functionality 
      of IP based communications and reinvent the concept of telephony 
      specifically. 
       
   3.0 VIEWS OF ENUM 
       
      Even within the technical community there are different views of 
      what ENUM is and what it is designed to accomplish.  
       
        3.1 NUMBER TRANSLATION DATABASE 
       
      One view sees ENUM in the DNS as essentially a benign number 
      translation database that exposes on the minimal subset of data 
      necessary to establish a connection between two endpoints. This 
      is the model we essentially have in the DNS now.  DNS translates 
      the URI concept such as http://www.foobar.org to IP number 
      necessary for a client to find a server running HTTP. No other 
      intervention by the DNS is necessary.  
       
      This is also the function of the DNS in E-mail where the DNS is 
      used simply to locate an MX record for a SMTP server within a 
      domain. No policy or personal information is exposed in the DNS 
      beyond a host name. 
    
    
   Shockey,et.al.          Expires - January 2004                [Page 4] 


                                       
   draft-ietf-enum-privacy-security-01.txt                      July 2003 
    
    
       
      This concept is roughly analogous to the concept of a Service 
      Control Point within the architecture of the PSTN that provide 
      routing data to a circuit switch based on the numeric input of a 
      phone number. 
       
      The essential difference between the DNS and PSTN Service Control 
      Points is that the DNS is a highly distributed database globally 
      accessible to any device or network connected to the Internet and 
      Service Control Points are a high specialized and restricted 
      databases available only to uniquely authenticated and authorized 
      PSTN network elements, such as Class 5 switches. Appropriate 
      domain name holders can modify DNS entries while only authorized 
      carriers can only modify data in PSTN Service Control points. 
       
        3.2 CALLED PARTY CONTROL OF ENUM ENABLED COMMUNICATIONS 
       
      An emerging view of ENUM is that it enables an advanced form of 
      called party control of communications since it is presumed that 
      the communications servers at the edge of network are under the 
      administrative or operational control of called party. User 
      control of those servers permits policy in some form to be 
      directly applied to inbound communications irrespective of the 
      wishes of the calling party. 
       
      This view is particularly relevant in the case of SIP based 
      communication [PETERSON 1]. The classic SIP model is based on the 
      use of proxies between end point client/user agents that can then 
      negotiate information about each other in order to establish a 
      session. The calling party has no need to discover the 
      capabilities of the called parties end point since those are 
      established during the signaling portion of a SIP session using 
      the Session Description Protocol. 
       
      The called parties proxy can also be used to enforce policy 
      (including privacy policy) about sessions, including how, when 
      and from whom to establish sessions. The presumption of this 
      model is that only the minimum information about location of the 
      endpoint proxy is necessary to expose in the global DNS, since 
      the proxies perform all other forms of session negotiation. 
       
        3.3 CALLING PARTY CONTROL OF COMMUNICATIONS 
       
      One other view of ENUM wishes to give the calling party the 
      complete control over how they wish to contact someone else. The 
      preference here is for the maximum amount of information exposed 
      in the global DNS to permit the calling party the choice of 
      contact methodology to the called party.  
    
    
   Shockey,et.al.          Expires - January 2004                [Page 5] 


                                       
   draft-ietf-enum-privacy-security-01.txt                      July 2003 
    
    
       
      In this scenario all the various endpoints that a called party 
      has under their control could be listed in the DNS with various 
      hints as to their nature and function in the NAPTR enumservice 
      field, such as E2U+sip,E2U+sms:tel, etc. [BRANDNER 1, BRANDNER 2] 
       
      The calling party's device or user agent could then parse the 
      various NAPTR records an present the options for communication to 
      the calling party. 
       
        
      $ORIGIN 4.3.2.1.6.7.9.8.6.4.e164.arpa. 
      IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+web:http"       "!^.*$! http:www.example.foo!"      
       
      IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+mms:tel;        " !^.*$!tel:+46987654321!"      
       
      IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+sip"            "!^.*$!sip:patrik@barfoo.bar!"      
       
      IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+ifax:mailto"    "!^.*$!mailto:patrik@mailco.foo!"  
       
        
      The calling party then selects the methodology for communication 
      from that list. 
       
    
   4.0 PROCEDURES FOR ENUM REGISTRATION 
       
      Various national ENUM groups have emerged with the task of 
      developing policies and procedures for administrating the ENUM 
      system within their various jurisdictions. [See 
      http://www.itu.int/osg/spu/enum/index.html#trials ]  Many of 
      these forums have described a multi-tier model for ENUM 
      registration and provisioning that will require some forms of 
      personal data to be collected and stored as well as technical 
      contact data on who is the responsible party for the management 
      of the authoritative name servers that hold and manage ENUM 
      records. 
       
      Many concepts and principals have been borrowed from domain name 
      registration where there are three distinct parties to the 
      transaction, Registrant, Registrar and Registry. 
       
      A Registrant in the global ENUM system is presumed to the 
      Telephone Number Holder or consumer. An ENUM Registrar is an 
      administrative entity that assists Registrants in populating the 
      global ENUM tree in e164.arpa by providing authentication and 
      authorization functions, in order to preserve and protect both 
      the interests of consumers and the global integrity of the E.164 
    
    
   Shockey,et.al.          Expires - January 2004                [Page 6] 


                                       
   draft-ietf-enum-privacy-security-01.txt                      July 2003 
    
    
      numbering plan. The ENUM Registry is a national administrative 
      entity that manages that portion of the E.164 namespace 
      appropriate within e164.arpa (such as 6.4.e164.arpa for Sweden or 
      4.4.e164.arpa for the United Kingdom, or possibly a sub-namespace 
      within a national namespace).  
       
      Various jurisdictions have different laws and regulations 
      regarding data acquisition and the protection of data acquired 
      from consumers (registrants). What those policies and procedures 
      should be will ultimately be a national sovereign decision of the 
      nation state managing their portion of the e164.arpa namespace. 
       
       
   5.0 SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS IN ENUM 
    
      Privacy is often viewed as an element of security, and thus the 
      privacy considerations discussed below in Sections 6 and 7 are 
      security considerations.  This section security concerns in more 
      traditional terms. 
    
        5.1 SECURITY IN ENUM PROVISIONING 
         
      Since the global ENUM system relies on the DNS and the protocol 
      itself converts E.164 numbers into domain names there has been 
      considerable discussion on how data is to be exchanged between 
      the ENUM registrants, registrars and registries and how that data 
      is protected. 
       
      For some time the IETF PROVREG working group has been developing 
      a robust Extensible Provisioning Protocol [EPP] for the domain 
      name industry. This protocol has within it several highly secure 
      mechanisms for the exchange of data between the various 
      Registrants, Registrars and Registries in the ENUM system.   
       
      This work could easily be adapted to the needs of ENUM, however 
      there are a variety of highly secure protocols and technologies 
      such as Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP) that could provide 
      similar capabilities. 
       
        5.2 SECURITY OF THE DNS 
         
      The security issues surrounding the DNS are well understood 
      [DNSSEC-INTRO]. This has enormous implications for emerging 
      national ENUM administrations. In particular a DNS request can be 
      subject to man-in-the-middle attacks where the response from the 
      DNS may be altered in transit. This has serious implications for 
      the accuracy and authentication of responses from the DNS to ENUM 
      formatted queries by applications. 
    
    
   Shockey,et.al.          Expires - January 2004                [Page 7] 


                                       
   draft-ietf-enum-privacy-security-01.txt                      July 2003 
    
    
       
      The IETF has developed DNSSEC [DNSSEC-ROADMAP] to authenticate 
      that the responses from the DNS are indeed from the zone for 
      which they have been requested, however DNSSEC is still in early 
      testing and deployment and has not been deployed in a large scale 
      environment such as generic or country code Top Level Domain.[RFC 
      3130] 
       
      It is the consensus of the IETF ENUM Work group that the use of 
      DNSSEC will become necessary as the protocol matures.  
       
       
   6.0 PRIVACY CONSIDERATIONS IN ENUM 
    
      ENUM raises a range of privacy concerns, both in its reliance on 
      the DNS, and in decisions that will be made by each national 
      authority that decides to implement ENUM.  This section discusses 
      both groups of concerns.  Many of these concerns are raised by 
      privacy principles called "fair information practices"  These 
      broad principles are briefly summarized below in Section 7.0.  
       
        6.1 PRIVACY CONCERNS INHERENT IN ENUM'S RELIANCE ON THE DNS 
       
      Because ENUM utilizes the global DNS to store information about 
      how to contact individuals, and information stored in DNS records 
      are freely accessible by any user on the Internet, ENUM 
      inherently raises questions about user privacy.  Although ENUM-
      like capability could have been designed without using the DNS, 
      the robust and globally deployed nature of the DNS offered a 
      means to develop and deploy ENUM without having to create a 
      separate global information lookup system.  Considerations raised 
      by this reliance on the DNS are addressed below. 
       
        6.1.1 CALLED PARTY VERSUS CALLING PARTY CONTROL 
       
      As a technical matter, there is no reason to conclude that either 
      the Called Party Control or Calling Party Control views of ENUM 
      are right or wrong. There are clearly circumstances where 
      consumers or businesses, for various reasons, might prefer each 
      option. 
       
      A variety of businesses and enterprises may wish to expose and 
      individually characterize the maximum number of contact points in 
      the global DNS order, to facilitate communications by calling 
      parties in the most convenient means available. 
       
      Consumers, however, will probably prefer that information about 
      them is masked or aliased in the DNS, in order to benefit from 
    
    
   Shockey,et.al.          Expires - January 2004                [Page 8] 


                                       
   draft-ietf-enum-privacy-security-01.txt                      July 2003 
    
    
      advanced IP communications, while preserving personal preferences 
      and privacy.  
       
      What is important is ENUM and the global ENUM system is flexible 
      enough to permit either approach, and the choice of either 
      methodology should be based on the informed consent of the user.  
      No implementation of ENUM should preclude or inhibit the use of 
      either the Called Party Control or the Calling Party Control 
      models. 
       
        6.1.2 SIP AS A TOOL FOR ENABLING PRIVACY 
       
      As described above in Section 3.2, the Called Party Control model 
      offers ENUM users the ability to exert control over what 
      information is provided through the ENUM system.  Critical to 
      this model of ENUM is technology such as the Session Initiation 
      Protocol, SIP, which can be used as a tool to greatly enhance the 
      privacy of information accessed through an ENUM transaction. 
       
      Traditional telephony relies on essentially "stupid" endpoints 
      such as traditional telephone instruments and "intelligence" in 
      the network embodied in Class 5 switches at the core of the PSTN. 
      These switches, typically controlled by service providers, 
      provide all of the advanced applications consumers have come to 
      expect. 
       
      Services such as Do Not Disturb, Call Forwarding, Call Screening 
      can only be enabled by these switches under the administrative 
      control of service providers. As a globally closed system, call 
      signaling and transport in the PSTN are tightly bound together, 
      the exact opposite of the architectural design of the Internet. 
      [RFC 1958] 
       
      SIP as an application technology at the edges of the Internet 
      reverses the PSTN control model. SIP endpoints and proxies are 
      assumed to be "intelligent" and configurable by network 
      administrators.  
       
      SIP through the use of advanced Call Processing Language 
      techniques can be quickly and easily programmed to provide Class 
      5 like features without the intervention of the call transport 
      mechanism. 
       
      The Called Party Control model of ENUM, therefore, relies on and 
      will promote the broad deployment of applications such as SIP 
      that give consumers direct control over their communications 
      options, and more generally allow the user to control who 
      accesses personal information about the user.  
    
    
   Shockey,et.al.          Expires - January 2004                [Page 9] 


                                       
   draft-ietf-enum-privacy-security-01.txt                      July 2003 
    
    
       
        6.1.3 THE USE OF REAL AND OR ALIAS NAMES  
         
      Even with the Called Party Control models some information is 
      necessarily exposed in the global DNS, but important steps can be 
      taken to reduce the disclosure of personal information in the DNS 
      records themselves.  In order to establish a session between two 
      endpoints it is necessary to describe that endpoint as a form or 
      URL. However, it not necessary nor is it a requirement to use 
      personally identifying information to establish a successful end-
      to-end SIP connection. If this information is exposed is only 
      because an end user chooses to do so by configuration of their 
      proxy. 
       
      The classic form of NAPTR record for SIP looks much like this. 
       
    $ORIGIN 4.3.2.1.6.7.9.8.6.4.e164.arpa. 
    IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+sip"  "!^.*$!sip:patrik.faltstrom@example.foo!"      
    
      One alternative method of achieving the same result without 
      exposing a real name or other form of Personally Identifying 
      Information is to use various forms of aliases. The following are 
      example of a highly constrained, but equally valid, ENUM SIP 
      response.  In the first case the identification of the SIP 
      endpoint is configured using an alias convention  
      "sip:e164number@userdomain.foo" 
    
       $ORIGIN 4.3.2.1.6.7.9.8.6.4.e164.arpa. 
       IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+sip"   "!^.*$!sip:4689761234@example.foo!"  
    
   OR  
    
       $ORIGIN 4.3.2.1.6.7.9.8.6.4.e164.arpa. 
       IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+sip"    "!^.*$!sip:anon5613@example!"  
    
      Where the user name "anon5616" is randomly selected. 
       
      Notice that the ENUM query only returns from the global DNS 
      information that a SIP proxy for the user "4689761234" or 
      "anon5616" exists within the domain example.foo. No personal 
      information is exposed in the global DNS other than the phone 
      number or anonymous alias used to create the FQDN query.  
       
      From the perspective of the SIP proxy, if properly configured, 
      there is no functional difference between  
      sip:patrik.faltstrom@example.foo and sip:4689761234@example.foo 
      or sip:anon5651@example.foo. All three could accurately describe 
      a unique SIP aware client or user agent. 
    
    
   Shockey,et.al.          Expires - January 2004               [Page 10] 


                                       
   draft-ietf-enum-privacy-security-01.txt                      July 2003 
    
    
       
      These examples illustrate a particular view of what is necessary 
      to establish a connection between two parties. That one name can 
      be an alias to something else well understood in Internet 
      engineering terms. For instance it is very easy to give out a e-
      mail address foobar@domain.us that can be automatically forwarded 
      to a different email address rich.shockey@example.biz.  
       
      Current discussion in the IETF ENUM WG have explored the concept 
      of indirect resolution to all forms of communications, not just 
      SIP, through the use of presence servers or a concept called a 
      "service resolution service". [PETERSON 2] Once again the called 
      party who is registering their phone number in the global ENUM 
      system would then have control of how he or she could be 
      contacted by any method, on any device, by means of configuring 
      in that presence or SRS service only that data that they choose 
      to expose to persons wishing to contact them.  The calling party 
      in this scenario would first executing a query to DNS to find the 
      presence server or SRS and based on locally controlled policy the 
      server would return the options available. 
       
      $ORIGIN 0.0.6.2.3.3.5.2.0.2.1.e164.arpa. 
      IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+pres"  "!^.*$!pres:jon.peterson@foobar.foo!"  
       
      This represents a more robust and expansive concept of presence 
      where a presence server or SRS would not automatically reveal or 
      display the physical or network presence of an individual or the 
      services under the called parties control but becomes a point of 
      control for how, why when and where presence and a form of 
      communication session might be established. 
       
       
        6.2 PRIVACY CONCERNS RAISED BY IMPLEMENTATION DECISIONS 
       
      The above privacy concerns arise because of ENUM's reliance on 
      the DNS system.  This section instead discusses concerns that may 
      (or may not) arise in national implementations of ENUM.  These 
      considerations are offered to reduce possible privacy-harming 
      impacts that could arise in ENUM implementations. 
       
       
        6.2.1 PRIVACY OF REGISTRATION INFORMATION 
         
      Unlike the ICANN administered domain name industry, the global 
      ENUM system has no requirement for a central WHOIS registry of 
      registrants.  There is, however, a strong need to be able to 
      locate technical contact information concerning an ENUM record. 
       
    
    
   Shockey,et.al.          Expires - January 2004               [Page 11] 


                                  
   draft-ietf-enum-privacy-security-01.txt                      July 2003 
    
    
      Unlike with the domain name system, ENUM URLs could not possibly 
      contain trademarked or other potentially disputed names.  More 
      generally, ENUM records do not, in an of themselves, provide ANY 
      "ultimate" service to any Internet users.  All that an ENUM 
      record does is to provide pointers to one or more references to 
      other services available over the Internet.  If anyone (such as 
      an intellectual property holder, for example) needs to contact 
      the owner of one a service that is referenced in an ENUM record, 
      they can use the URL/URI of the referenced service to locate the 
      relevant party. 
      For these reasons, there is little reason to require that the 
      identity of the holder of an ENUM record be disclosed in a WHOIS-
      like system. 
       
      In contrast, there is value in linking technical contacts with 
      particular ENUM records.  Because the ENUM system depends on the 
      security and stability of DNS servers to function properly, it is 
      prudent and necessary that technical contact data for these 
      servers be widely available to network administrators so that 
      they can be contacted in the event there is a technical problem 
      with aspects of the DNS under their management and control.  
       
      A discussion of the various problems with the current WHOIS 
      protocol is beyond the scope of this document.  The IETF CRISP 
      working group [http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/crisp-
      charter.html ] is developing requirements [CRISP-REQ] for a next 
      generation WHOIS like protocol that may offer a more appropriate 
      solution to the ENUM environment. 
       
        6.2.2 OPT-IN NATURE OF ENUM 
         
      With both the Called Party Control model of ENUM, and especially 
      with the Calling Party Control model, some degree of personal 
      contact information is exposed in the global DNS.  It is 
      important that information regarding end telephone users NOT be 
      imported on a blanket or wholesale basis into the ENUM/DNS 
      system.  Users should have a choice of whether to have any 
      information about them listed in the publicly-available DNS. 
       
      Such an approach will, for example, reasonably preserve the 
      ability of end users to maintain an "unlisted" telephone number, 
      even using VoIP technology.  Assuming users are given a choice 
      about enrolling in the ENUM system, a user could forego the 
      benefits of ENUM in favor of directly providing (for example) a 
      SIP address of record to trusted family members and associates. 
       


    
    
   Shockey,et.al.          Expires - January 2004               [Page 12] 


                                       
   draft-ietf-enum-privacy-security-01.txt                      July 2003 
    
    
        6.2.3 CONTROL OVER DATA IN ENUM RECORD 
         
      Because as noted some degree of personal contact information is 
      exposed in the global DNS, it is important that the ENUM 
      registrants be provided effective and efficient control over that 
      information.  It is also important that ENUM registrants fully 
      understand the privacy implications of placing information in the 
      global DNS. 
       
      The flip side of effective user control over ENUM records is that 
      only authorized users should be able to control the content of 
      ENUM records.  This issue is briefly discussed as a security 
      consideration above. 
       
       
   7.0 FAIR INFORMATION PRACTICES 
    
      As guiding principles, consumer privacy protection in many parts 
      of the world is based on "fair information practices," which were 
      authoritatively detailed in [OECD] by the Organization for 
      Economic Co-operation and Development.  The principles should be 
      considered in any implementation of ENUM. Fair information 
      practices include the following principles:  
           
            * Notice and Consent - before the collection of data, the 
      data subject should be provided: notice of what information is 
      being collected and for what purpose and an opportunity to choose 
      whether to accept the data collection and use. In Europe, data 
      collection cannot proceed unless data subject has unambiguously 
      given his consent (with exceptions).   
        
            * Collection Limitation - data should be collected for 
      specified, explicit and legitimate purposes. The data collected 
      should be adequate, relevant and not excessive in relation to the 
      purposes for which they are collected.  
           
            * Use/Disclosure Limitation - data should be used only for 
      the purpose for which it was collected and should not be used or    
      disclosed in any way incompatible with those purposes.  
           
            * Retention Limitation - data should be kept in a form that   
      permits identification of the data subject no longer than is    
      necessary for the purposes for which the data were collected.  
           
            * Accuracy - the party collecting and storing data is 
      obligated to ensure its accuracy and, where necessary, keep it up 
      to date; every reasonable step must be taken to ensure that data 
      which are inaccurate or incomplete are corrected or deleted.  
    
    
   Shockey,et.al.          Expires - January 2004               [Page 13] 


                                       
   draft-ietf-enum-privacy-security-01.txt                      July 2003 
    
    
           
            * Access - a data subject should have access to data about    
      himself, in order to verify its accuracy and to determine how it 
      is being used.  
           
            * Security - those holding data about others must take 
      steps to protect its confidentiality.  
       
    
    
   8.0 REFERENCES 
    
                        
    
       
      1. [RFC2916bis] Faltstrom, P.&  Mealling,M. "The E.164 to URI          
         DDDS Applications",draft-ietf-enum-rfc2916bis-06.txt, (work in          
         progress), May 2003  
                                                                                     
      2. [RFC2119]Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate          
         Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997  
              
      3. [ITU-T], "The International Public Telecommunication Number         
         Plan", Recommendation E.164, May 1997.  
           
      4. [RFC3026] Blaine, R. "Liaison to IETF/ISOC on ENUM" RFC          
         3026,January 2001  
          
      5. [RFC 3403] Mealling, M., "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System 
         (DDDS) Part Four: The URI Resolution Application", RFC 3403 
         October 2002. 
       
      6. [PETERSON1] Peterson, J. etal, "Using ENUM for SIP 
         Applications", draft-ietf-sipping-e164.02.txt, (work in 
         progress), October 2002 
       
      7. [BRANDNER 1] Brandner, R. et.al." Registration for 
         enumservices of group messages", draft-ietf-enum-msg-00.txt, 
         (work in progress) June 2003 
       
      8. [BRANDNER 2] Brandner, R. et.al." Registration for 
         enumservices web and ft", draft-ietf-enum-webft-00.txt, (work 
         in progress) June 2003 
       
      9. [DNSSEC-INTRO] Arends, R.,"DNS Security Introduction and 
         Requirements", draft-ietf-dnsext-dnssec-intro-05.txt, (work in 
         progress) February 2003 

    
    
   Shockey,et.al.          Expires - January 2004               [Page 14] 


                                       
   draft-ietf-enum-privacy-security-01.txt                      July 2003 
    
    
       
      10. [RFC 3130] Lewis, E. "Notes from the State-Of-The-Technology: 
         DNSSEC" RFC 3130, June 2001 
       
      11. [RFC 1958] Carpenter, B. Editor "Architectural Principals of 
         the Internet", RFC 1958 June 1996 
       
      12. [RFC 3245] Klensin, J. Editor "The History and Context of 
         Telephone Number Mapping (ENUM) Operational Decisions: 
         Informational Documents Contributed to ITU-T Study Group 2 
         (SG2)", RFC 3245, March 2002 
       
      13. [PETERSON2] Peterson, J "Enumservice Registration for   
         Presence Services", draft-peterson-enum-pres-00.txt, (work-in-
         progress) February 2003 
       
      14. [RFC 3130] Lewis, E. "Notes from the State-Of-The-Technology: 
         DNSSEC" RFC 3130, June 2001 
       
      15. [PROVREG] Hollenbeck,S. "Extensible Provisioning Protocol", 
         draft-ietf-provreg-epp-09.txt, (work in progress) September 
         2003 
       
      16. [CRISP-REQ] Newton, A. "Cross Registry Internet Service 
         Protocol (CRISP) Requirements", draft-ietf-crisp-requirements-
         05.txt, (work in progress) May 2003 
       
      17. [DNSSEC-ROADMAP] Rose, S. "DNS Security Document Roadmap", 
         draft-ietf-dnsext-dnssec-roadmap-07.txt (work in progress) Feb 
         2003 
       
      18. [CLARKE]  Clarke, R. "ENUM - A Case Study in Social 
         Irresponsibility," March 2003, 
         http://www.anu.edu.au/people/Roger.Clarke/DV/enumISOC02.html 
       
      19. [EPIC]  Electronic Privacy Information Center, "EPIC Comments 
         on Privacy Issues in ENUM Forum 11-01-02 Unified Document," 
         November 2002, 
         http://www.epic.org/privacy/enum/enumcomments11.02.html 
       
      20. [CDT]  Center for Democracy & Technology, "ENUM: Mapping 
         Telephone Numbers onto the Internet - Potential Benefits with 
         Public Policy Risks," April 2003, 
         http://www.cdt.org/standards/enum/030428analysis.pdf 
       
       
       
       
    
    
   Shockey,et.al.          Expires - January 2004               [Page 15] 


                                       
   draft-ietf-enum-privacy-security-01.txt                      July 2003 
    
    
   Acknowledgments 
       
      The original suggestion for this document came from Allison 
      Mankin and Scott Bradner. 
       
       
        Author's Addresses 
         
      Richard Shockey 
      NeuStar, Inc 
      46000 Center Oak Plaza 
      Sterling, VA  20166  USA 
      Phone: +1 571 434 5651 
      Email: richard.shockey@neustar.biz 
       
      John B. Morris, Jr. 
      Director, Internet Standards, Technology & Privacy Project 
      Center for Democracy and Technology 
      1634 I Street NW, Suite 1100 
      Washington, DC 20006  USA               
      Email:  jmorris@cdt.org                                          
      http://www.cdt.org 
       
       
      Intellectual Property Statement 
       
            The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope 
      of any   intellectual property or other rights that might be 
      claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology 
      described in this document or the extent to which any license 
      under such rights might or might not be available; neither does 
      it represent that it has made any effort to identify any such 
      rights. Information on the IETF's procedures with respect to 
      rights in standards-track and standards-related documentation can 
      be found in BCP-11. Copies of claims of rights made available for 
      publication and any assurances of licenses to be made available, 
      or the result of an attempt made to obtain a general license or 
      permission for the use of such proprietary rights by implementors 
      or users of this specification can be obtained from the IETF 
      Secretariat. 
       
         The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its 
      attention any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or 
      other proprietary rights which may cover technology that may be 
      required to practice this standard. Please address the 
      information to the IETF Executive Director. 
       
       
    
    
   Shockey,et.al.          Expires - January 2004               [Page 16] 


                                       
   draft-ietf-enum-privacy-security-01.txt                      July 2003 
    
    
      Full Copyright Statement 
       
         Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights 
      Reserved. 
       
         This document and translations of it may be copied and 
      furnished to others, and derivative works that comment on or 
      otherwise explain it or assist in its implementation may be 
      prepared, copied, published and distributed, in whole or in part, 
      without restriction of any kind, provided that the above 
      copyright notice and this paragraph are included on all such 
      copies and derivative works. However, this document itself may 
      not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright 
      notice or references to the Internet Society or other Internet 
      organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing 
      Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights 
      defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as 
      required to translate it into languages other than English. 
       
         The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will 
      not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or 
      assignees. 
       
         This document and the information contained herein is provided 
      on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
      ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
      IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE 
      OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY 
      IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR 
      PURPOSE. 
       
       
      Acknowledgment 
       
         Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by 
      the Internet Society. 
       











    
    
   Shockey,et.al.          Expires - January 2004               [Page 17] 


