





 
            PPVPN Working Group                                             Jim Guichard 
            Internet Draft                                                Monique Morrow 
                                                                              Jeff Apcar 
                                                                   Jean Philippe Vasseur 
            Expiration Date: September 2002                            Cisco Systems Inc 
             
                                                                           Yakov Rekhter 
                                                                    Juniper Networks Inc 
                                                                         
            Robin Clipsham                                                  Xavier Vinet 
            AAPT Limited                                                          EQUANT  
             
            Tazri Tayaddin                                                    Adam Grace 
            TeleKom Malaysia                                                   Yes Optus 
                                                                         
            James Spenceley                                                    B Nagaraj 
            COMindico Australia Pty Ltd                                 Reliance InfoCom 
                                                                         
            Arthur CHEONG Boon Leong                                      Binsar Pardede 
            STAR Hub Pte Ltd                                 PT Telekomunikasi Indonesia 
                                                                         
            Kenji Kumaki                                                  Yuichi Ikejiri 
            KDDI Corporation                              NTT Communications Corporation 
                                                                         
            Y. Reina Wang                                                  Raymond Zhang 
            Fang, Luyuan                                    Infonet Services Corporation 
            AT&T Labs                                                                
                                                         Dr. Thomas Kuehne Lars Braeunig 
                                                                          Arcor AG & Co. 
                                                                         
                                                                        William Copeland 
                                                                                WorldCom 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                            
             
            Address Allocation for PE-CE links within an RFC2547bis Network 
             
                          draft-guichard-pe-ce-addr-00.txt 
             
            Status of this Memo 
             
               This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
               all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
             
               Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
               Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
               other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- 
               Drafts. 
             
               Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six      
               months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents  
               at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as  
               reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 












             
               The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
               http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
             
               The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
               http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.  
             
            Abstract 
                
               This document proposes to allocate a block of globally unique IPv4  
               addresses for exclusive use by Service Providers that provide  
               [L3VPN] based Services. The Service Provider may use these addresses  
               for the provisioning of IP addresses to the links that connect 
               customer edge (CE) routers with provider edge (PE) routers (PE-CE  
               links).   
             
               The main motivation for this proposal is to simplify the Service  
               Providers' operations by eliminating the need for the Service  
               Providers to acquire globally unique addresses for the links that  
               connect Customer Edge (CE) routers with Provider Edge (PE) routers.  
               An additional benefit of this proposal is that it conserves IPv4  
               address space by allowing multiple Service Providers to share the  
               same block of IPv4 addresses for provisioning of customer links. 
                
               This addressing scheme is not intended for use by VPNs that span  
               more than a single Service Provider, unless co-operation of addressing  
               structure is maintained to ensure uniqueness between providers. 
             
            Table of Contents 
             
            1. Conventions used in this document...............................2  
            2. Motivation......................................................2  
            2.1 PE-CE Connectivity.............................................3  
            3. Proposal........................................................4  
            4. Operational Considerations......................................4 
            5. Security Considerations.........................................5  
            6. IANA Considerations.............................................5 
            7. Acknowledgments.................................................5 
            8. References......................................................5  
            9. Authors Addresses...............................................5  
              
            1. Conventions used in this document 
             
               The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
               "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in  
               this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC-2119]. 
             
            2. Motivation 
             
               The emergence of [L3VPN] based services internationally, and the  
               significant experience gained from the deployment of these services, 
               has prompted the need for an additional IP address allocation 
               scheme. The primary use for this scheme is for the address assignment 
               to the links that connect Customer Edge (CE) routers with Provider 
               Edge (PE) routers (PE-CE links).    
             
            2.1 PE-CE Connectivity 
             
               There are various options currently available to the Service  
               Provider when allocating IP addresses to VPN interfaces that connect  
               CE devices to PE devices. They may use unnumbered addressing for the  
               PE-CE links; assign address space from their own registered  
               (globally unique) address block; use address space from the customer  
               address block; use private addressing as detailed in [RFC-1918]; use  
               a unique address block (whether private or registered) which is used  
               for ALL VPNs; or use a unique address block (whether private or  
               registered) which is used for ALL PE routers.   
             
               There are various advantages and disadvantages associated with each 
               of the possible address allocation approaches. These can be summarized as    
               follows: 
             
               Unnumbered addressing: 
             
                  Pros: Conservation of IP addresses. Only 1 IP address is required  
                        instead of a /30 or /31 subnet. 
                  Cons: Undesirable for Network Management purposes, as the network  
                        management stations do not capture the management view of  
                        the PE-CE links. This means that a separate Network  
                        Management loopback interface is needed for each CE device.  
                        A further disadvantage is the requirement for an additional  
                        loopback interface on the PE router for each VRF, which may  
                        be taken from the Service Providers registered address  
                        block, or from the customer address block, or from the  
                        [RFC-1918] address block. In either case, the same set of  
                        pros and cons apply. 
             
             
               Address space from Service Provider registered block: 
             
                  Pros: Does not require any coordination with customer IP  
                        address allocation, as no address conflict is likely.  
                        Addresses used for PE-CE links are unique across all the  
                        PE-CE links for all the VPNs supported by the Service  
                        Provider. 
             
                  Cons: The Service Provider has to obtain these addresses from one  
                        of the addressing registries. Waste of globally unique  
                        addresses for private usage. A separate /30 or /31 subnet  
                        is required for each PE-CE connection, which may result in  
                        a very high number of wasted addresses, especially when  
                        there are potentially VPNs with hundreds, if not thousands,  
                        of sites.   
                 
               Address space taken from the customer address block: 
             
                  Pros: There is no requirement for Service Provider registered  
                        addresses, and the customer is responsible for the  
                        addressing plan. No need for the Service Provider to obtain  
                        these addresses from one of the addressing registries. 
                  Cons: Requires co-ordination of addressing plan between the  
                        Service Provider and the customer. May be problematic if  
                        the customers' addresses are from the [RFC-1918] range and  
                        the Service Provider also uses [RFC-1918] address space, as 
                        there is the potential for an address overlap between the 
                        Service Provider and the customer address space. Also, if the 
                        Service Provider manages PE-CE links, then this option requires 
                        NMS used by the provider to deal with non-unique addresses.  
             
             
               Unique address block used for ALL VPNs: 
             
                  Pros: Address space can be saved as the same address block is  
                        used on the PE-CE links of ALL VPNs. 
                  Cons: Potential for address conflict when merging one VPN with  
                        another as the same addresses may be used on the PE-CE  
                        links. Also, if the Service Provider manages PE-CE links,  
                        then this option requires NMS used by the provider to deal  
                        with non-unique addresses. 
             
               Unique address block used for ALL PE routers: 
             
                  Pros: Address space can be saved as the same address block is  
                        used for each PE router in the network. This address block  
                        is used to number all the PE-CE links of that PE router,  
                        irrespective of whether these links belong to the same or  
                        different VPNs.   
                  Cons: Potential for address conflict as two PE-CE links belonging  
                        to the same VPN but attached to two different PE routers  
                        may have the same /30 or /31 subnet assigned. Also, if the  
                        Service Provider manages the PE-CE links, then this option  
                        requires NMS used by the provider to deal with non-unique  
                        addresses.   
             
            3. Proposal 
             
               This document defines a block of addresses [TBD] that a Service 
               Provider could use for PE-CE addressing, and/or for local value- 
               added services.   
                
            4. Operational Considerations 
             
               Reserved addresses for [L3VPN] based services facilitate address  
               uniqueness for Service Providers within their own administrative  
               domain. The uniqueness of addresses is guaranteed even if the  
               Service Provider network consists of multiple Autonomous Systems.  
             
               Overlapping of these reserved addresses between Service Providers  
               may cause problems if a VPN client site CE router connects to two 
               different Service Provider PE routers, and the addresses used on the 
               PE-CE links are the same.  
             
               Private addressing [RFC-1918] is still available for use within a  
               Service Provider and customer environment but the most important  
               benefit of a dedicated address block for PE-CE connections and local  
               value-added services is the guarantee against address overlap  
               between Service Provider and customer address spaces for [L3VPN]  
               based services, as well as the guarantee that all PE-CE numbered  
               links would have addresses that are unique within a Service Provider  
               This benefit impacts the service cost for preventing address 
               overlapping and reduces the complexity in doing so.  
             
               For Service Providers who offer managed customer PE-CE connectivity,  
               this proposal facilitates SP NMS operations by guaranteeing unique  
               addressing for the managed service thus minimizing provisioning  
               complexity attributed to administering non-unique address space.   
               This factor is a key benefit to Service Providers who are developing  
               and deploying managed PE-CE connections. One specific example of the  
               benefit is that the Service Provider only requires a single  
               Management VPN (the Service Provider can import to the  
               VPN_Management the PE-CE address block using a route-map), the  
               number of Management Workstations (or instances of) is greatly  
               reduced as there is no overlap. 
             
             
            5. Security Considerations 
             
               Security issues are not addressed in this memo. 
             
                
            6. IANA Considerations 
             
               IANA should allocate a /8 address block for sole use by [L3VPN]  
               Service Providers. Actual address block assignment TBD. 
                
            7. Acknowledgements     
             
             
            8. References 
             
               [L3VPN], Rosen, E. et al., "BGP/MPLS VPNs", draft-ietf-ppvpn-
                        rfc2547bis-01, July, 2002. 
             
               [RFC-1918], Rekhter, Y. et al. "Address Allocation for Private 
                           Internets", RFC 1918, February 1996. 
             
             
            9. Author's Addresses 
             
                  Jim Guichard 
                  Cisco Systems, Inc. 
                  250 Apollo Drive 
                  Chelmsford, MA, 01824 
                  Email: jguichar@cisco.com 
             
                  Monique Jeanne Morrow 
                  Cisco Systems, Inc. 
                  Glatt-Com 
                  CH-8301, Glattzentrum, Switzerland 
                  Email: mmorrow@cisco.com 
             
                  Jeff Apcar 
                  Cisco Systems, Inc 
                  201 Pacific Highway 
                  St Leonards, NSW 2068 
                  Australia 
                  Email: japcar@cisco.com 
             
                  JP Vasseur 
                  Cisco Systems, Inc. 
                  11, rue Camille Desmoulins 
                  92782 Issy les Moulineaux Cedex 9 
                  FRANCE 
                  Email: jpv@cisco.com 
             
                  Yakov Rekhter 
                  Juniper Networks, Inc. 
                  1194 N. Mathilda Ave. 
                  Sunnyvale, CA 94089 
                  Email: yakov@juniper.net 
                   
                  Xavier VINET 
                  EQUANT 
                  9 rue du Chˆne Germain - BP 80 
                  35512 Cesson Sevigne cedex 
                  FRANCE 
                  Email : xavier.vinet@equant.com 
                                     
                  Robin Clipsham  
                  AAPT Limited 
                  180-181 Burnley St, 
                  Richmond VIC  3121 
                  Australia 
                  Email: rclipsham@aapt.com.au              
             
                  Adam Grace 
                  Yes Optus 
                  L2, 50 Miller St 
                  North Sydney NSW 2060 
                  AUSTRALIA 
                  Email: Adam.Grace@optus.com.au 
             
                  B Nagaraj 
                  Reliance Infocom, Chitrakoot, 
                  Sri Ram Mills Compound, 
                  Worli, Mumbai - 400031   
                  India 
                  Email: B_Nagaraj@ril.com 
                  
                  Tazri Tajuddin 
                  COINS GLobal, Telekom Malaysia 
                  2nd Floor, Ibupejabat Telekom Malaysia,  
                  Jalan Pantai Baharu,  
                  50672 Kuala Lumpur. 
                  Email: ttazri@telekom.com.my 
             
                  James Spenceley 
                  COMindico Australia Pty Ltd 
                  Level 15 
                  201 Kent St 
                  Sydney NSW 2000 Australia 
                  Email: james.spenceley@comindico.com.au              
             
                  Binsar Pardede 
                  PT TELEKOMUNIKASI INDONESIA, Tbk 
                  Ghra Citra Caraka 7th Fl 
                  Jl. Gatot Subroto No. 52 Jakarta 12710 
                  Indonesia 
                  Email: binsar_p@telkom.co.id 
                  
                  Arthur CHEONG Boon Leong  
                  StarHub Pte Ltd (Head Office)  
                  51 Cuppage Road #07-00  
                  StarHub Centre  
                  Singapore 229469 
                  Email: arthurc@starhub.com.sg 
                  
                  Yuichi Ikejiri 
                  NTT Communications Corporation 
                  1-1-6, Uchisaiwai-cho, Chiyoda-ku 
                  Tokyo 100-8019 Japan 
                  Email: ikejiri@ntt.ocn.ne.jp  
                   
                  Kenji Kumaki 
                  KDDI Corporation 
                  KDDI Bldg. 2-3-2, Nishishinjyuku, Shinjyuku-ku 
                  Tokyo 163-8003 Japan        
                  Email: ke-kumaki@kddi.com  
                  
                  Y. Reina Wang 
                  AT&T Labs  
                  200 Laurel Ave 
                  Middletown, NJ 07748 
                  USA 
                  Email: reinawang@att.com  
             
                  Luyuan Fang  
                  AT&T Labs 
                  200 Laurel Avenue  
                  Middletown, NJ 07748  
                  USA 
                  Email: luyuanfang@att.com 
             
                  Raymond Zhang 
                  INFONET Services Corporation 
                  2160 E. Grand Ave. 
                  El Segundo, CA 90245 
                  Email: raymond_zhang@infonet.com 
                  
                  Dr. Thomas Kuehne 
                  Lars Braeunig 
                  Arcor AG & Co. 
                  K÷lner Strasse 5 
                  65760 Eschborn 
                  GERMANY 
                  Email: thomas.kuehne@arcor.net 

                  William Copeland 
                  WorldCom 
                  Advisory Engineer 
                  901 International Parkway 
                  Richardson, TX 75081 
                  Email: william.copeland@wcom.com 
             
             
            10. Full Copyright Statement 
             
               Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000).  All Rights Reserved. 
             
               This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
               others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
               or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
               and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
               kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph  
               are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
               document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
               the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
               Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
               developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
               copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
               followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
               English. 
             
               The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
               revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
             
               This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
               "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
               TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
               BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
               HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
               MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             











             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
























