


OPSEC                                                            P. Cain
Internet-Draft                               The Cooper-Cain Group, Inc.
Expires: December 28, 2006                                 June 26, 2006


           Logging Capabilities for IP Network Infrastructure
                       draft-cain-logging-caps-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 28, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document lists logging capabilities needed to support the
   current practices described in Operational Security Current Practices
   [CURPRAC] and logical enhancements to those practices if the
   capability existed.  Logging is defined as the delivery to another
   entity or system of messages about the device, the data passing
   through the device, or the device's interaction with another device.

   Capabilities are defined without reference to specific technologies.
   This is done to leave room for deployment of new technologies that



Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


   implement the capability.  Each capability cites the practices it
   supports.  Current implementations that support the capability are
   cited.  Special considerations are discussed as appropriate listing
   operational and resource constraints, limitations of current
   implementations, trade offs, etc.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Threat Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2.  Capabilities or Requirements ? . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.3.  Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.4.  Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Functional Capabilities of Log Generating Systems  . . . . . .  5
     2.1.  Logging Facility Uses Protocols Subject To Open Review . .  5
     2.2.  Logs Sent To Remote Servers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.3.  Ability to Select Reliable Delivery  . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.4.  Ability to Remotely Log Securely . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.5.  Ability to Log Locally . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     2.6.  Ability to Log Different Severities to Different
           Destinations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     2.7.  Ability to Log to Multiple Destinations  . . . . . . . . . 10
     2.8.  Ability to Maintain Accurate System Time . . . . . . . . . 11
     2.9.  Display Timezone And UTC Offset  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     2.10. Default Timezone Should Be UTC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     2.11. Log Entries Must Be Timestamped  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     2.12. Log on Exception or Identifed Event  . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     2.13. Logs Contain Untranslated IP Addresses . . . . . . . . . . 15
     2.14. Logs Contain Records Of Security Events  . . . . . . . . . 16
     2.15. Logs Do Not Contain Passwords  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     2.16. Devices Should Log Every Message . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     2.17. Syslog-specific Capabilties  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
       2.17.1.  Configurable Facility Values  . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
       2.17.2.  Configurable Destination TCP Port . . . . . . . . . . 19
   3.  Functional Capabilities of Log Storage Systems . . . . . . . . 21
     3.1.  Configurable Retention Period  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     3.2.  Ability to Compress Log Data Before Storage  . . . . . . . 21
   4.  Additional Operational Practices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
   7.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 27







Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


1.  Introduction

   The Framework for Operational Security Capabilities [FRMWK] outlines
   the proposed effort of the IETF OPSEC working group.  This includes
   producing a series of drafts to codify knowledge gained through
   operational experience about feature sets that are needed to securely
   deploy and operate managed network elements providing transit
   services at the data link and IP layers.  Current plans include
   separate capabilities documents for Packet Filtering; Event Logging;
   In-Band and Out-of-Band Management; Configuration and Management
   Interfaces; AAA; and Documentation and Assurance.  [CURPRAC] defines
   the goals, motivation, scope, definitions, intended audience, threat
   model, potential attacks and give justifications for each of the
   practices.

1.1.  Threat Model

   The logging capabilities are derived from real world observations
   where unexpected activities in a network infrastructure caused
   concern to the network operator.  Examples of such activities are:

      An adversary or unauthorized user login into an infrastructure
      device.  The risk is that the configuration or other operating
      parameter could be modified.

      A device becomes overwhelmed, throttles, or crashes.  An unaware
      operator cannot return the device to optimal operating conditions

      Network problems cannot be properly diagnosed without information.
      Information does not exist unless generated

   Threats to the network devices may be classified into broad
   categories such as the device status or configuration is modified
   without notice by the network operator, captured data traffic or
   notification messages from the device are intercepted by a third
   party, or logging data may not be properly stored rendering forensic
   activity worthless.

   The main technical issues revolve around what events generate a log
   entry, how long are logs retained and what mechanisms are used to
   secure the logged information while it is in transit and while it is
   stored.  A good overview of building and operating a log
   infrastructure can be found in NIST Publication 800-62 [SP800-92]

1.2.  Capabilities or Requirements ?

   Capabilities may or may not be requirements.  That is a local
   determination that must be made by each operator with reference to



Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


   the policies that they must support.  This document, together with
   [CURPRAC] will assist network operators in identifying their security
   capability requirements and communicating them clearly to vendors.

1.3.  Format

   Each capability has the following subsections:

   o  Capability (what)

   o  Discussion

   o  Supported Practices (why)

   o  Current Implementations (how)

   o  Considerations (caveats, resource issues, protocol issues, etc.)

   The Capability section describes a feature to be supported by the
   device.  The Supported Practice section cites practices described in
   [CURPRAC] that are supported by this capability.  The Current
   Implementation section is intended to give examples of
   implementations of the capability, citing technology and standards
   current at the time of writing.  It is expected that the choice of
   features to implement the capabilities will change over time.  The
   Considerations section lists operational and resource constraints,
   limitations of current implementations, trade offs, etc.

1.4.  Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   The use of the RFC 2119 keywords is an attempt, by the author, to
   assign an expectation level ("MUST", "SHOULD", "MAY") to the each
   capability.  It must be noted that different organizations,
   operational environments, policies and legal environments will
   generate different requirement levels.

   NOTE: This document defines capabilities.  This document does not
   define requirements, and there is no requirement that any particular
   capability be implemented or deployed.  The use of the terms MUST,
   SHOULD, and so on are in the context of each capability in the sense
   that if you conform to any particular capability then you MUST or
   SHOULD do what is specified for that capability, but there is no
   requirement that you actually do conform to any particular
   capability.



Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


2.  Functional Capabilities of Log Generating Systems

   The capabilities in this section are intended to list testable,
   functional capabilities that are needed to operate devices securely
   and meet the obligations of Section Threat Model.

2.1.   Logging Facility Uses Protocols Subject To Open Review

   Capability

      The device MUST provide a logging facility that is based on
      protocols subject to open review.  Custom or proprietary logging
      protocols MAY be implemented provided the same information is made
      available.

   Discussion

      The use of logging based on protocols subject to open review
      permits the operator to perform archival and analysis of logs
      without relying on vendor-supplied software and servers. .


   Supported Practices.

      *  syslog

      *  syslog with reliable delivery


   Current Implementations

      This capability can be satisfied by the use of one or more of
      syslog [RFC3164], syslog with reliable delivery [RFC3195], TACACS+
      [RFC1492] or RADIUS [RFC2865].

      The current best solution seems to be the following:

      *  Implement syslog [RFC3164].

      *  Consider implementing syslog with reliable delivery [RFC3195].


   Considerations

      None.






Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


2.2.  Logs Sent To Remote Servers

   Capability

      The device MUST support transmission of records of security
      related events to one or more remote collection devices.  There
      MUST be configuration settings on the device that allow selection
      of destination servers.

   Discussion

      None.


   Supported Practices

      *  Use multiple collection devices to enhance reliability.

      *  Use different collection devices to segregate different event
         sensitivity levels.


   Current Implementations

      This capability may be satisfied by the use of one or more of:
      syslog [RFC3164], syslog with reliable delivery [RFC3195], TACACS+
      [RFC1492], or RADIUS [RFC2865].


   Considerations

      This is important because it supports individual accountability.
      It is important to store them on a separate server to preserve
      them in case of failure or compromise of the managed device.

      Note that there may be privacy or legal considerations when
      logging/monitoring user activity.

      High volumes of logging may generate excessive network traffic
      and/or compete for scarce memory and CPU resources on the device.


2.3.   Ability to Select Reliable Delivery








Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


   Capability

      It SHOULD be possible to select reliable delivery of log messages.

   Discussion

      Reliable delivery is important to the extent that log data is
      depended upon to make operational decisions and forensic analysis.
      Without reliable delivery, log data becomes a collection of hints
      instead of a true record of events.


   Supported Practices

      *  Use syslog-ng.

      *  Tunnel the logging stream over a TCP-based connection.

      *  Use an out-of-band network to connect critical logging devices
         to the collection device.


   Current Implementations

      One example of reliable syslog delivery is defined in [RFC3195].
      Syslog-ng provides another example, although the protocol has not
      been standardized


   Considerations

      Reliable delivery should be used if the path from log event
      generator to the collection device transits administrative domains
      or uses unreliable channels, as it is important that the entire
      stream of leg events is captured.


2.4.   Ability to Remotely Log Securely

   Capability

      The log data stream SHOULD be able to be delivered to the
      collection device in a confidential manner.

   Discussion






Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


      While syslog *could* provide this capability, it has many security
      issues and by itself does not address issues from the threat
      model.  See the security considerations section of [RFC3164] for a
      list of issues.  Syslog with reliable delivery provides solutions
      to most/all of these issues, however at the time of this writing
      there are few implementations.  Other possible solutions might be
      to tunnel syslog over a secure transport...but this often raises
      difficult key management and scalability issues.


   Supported Practices

      *  Log data tunnelled within IPSec or SSH.

      *  Use syslog-ng.


   Current Implementations

      There is no common implementation of this capability.


   Considerations

      As is the reliable delivery capability, delivering log data across
      untrusted streams or including sensitive data in a event data may
      require additional countermeasures to protect the data.  This
      concern should not be addressed lightly.

      ISPs are fully aware that there is no security with syslog but
      IPSec is considered too operationally expensive and cumbersome to
      deploy.  Syslog-ng and stunnel could be used for better
      authentication and integrity protected solutions.  Mechanisms to
      prevent unauthorized personnel from tampering with logs is
      constrained to auditing who has access to the logging servers and
      files.


2.5.   Ability to Log Locally

   Capability

      It SHOULD be possible to log locally on the device itself.  Local
      logging SHOULD be written to non-volatile storage. .







Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


   Discussion

      Logging of failed authentication attempts to local non-volatile
      storage is critical as it provides a record of events if the
      device gets isolated from its authentication interfaces or an
      attack overwhelms the console interface.  Local logging is also
      important for viewing information when connected to the device and
      it provides some backup of log data in case remote logging fails.

      Local logging also provides a way to quickly view logs relevant to
      one device without having to sort through a possibly large set of
      logs from other devices at the collection device.


   Supported Practices

      *  To conserve space, only failed device logins and network
         connectivity issues are logged locally.


   Current Implementations



         One example of local logging would be a memory buffer that
         receives copies of messages sent to the remote log server.

         Another example might be a local syslog server (assuming the
         device is capable of running syslog and has some local
         storage).



   Considerations

      Storage on the device may be limited.; high volumes of log
      messages may quickly fill the available storage, in which case
      there are two options: new logs overwrite old logs (possibly via
      the use of a circular memory buffer or log file rotation), or
      logging stops.


2.6.   Ability to Log Different Severities to Different Destinations








Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


   Capability

      The device SHOULD allow specified severity levels of log message
      to be delivered to different collection destinations.

   Discussion

      A network of multiple devices may generate a significant amount of
      log data.  The ability to send critical log messages, for example
      a root login, to a specific destination device will enhance the
      ability of the network operator to notice the critical event.


   Supported Practices

      *  Email critical event notices to a 24-hour watched mailbox.

      *  Send critical event notices to a separate log collector that
         scrolls received messages upon a large display in the NOC.


   Current Implementations

      There are no common implementations of this capability.


   Considerations

      The use of multiple collectors will incur maintenance and
      reliability issues.  In some cases, multiple filters watching a
      single collection point may be more efficient than using multiple
      collectors.


2.7.   Ability to Log to Multiple Destinations

   Capability

      The device SHOULD allow log message to be delivered to multiple
      collection destinations.

   Discussion

      All ISPs have multiple syslog servers - some ISPs choose to use
      separate syslog servers for varying infrastructure devices (i.e.,
      one syslog server for backbone routers, one syslog server for
      customer edge routers, etc.)  This provides a backup mechanism to
      see what is going on in the network in the event that a device may



Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


      'forget' to do syslog if the CPU is busy.


   Supported Practices

      *  Use multiple log servers to enhance reliability.


   Current Implementations

      Most ISPs use multiple, sometimes gegraphic-driven, log
      collectors.


   Considerations

      None.


2.8.   Ability to Maintain Accurate System Time

   Capability

      The device MUST maintain accurate, "high resolution" system time.

   Discussion

      Accurate time is important to the generation of reliable log data.
      Accurate time is also important to the correct operation of some
      authentication mechanisms.

      The ability to correlate network events from different devices is
      directly related to the accuracy of the log timestamps.  If a
      timeline cannot be constructed, the event logs and forensic data
      is useless.


   Supported Practices

      *  The time is derived from NTP which is generally configured as a
         flat hierarchy at stratum1 and stratum2 servers to have less
         configuration and less maintenance issues.

      *  Each router is configured with one stratum1 peer both locally
         and remotely.






Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


   Current Implementations

      This capability may be satisfied by supporting Network Time
      Protocol (NTP), Simple Network Time Protocol (SNTP), or via direct
      connection to an accurate time source.


   Considerations

      System clock chips are inaccurate to varying degrees.  System time
      should not be relied upon unless it is regularly checked and
      synchronized with a known, accurate external time source (such as
      an NTP stratum-1 server).  Also note that if network time
      synchronization is used, an attacker may be able to manipulate the
      clock unless cryptographic authentication is used..


2.9.   Display Timezone And UTC Offset

   Capability

      All displays and logs of system time MUST include a timezone or
      offset from UTC.

   Discussion

      None.


   Supported Practices

      *  The log timestamps include a timezone indicator like "-05:00".


   Current Implementations




   Considerations

      Knowing the timezone or UTC offset makes correlation of data and
      coordination with data in other timezones possible.  Bob is in
      Newfoundland, Canada which is UTC -3:30.  Alice is somewhere in
      Indiana, USA.  Some parts of Indiana switch to daylight savings
      time while others do not.  A user on Bob's network attacks a user
      on Alice's network.  Both are using logs with local timezones and
      no indication of UTC offset.  Correlating these logs will be



Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


      difficult and error prone.  Including timezone, or better, UTC
      offset, eliminates these difficulties.

      Notice that a physical location may have different offsets from
      UTC during a year as summertime, daylight savings time, or other
      local customs are applied.


2.10.  Default Timezone Should Be UTC

   Capability

      The default timezone for display and logging SHOULD be UTC.  The
      device MAY support a mechanism to allow the operator to specify
      the display and logging of times in a timezone other than UTC.

   Discussion

      Knowing the timezone or UTC offset makes correlation of data and
      coordination with data in other timezones possible.

   Supported Practices

      *  The timezone offset can be entered as part of configuration of
         a device.


   Implementation

      Bob in Newfoundland (UTC -3:30) and Alice in Indiana (UTC -5 or
      UTC -6 depending on the time of year and exact county in Indiana)
      are working an incident together using their logs.  Both left the
      default settings, which was UTC, so there was no translation of
      time necessary to correlate the logs.


   Considerations

      None.


2.11.   Log Entries Must Be Timestamped

   Capability







Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


      By default, the device MUST timestamp all log messages.  The
      timestamp MUST be accurate to within a second or less.  The
      timestamp MUST include a timezone.  There MAY be a mechanism to
      disable the generation of timestamps.

   Discussion

      Accurate timestamps are necessary for correlating events,
      particularly across multiple devices or with other organizations.
      This applies when it is necessary to analyze logs..


   Supported Practices

      *  Each entry into the log contains a time value.


   Current Implementations

      This capability may be satisfied by writing timestamps into syslog
      messages.


   Considerations

      It is difficult to correlate logs from different time zones.
      Security events on the Internet often involve machines and logs
      from a variety of physical locations.  For that reason, UTC is
      preferred, all other things being equal..


2.12.   Log on Exception or Identifed Event

   Capability

      Log entries should be generated on exceptions (e.g., failures) or
      event matching (e.g., generate a log entry if an event happens)
      via a configurable value.

   Discussion

      Traditionally log events are generated on exceptions -- failures
      or errors.  Many times this is not sufficient as a network
      operator cannot tell if an attacker failed to log into a device
      once, or failed once and then succeeded on the second try.
      Devices should be configurable to allow for log messages on
      failures, successes, or everything.




Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


   Supported Practices

      *  Log all login events to a device but only have the collection
         device alert on failures.

      *  Log on successful device configuration changes since one must
         be aware of all modifications on some types of devices.


   Current Implementations

      Some ISPs put in passive devices to see routing updates and
      withdrawals and not rely solely on the device for log files.


   Considerations

      None.


2.13.   Logs Contain Untranslated IP Addresses

   Capability

      Log messages MUST NOT list translated addresses (DNS names)
      associated with the address without listing the untranslated IP
      address where the IP address is available to the device generating
      the log message.

   Discussion

      Although some times less obtuse than DNS names, IP address
      assignments tend to be more stable than DNS entries.  If an
      operator is trying to correlate a historical event, the DNS name
      may have been changed from that used at the event.  TO ease this
      confusion, the IP address of the source of the action that caused
      the log event should be retained in the log entry.


   Supported Practices

      *  Include the source IP address in all log messages.

      *  Although a corresponding DNS name is useful, DNS lookups can be
         slow and consume resources.






Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


   Current Implementations

      Most devices include the source IP in event logs


   Considerations

      A failed network login should generate a record with the source
      address of the login attempt, but the Source addresses may be
      spoofed.  Network-based attacks often use spoofed source addresses
      so they should not be completely trusted unless verified by other
      means.  Having accurate timestamps in the logs increases the
      chances that the use of an address can be correlated to an
      individual.


2.14.  Logs Contain Records Of Security Events

   Capability

      The device MUST be able to send a record of at least the following
      events: * authentication successes, * authentication failures, *
      session Termination, * authorization changes, * configuration
      changes, * device status changes.

      The device SHOULD be able to send a record of all other security
      related events including filtering (or ACL) exceptions, routing
      protocol state changes, all device access (regardless of
      authentication success or failure), all commands issued to a
      device, and all routing events (boot-up/flaps).

   Discussion

      The main function of any of these log messages is to see what the
      device is doing as well as to try and ascertain what certain
      malicious attackers are trying to do.

      Typically the data logged will contain the source and destination
      IP addresses and layer 4 port numbers as well as a timestamp.


   Supported Practices

      *  Examples of events recorded include: user logins, bad login
         attempts, logouts, user privilege level changes, individual
         configuration commands issued by users and system startup/
         shutdown events.




Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


   Current Implementations

      Most devices crudely support this capability.


   Considerations

      This list is far from complete.  Note that there may be privacy or
      legal considerations when logging/monitoring user activity or
      personal information.

      This is an important capability because it supports individual
      accountability and auditing as well as forensics.  See section
      4.5.4.4 of .


2.15.  Logs Do Not Contain Passwords

   Capability

      Passwords SHOULD be excluded, by default configuration, from all
      audit records, including records of successful or failed
      authentication attempts.

   Discussion

      A user may make small mistakes in entering a password such as
      using incorrect capitalization ("my password" vs. "My Password").
      Event logs are traditional disperse widely so unexpected events
      will be noticed.  Unauthorized access to event logs that contain
      these mistakes may compromise more than just the network devices
      as most users do not have independent passwords for every system.


   Supported Practices

      *  Login failure log messages include the failed username,
         timestamp, and source IP address, but not the password used.


   Current Implementations

      Access control and authorization requirements differ for
      accounting records (logs) and authorization databases (passwords).
      Logging passwords may grant unauthorized access to individuals
      with access to the logs.  Logging failed passwords may also give
      hints about actual passwords.  See section 4.5.4.4 of [RFC2196]




Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006





   Considerations

      There may be situations where it is appropriate/required to log
      passwords, such as when performing real-time attack analysis.
      Caution is advised in these rare circumstances.


2.16.  Devices Should Log Every Message

   Capability

      Devices should be configurable to either log every event or to
      drop events due to congestion.

   Discussion

      Many devices implement logging as an afterthought with the device
      dropping log messages or failing to log critical events when the
      device is "busy".  This behaviour makes forensic analysis
      difficult, if not impossible.  Devices should be configurable to
      not drop log events at those operator-defined times when this
      behaviour s expected.


   Supported Practices

      *  Use multiple logging devices and collectors to capture enough
         extra messages to be able to recreate a full log.


   Current Implementations

      Use multiple logging devices.




   Considerations

      None.








Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


2.17.  Syslog-specific Capabilties

   The predominant logging mechanism within network infrastructures is
   BSD-syslog and its' variants.  With such widespread uses, this
   section identifies capabilities specific to syslog.

2.17.1.  Configurable Facility Values

   Capability

      The device SHOULD allow for the selection of the syslog facility
      number via configuration.

   Discussion

      A network operator may have many similar devices in their network.
      The ability to segregate different severity events by the
      strategic use of the syslog facility number is extremely useful.


   Supported Practices

      *  Authentication log entries are marked at a different facility
         code to allow for easier segregation at the event collector.


   Current Implementations

      Some devices support this capability via a configuration variable.


   Considerations

      None.


2.17.2.   Configurable Destination TCP Port

   Capability

      Devices should allow for the configuration of the destination
      syslog TCP port number.

   Discussion







Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


      In large logging environments, spreading the load amongst multiple
      receiving daemons is a useful optimization.  This capability also
      allows to differentiate different device functions very easily,
      for example all backbone router log to port 512 and all access
      router log to port 513.


   Supported Practices

      *  Send all backbone routers log to port 512 and all access router
         log to port 513.


   Current Implementations

      Some devices support this capability via a configuration variable.


   Considerations

      None.






























Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006              [Page 20]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


3.  Functional Capabilities of Log Storage Systems

   Alongside the generation and transport of log messages, there are
   capabilities required at the collection device.  This section
   identifies capabilities necessary for collection devices.

3.1.   Configurable Retention Period

   Capability

      The collection device should retain log data for a configurable
      period before deletion.  A collection device may also set a
      maximum size of retained log data and deleted the oldest data when
      new data arrives.

   Discussion

      Log messages may overwhelm even the largest storage media.
      Collection devices should retain log message for a set time period
      or until a set amount is collected and then purge the oldest data
      as new data is received.

   Supported Practices

      *  Logs older than 60 days are automatically deleted via a cron
         job on log servers.


   Current Implementations

      Unknown.


   Considerations

      None.


3.2.   Ability to Compress Log Data Before Storage

   Capability

      A collection device should be able to support the compressing of
      received log messages before storing them.







Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006              [Page 21]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


   Discussion

      In collaboration with the previous capability, this capability
      allows the collection device to store the maximum amount of log
      data on a media.

   Supported Practices

      *  None


   Current Implementations

      Log messages destined for archival storage are compressed before
      writing to CDRom.


   Considerations

      None.































Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006              [Page 22]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


4.  Additional Operational Practices

   This section describes practices not covered in [CURPRAC].  They are
   included here to provide justification for capabilities that
   reference them.

   This section will be populated from comments received on this
   internet-draft.











































Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006              [Page 23]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


5.  Security Considerations

   Security capabilities of network devices is the subject matter of
   this entire memo.  The capabilities listed cite practices in
   [CURPRAC] that they are intended to support.  [CURPRAC] also defines
   the general threat model, practices, and lists justifications for
   each practice.












































Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006              [Page 24]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


6.  IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA actions required by this document.

7.  Normative References

   [CURPRAC]  Kaeo, M., "Operational Security Current Practices",
              May 2006.

   [FRMWK]    Jones, G., Ed., "Framework for Operational Security
              Capabilities for IP Network Infrastructure,
              draft-ietf-opsec-framework-03 (work in progress)",
              October 2005, <draft-ietf-opsec-framework>.

   [RFC1492]  Finseth, C., "An Access Control Protocol, Sometimes Called
              TACACS", RFC 1492, July 1993.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2196]  Fraser, B., "Site Security Handbook", RFC 2196,
              September 1997.

   [RFC2865]  Rigney, C., Willens, S., Rubens, A., and W. Simpson,
              "Remote Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)",
              RFC 2865, June 2000.

   [RFC3164]  Lonvick, C., "The BSD Syslog Protocol", RFC 3164,
              August 2001.

   [RFC3195]  New, D. and M. Rose, "Reliable Delivery for syslog",
              RFC 3195, November 2001.

   [SP800-92]
              Souppaya, M. and K. Kent, "Guide to Security Log
              Management", FIPS 800-92, April 2006.















Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006              [Page 25]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


Author's Address

   Patrick Cain
   The Cooper-Cain Group, Inc.
   P.O. Box 400992
   Cambridge, MA  02140
   U.S.A.

   Phone: +1 617-848-1950
   Email: pcain@coopercain.com









































Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006              [Page 26]

Internet-Draft            Logging Capabilities                 June 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Cain                    Expires December 28, 2006              [Page 27]

