


Mobopts Working Group                                             Y. Qiu
Internet-Draft                           Institute for Infocomm Research
Expires: August 30, 2006                                         F. Zhao
                                                                UC Davis
                                                               R. Koodli
                                                   Nokia Research Center
                                                       February 26, 2006


                 Mobile IPv6 Location Privacy Solutions
            draft-irtf-mobopts-location-privacy-solutions-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 30, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   Mobile IPv6 [1] is an IP layer mobility protocol which allows mobile
   nodes to remain reachable while moving around on the Internet.  With
   the existing specification, a mobile node's movement can be tracked
   by simply monitoring the IP addresses in communication involving the
   mobile node.  In this document, we propose techniques for hiding a



Qiu, et al.              Expires August 30, 2006                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       MIP6 location privacy solutions       February 2006


   mobile node's location information from eavesdroppers as well as from
   correspondent nodes.  The proposed techniques are efficient and fully
   compatible with the base Mobile IPv6 operation.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Analysis of Location Privacy in MIP6 . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Hiding Mobile Node's Location Movement Information . . . . . .  5
     3.1.  Pseudo Home Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  Hiding HoA within Home Binding Update  . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.3.  Hiding CoA via Reverse Tunneling Mode  . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.4.  Hiding HoA from an Eavesdropper in Route Optimization  . .  7
       3.4.1.  Home Test Init from the Mobile Node  . . . . . . . . .  7
       3.4.2.  Home Test from Correspondent Node  . . . . . . . . . .  8
       3.4.3.  Correspondent Binding Update . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       3.4.4.  The increment of Sequence Numbers  . . . . . . . . . .  9
       3.4.5.  Traffic Packets between Mobile Node and
               Correspondent Node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   4.  Location Privacy with Unmodified RR Signaling  . . . . . . . . 11
     4.1.  Route-Optimized Binding Update to CN . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       4.1.1.  The generation of the privacy management key, Kpm  . . 11
       4.1.2.  Route-Optimized Binding Update to CN directly  . . . . 11
     4.2.  Reverse-tunneled Binding Update to CN  . . . . . . . . . . 12
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     5.1.  Hiding a MN's Location Information from its CN and
           from an  Eavesdropper in Reverse Tunneling Mode  . . . . . 14
     5.2.  Hiding a MN's Location Movement Information from an
           Eavesdropper  in Route Optimization  . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   7.  Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 18
















Qiu, et al.              Expires August 30, 2006                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       MIP6 location privacy solutions       February 2006


1.  Introduction

   IP Address Location Privacy in the presence of IP Mobility is an
   important problem for which some solutions are already frequently
   discussed.  However, details are not documented.  Furthermore,
   solutions for Home Address profiling may benefit from more
   investigation.  In this document, we briefly discuss the problem and
   then specify the details of solutions.  We introduce a "Pseudo Home
   Address" as a mechanism to hide Home Address during route-optimized
   communication.  The IP address location privacy problem is specified
   in detail in [2].

   In the protocol, we focus on the threats to location privacy posed by
   the passive entities.  In order to compromise the location privacy
   successfully, the passive entities are usually required to be at
   certain locations, for example, an eavesdropper along certain paths
   taken by the traffic between MN, HA and CN.  The threats posed by the
   active attackers are out of scope for now.  Also we only consider the
   location privacy of MN; thus we assume both CN and HA are fixed node
   in order to simplify the scenarios.  While in the real deployment, CN
   or HA might be mobile as well, the same analysis and solution for MN
   may also apply in these cases.

   We categorize the threats related to location privacy in MIP6 from
   the passive entities into the following two kinds: IP address
   location privacy and profiling attacks.

   The issue of IP address location privacy means that other entities
   can learn the location information of MN from its IP addresses
   without authorization.  In the presence of mobility, there are two
   problems related to IP address location privacy: Disclosing a new IP
   address (CoA) to a correspondent, and revealing a fixed IP address
   (HoA) to an eavesdropper.  So, a MN may not mind using a fixed Home
   Address with a correspondent but may not wish to disclose its new
   Care-of Address, whereas it may not wish to reveal its Home Address
   to an on-looker, but has to use the CoA from its visited network.

   The issue of profiling attacks means that other entities can enrich
   its knowledge about MN, for example by linking the activities of MN
   and then analyzing the collected information.  With the enlarged
   knowledge base together with other additional background information
   about MN, other entity can compromise the location privacy of MN with
   a higher probability.

   The scope of this protocol will be limited the issue of IP address
   location privacy.  And we use the commonly adopted terminology
   defined in [1] and [2] in this document.




Qiu, et al.              Expires August 30, 2006                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       MIP6 location privacy solutions       February 2006


2.  Analysis of Location Privacy in MIP6

   Current MIP6 specification does not consider location privacy.  For
   example, both CoA and HoA are available to on-lookers in the
   following messages:

   o  Home Binding Update and Acknowledgement

   o  Correspondent Binding Update and Acknowledgement

   o  Prefix Discovery

   o  Data packets between MN and CN in the Route Optimization mode

   Also HoA is available in the HoTi/HoT message on the HA-CN path.
   Hence, the CN, on-lookers and even the HA can inspect copies of
   packets from MN, and learn the complete location information
   deterministically without MN's authorization.

   In Route Optimization Mode, where the MN must use CoA as the source
   IP address in the communication with HA and CN, both its peers and
   eavesdropper can learn CoA.  In order to protect the location
   privacy, MN must use some way to conceal its real HoA.  If the MN is
   always the initiator of a communication, MN can conceal its HoA from
   both the CN and the on-looker.  However, if the CN is the initiator
   of a communication, the CN certainly knows the MN's HoA, and then
   MN's CoA.  Therefore, in this case, MN can only conceal its HoA from
   the on-lookers.

   In Reverse Tunneling Mode, a MN can hide its current location from
   the CN by reverse tunneling all its traffic through the Home Agent.
   The MN, in addition can hide its Home Address from any eavesdroppers
   on the access network by also reverse tunneling IPsec-encrypted
   Mobile IP signaling and data traffic with its Home Agent.

















Qiu, et al.              Expires August 30, 2006                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       MIP6 location privacy solutions       February 2006


3.  Hiding Mobile Node's Location Movement Information

3.1.  Pseudo Home Address

   It is desirable not to reveal the real Home Address at all in the
   mobile node's communication.  So, some other field can be used to
   substitute the real HoA, but such a field must be communicated
   securely and the field itself must not become a target of profiling.

   We define a field called a "Pseudo Home Address", which is sent as a
   destination option in place of the Home Address.  The field is used
   by the home agent and correspondent to recover the real Home Address
   from the Pseudo Home Address in packets among MN, HA and CNs.

   The computation of Pseudo Home Address is as follows:

      Pseudo_HoA = HMAC_SHA1(Kph, Previous Pseudo_HoA))

   Where the Kph could be derived from the secret key pre-established
   manually between the MN and HA or derived from the secret key set up
   during IKE phase 1 between the MN and the HA.

3.2.  Hiding HoA within Home Binding Update

   When MN moves to a new foreign subnet, it sends the following
   modified Home Binding Update to its HA:

   o  IPv6 header (source = CoA, destination = HA)

   o  Destination option header

      *  Home Address option (Pseudo_HoA)

   o  ESP header in transport mode

   o  Mobility header

      *  Home Binding Update

      *  Alternative CoA option (CoA)

   And HA replies to MN with the following modified Home Binding
   Acknowledgement:

   o  IPv6 header (source = HA, destination = CoA)

   o  Destination option header




Qiu, et al.              Expires August 30, 2006                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       MIP6 location privacy solutions       February 2006


      *  Home Address option (Pseudo_HoA)

   o  ESP header in transport mode

   o  Mobility header

      *  Home Binding Acknowledgement

   Note that Pseudo_HoA is used instead of the real HoA in above
   messages.  In case MN fails to receive the Binding Acknowledgement,
   it will retransmit the Binding Update but with a new sequence number
   in order to detect a replay attack.  Upon the successful binding
   update, MN and HA each computes a new PseudoHoA as described in above
   section.

   They then replace the previous Pseudo_HoA with the new one in their
   respective data record and in their respective Home BU cache:

      PseudoHoA (as the index of the entry)

      HoA (as the index of the entry)

      CoA

      Lifetime

      ......

3.3.  Hiding CoA via Reverse Tunneling Mode

   To hide its CoA from the CN and its HoA from an eavesdropper, the MN
   communicates Mobile IP signaling and IP data packets with its HA via
   reverse tunneling.

   When the MN sends a Home Binding Update from a visited network to its
   HA, it uses the following packet form to hide its HoA from being
   monitored on the access network:

   o  IPv6 header (source = CoA, destination = HA)

   o  Destination option header

      *  Home Address option (Pseudo_HoA)

   o  ESP header in transport mode

   o  Mobility header




Qiu, et al.              Expires August 30, 2006                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       MIP6 location privacy solutions       February 2006


      *  Binding Update

      *  Alternative CoA option (CoA)

   The HA uses the following packet form to reply a Binding
   Acknowledgement to the MN that is not on the home link:

   o  IPv6 header (source = HA, destination = CoA)

   o  Routing header (type 2)

      *  Pseudo_HoA

   o  ESP header in transport mode

   o  Mobility header

      *  Binding Acknowledgement

   In case the MN fails to receive the Binding Acknowledgement, the MN
   will retranismit the Binding Update but with a new sequence number in
   order to detect replay attack.

   The MN and HA each computes a new Pseudo HoA as described in Section
   3.1.

   The MN and HA then each replace the old Pseudo_HoA with the new one
   in their respective databases.  This updating of Pseudo_HoA is only
   performed once right after the successful home binding update and
   acknowledgement.

3.4.  Hiding HoA from an Eavesdropper in Route Optimization

3.4.1.  Home Test Init from the Mobile Node

   The MN sends HoTI to HA with the following packet form:

   o  IPv6 header (source = CoA, destination = HA)

   o  ESP header in tunneling mode

   o  IPv6 header (source = HoA, destination = CN)

   o  Mobility header

      *  HoTI

   The HoTI is then forwarded to the CN in the following form:



Qiu, et al.              Expires August 30, 2006                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       MIP6 location privacy solutions       February 2006


   o  IPv6 header (source = HA, destination = CN)

   o  Destination option

      *  Pseudo_HoA

   o  Mobility header

      *  HoTI

3.4.2.  Home Test from Correspondent Node

   Upon receiving the HoTI from HA, the CN replies with HoT in the
   following form:

   o  IPv6 header (source = CN, destination = HA)

   o  Destination option

      *  Pseudo_HoA

   o  Mobility header

      *  HoT = (home init cookie, home keygen token, home nonce index)

   where home keygen token = First (64, HMAC_SHA1(Kcn, (Pseudo_HoA |
   nonce | 0))) and Kcn is the CN's local secret [1].

   Upon receiving the packet, HA, using Pseudo_HoA as an index,
   retrieves HoA and CoA from the Home BU cache, generates a new HoT
   packet and forwards the packet to MN:

   o  IPv6 header (source = HA, destination = CoA)

   o  ESP header in tunneling mode

   o  IPv6 header (source = CN, destination = HoA)

   o  Mobility header

      *  HoT = (home init cookie, home keygen token, home nonce index)

3.4.3.  Correspondent Binding Update

   The MN sends the CoTI to the CN and the CN replies to the MN with
   CoT, in exactly the same ways as specified in the RR test [1].

   After receiving the HoT and CoT, the MN sends the Binding Update to



Qiu, et al.              Expires August 30, 2006                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       MIP6 location privacy solutions       February 2006


   the CN in the following packet form:

   o  IPv6 header (source = CoA, destination = CN)

   o  Destination Option

      *  E(Kbm, HoA)

   o  Mobility header

      *  Binding Update = (Pseudo_HoA, home nonce index, ...)

   where Kbm is the binding update key given by

   o  Kbm = SHA1 (home keygen token | care-of keygen token)

   o  home keygen token = First (64, HMAC_SHA1(Kcn, (Pseudo_HoA | nonce
      | 0)))

   o  care-of keygen token = First (64, HMAC_SHA1(Kcn, (CoA | nonce |
      1)))

   and E(Kbm, HoA) is a symmetric key encryption of the HoA under the
   secret binding update key Kbm.

   After receiving the BU, the CN first computes home keygen token and
   care-of keygen token.  The CN then computes Kbm and decrypts E(Kbm,
   HoA) to recover HoA.  The CN then keeps both HoA and Pseudo HoA in
   its binding cache table.  The subsequent data traffic between the MN
   and the CN will follow the same procedure and packet format as
   specified in [1] except that the Pseudo HoA is used in place of the
   HoA.

3.4.4.  The increment of Sequence Numbers

   RFC 3775 [1] only requires that the sequence number field in the
   Binding Update is greater than the Sequence Number received in the
   previous valid Binding Update for this home address.  However, if the
   increment of sequence number is fixed, an eavesdropper is also able
   to guess the MN's movement by monitoring a series of BU messages.

   Here the increment of sequence number is defined as

      seq#_increment = First(8, HMAC_SHA1(Kbm, home nonce index | care
      nonce index));

   then




Qiu, et al.              Expires August 30, 2006                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       MIP6 location privacy solutions       February 2006


      Seq# = previous Seq# + seq#_increment.

   In order to avoid exceeding easily the 16 bit range of se-quence
   number and keep enough random numbers, we pick up the first 8 bits
   from the result of the keyed pseudo function.

   If seq#_increment = 0, then set

      seq#_increment = 1.

   As the increment of sequence number is not fixed now, MN needs to
   deal with the case when it reaches 2^16-1.  If the new Seq# > 2^16-1,
   then MN sets the new Seq# to 2^16-1.

3.4.5.  Traffic Packets between Mobile Node and Correspondent Node

   The subsequent data traffic between MN and CN will follow the same
   procedure and packet format as specified in [1] except that
   Pseudo_HoA is used in place of HoA:

   Packets from MN to CN:

   o  IPv6 header (source = CoA, destination = CN)

   o  Destination option

      *  Pseudo_HoA

   o  Payload

   Packets from CN to MN:

   o  IPv6 header (source = CN, destination = CoA)

   o  Routing Header

      *  Pseudo_HoA

   o  Payload












Qiu, et al.              Expires August 30, 2006               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       MIP6 location privacy solutions       February 2006


4.  Location Privacy with Unmodified RR Signaling

   In this section, we present an IP address location privacy mechanism
   without any modification on the original RR test, which would help
   ease the transition to a Mobile IPv6 management solution with the
   support of location privacy.

   The basic idea is that both CN and MN derive a shared privacy
   management key, Kpm, from the keygen tokens achieved in the home
   address and care-of address test procedures; afterwards, MN uses Kpm
   to hide its home address in the Binding Update to CN; and finally CN
   authenticates the received Binding Update and restores the MN'S home
   address therein.

4.1.  Route-Optimized Binding Update to CN

4.1.1.  The generation of the privacy management key, Kpm

   MN and CN may use a different key from Kbm for the purpose of
   location privacy.  In the following we describe the details to
   generate a so-called privacy management key, Kpm.

   With the home address test and the care-of address test, a care-of
   keygen token and a home keygen token are generated in the same way as
   in the original RR test.  The privacy management key, Kpm, is then
   generated as follows:

      Kpm = SHA1 (home keygen token | care-of keygen token | 0)

4.1.2.  Route-Optimized Binding Update to CN directly

   In the original RR test, the home address is visible in the Binding
   Update to CN.  MN can make the home address invisible to on-lookers
   by replacing the HoA with a Pseudo Home Address generated from the
   original Home Address and Kpm as follows:

      Pseudo Home Address = E(Kpm, Home Address)

   where E is an encryption algorithm, such as AES.

   The format of the Binding Update to CN is as follows:

   o  Source Address = care-of address

   o  Destination Address = correspondent

   o  Parameters:




Qiu, et al.              Expires August 30, 2006               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       MIP6 location privacy solutions       February 2006


      *  Pseudo home address

      *  sequence number

      *  home nonce index

      *  care-of nonce index

      *  First (96, HMAC_SHA1 (Kbm, (care-of address | correspondent |
         BU)))

   When CN receives this BU message, CN firstly verifies the MAC based
   on the re-generated Kbm. If it is successful, CN recovers the home
   address from the Pseudo home address:

      Home Address = D(Kpm, Pseudo Home Address)

   where D is a decryption algorithm.

   CN may also use this information to update its Binding Update cache.
   Also CN may send back a Binging Acknowledgement if requested:

   o  Source Address = correspondent

   o  Destination Address = care-of address

   o  Parameters:

      *  Sequence number

      *  First (96, HMAC_SHA1 (Kbm, (care-of address | correspondent |
         BA)))

4.2.  Reverse-tunneled Binding Update to CN

   MN may send the BU not directly to CN, but via HA.  In this case, the
   packet header format is as follows:

   o  IPv6 header (source = care-of address, destination = home agent)

   o  ESP header in tunnel mode

   o  IPv6 header (source = home address, destination = correspondent
      node)

   o  Destination Option





Qiu, et al.              Expires August 30, 2006               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       MIP6 location privacy solutions       February 2006


      *  Pseudo Home Address

   o  Mobility header

      *  Binding Update

      *  Alternate Care-of Address option (care-of address)

   The privacy management key Kpm is the same as the binding management
   key Kbm.

   When a CN receives a BU with an alternate-CoA option and a new
   destination option containing the Pseudo Home Address, it first
   computes the Kbm, verifies the MAC for the Binding Update, and then
   recovers the Home Address from the Pseudo Home Address, and verifies
   if it is actually the Home Address present in the source IP address.

   When the Binding Update is reverse-tunneled through the Home Agent,
   the Home Address is visible as the source IP address along the HA-CN
   path.  However the on-lookers on the HA-CN path can launch the attack
   to compromise the RR test anyway.






























Qiu, et al.              Expires August 30, 2006               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       MIP6 location privacy solutions       February 2006


5.  Security Considerations

   The modified binding update procedures and data packets presented
   above can be explored to achieve two objectives: 1) hiding the
   location information of a mobile node from its correspondent node as
   well as from an eavesdropper when data packets are communicated in
   the reverse tunneling mode, and 2) hiding a mobile node's location
   movement information from an eavesdropper during route optimization.

5.1.  Hiding a MN's Location Information from its CN and from an
      Eavesdropper in Reverse Tunneling Mode

   When MN roams to a new foreign subnet, it sends the modified home
   binding update (BU) to its HA and the HA replies with the modified
   home binding acknowledgement (BA).  Note that in both BU and BA,
   Pseudo_HoA is used in place of HoA; hence an eavesdropper will not be
   able to relate CoA to HoA.  Moreover, the value of Pseudo_HoA is
   updated continually whenever MN moves to a new subnet.  As a result,
   the eavesdropper is not able to link past Pseudo_HoA values.

   In the reverse tunneling mode, CN continues to send data packets to
   MN's HoA since it is not aware of the movement of MN.  Data packets
   from CN are intercepted by HA and are tunneled to MN's CoA.  To
   tunnel intercepted packets, HA encapsulates the packets using IPsec
   ESP tunneling mode which encrypts the inner IPv6 header where HoA is
   used in destination option, with the outer IPv6 header addressed to
   MN's CoA.

5.2.  Hiding a MN's Location Movement Information from an Eavesdropper
      in Route Optimization

   In the route optimization mode, since MN and CN communicate with each
   other directly, obviously it is not possible to hide MN's location
   (i.e., CoA) from CN.  The best we can hope for is to hide MN's
   location movement from an eavesdropper.  This is accomplished as
   follows.

   When MN moves to a new foreign subnet, it first performs the modified
   home binding update procedure given in section 3.  As discussed
   before, this procedure does not disclose the relationship between HoA
   and CoA and therefore prevents an eavesdropper from learning the
   current location of MN.  The procedure also updates Pseudo_HoA values
   whenever MN enters a new subnet in order to avoid the eavesdropper
   from tracing MN's movement from one subnet to another.

   To initiate the route optimization mode, MN next performs the
   modified correspondent binding update procedure described in section
   3.  It is easy to see that none of these messages relates HoA with



Qiu, et al.              Expires August 30, 2006               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       MIP6 location privacy solutions       February 2006


   CoA.  Hence, the eavesdropper, observing all the message flows, may
   learn that a node is at CoA but is not able to relate it to the
   target MN.  The same observation applies to the data packets.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document may specify IANA Type assignment(s) in subsequent
   versions.










































Qiu, et al.              Expires August 30, 2006               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft       MIP6 location privacy solutions       February 2006


7.  Conclusion

   In this document, we introduced solutions to protect location
   information of mobile node.  The proposed techniques are efficient
   and fully compatible with the base Mobile IPv6 operation.

   With our techniques, a mobile node's location information can be
   hidden from eavesdroppers during route optimization and further
   hidden from its correspondent node during reverse tunneling.  The
   basic idea is that a pseudo HoA is used in place of the MN's real HoA
   for all packets to and from the MN, and the pseudo HoA is updated
   whenever MN moves to a new location.  As a result, the binding
   between the CoA and the HoA cannot be derived by an eavesdropper (or
   even by the correspondent node in the reverse tunneling mode).
   Moreover, as the pseudo HoA is never used as a communicating address,
   the process of IP reachable checking and DNS updates could be
   avoided.

8.  References

   [1]  Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in
        IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [2]  Koodli, R., "IP Address Location Privacy and Mobile IPv6:
        Problem Statement", draft-irtf-mobopts-location-privacy-ps-00
        (work in progress), July 2005.

























Qiu, et al.              Expires August 30, 2006               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft       MIP6 location privacy solutions       February 2006


Authors' Addresses

   Ying Qiu
   Institute for Infocomm Research
   21 Heng Mui Keng Terrace
   Singapore  119613

   Phone: +65-6874-6742
   Email: qiuying@i2r.a-star.edu.sg


   Fan Zhao
   University of California Davis
   One Shields Avenue
   Davis, CA  95616
   US

   Phone: +1 530 752 3128
   Email: fanzhao@ucdavis.edu


   Rajeev Koodli
   Nokia Research Center
   313 Fairchild Drive
   Mountain View, CA  94043
   US

   Email: rajeev.koodl@nokia.com























Qiu, et al.              Expires August 30, 2006               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft       MIP6 location privacy solutions       February 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Qiu, et al.              Expires August 30, 2006               [Page 18]






