Internet Engineering Task Force                       S. Harris, Editor
INTERNET-DRAFT                                        Merit Network
                                                      November 15, 2000


The Tao of IETF - A Novice's Guide to the Internet Engineering Task Force
                      <draft-ietf-uswg-tao-01.txt>

Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its Working Groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

   For the benefit of users who are new to the Internet Engineering Task
   force, this document describes the inner workings of IETF meetings,
   Working Groups, other organizations related to the IETF, and the
   standards process.

Table of Contents

      Abstract   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
      Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
      Acknowledgements   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
      1. What Is the IETF?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
         1.1 Humble Beginnings   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
         1.2 The Hierarchy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
             1.2.1 ISOC (Internet Society)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
             1.2.3 IESG (Internet Engineering Steering Group)  . . .  5
             1.2.4 IAB (Internet Architecture Board) . . . . . . . .  7



Harris                                                          [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


             1.2.5 IANA (Internet Assigned Numbers Authority)  . . .  7
             1.2.6 RFC Editor  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
             1.2.7 IETF Secretariat   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
         1.3  IETF Mailing Lists   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     2.  IETF Meetings   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
         2.1 Registration   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
         2.2 Newcomers' Orientation   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
         2.3 Dress Code   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
         2.4 Seeing Spots Before Your Eyes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
         2.5 Terminal Room  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
         2.6 Social Event   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
         2.7 Agenda   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
         2.8 Where Do I Fit In? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
             2.8.1  IS Managers    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
             2.8.2  Network Operators and ISPs  . . . . . . . . . . . 14
             2.8.3  Networking Hardware and Software Vendors  . . . . 14
             2.8.4  Academics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
             2.8.5  Computer Trade Press . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
         2.9  Proceedings   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
         2.10 Other General Things . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     3.  Working Groups (WGs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
         3.1 Working Group Chairs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .17
         3.2 Getting Things Done in a Working Group . . . . . . . . . 18
         3.3 Preparing for Working Group Meetings    . . . . . . . .  19
         3.4 Working Group Mailing Lists   . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
         3.5 Interim Working Group Meetings  . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     4.  BOFs   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     5.  RFCs and Internet Drafts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
         5.1 Getting a Standard Published  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
         5.2 Letting Go Gracefully, or, "Change Control for
             Internet Standards" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
         5.3 Internet Drafts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23
             5.3.1 Recommended Reading for Writers  . . . . . . . .   24
             5.3.2 Filenames and Other Matters  . . . . . . . . . .   24
             5.3.3 Common "Nits"  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
         5.4 Standards-Track RFCs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
             5.4.1 Telling It Like It Is -- Using MUST and
                   SHOULD and MAY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
             5.4.2 Normative References in Standards  . . . . . . . . 27
             5.4.3 IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
             5.4.4 Patents in IETF Standards  . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
         5.5 Informational and Experimental RFCs  . . . . . . . . . . 29
      6. How to Contribute to the IETF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  30
      7. IETF and the Outside World . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
         7.1 IETF and Other Standards Groups  . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
         7.2 Press Coverage of the IETF   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
      8. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
         8.1 Frequently Asked Questions (and Their Answers)  . . . .  32



Harris                                                          [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


         8.2 Useful E-mail Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  33
         8.3 Useful Documents and Files  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  33
         8.4 IETF Area Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  35
         8.5 Acronyms Used in the Tao  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  35

Introduction

   Over the last several years, attendance at Internet Engineering Task
   Force (IETF) face-to-face meetings has grown phenomenally. Many of
   the attendees are new to the IETF at each meeting, and many of those
   go on to become regular attendees. When the meetings were smaller, it
   was relatively easy for a newcomer to get into the swing of things.
   Today, however, a newcomer meets many more new people, some
   previously known only as the authors of documents or thought-
   provoking e-mail messages.

   This document describes many aspects of the IETF, with the goal of
   explaining to newcomers how the IETF works. This will give them a
   warm, fuzzy feeling and enable them to make the meeting and the
   Working Group discussions more productive for everyone.

   Of course, it's true that many IETF participants don't go to the
   face-to- face meetings at all. Instead, they're active on the mailing
   list of various IETF Working Groups.  Since the inner workings of
   Working Groups can be hard for newcomers to understand, this FYI
   provides the mundane bits of information that newcomers will need in
   order to become active participants.

   Many types of IETF documentation are mentioned in The Tao, from BCPs
   to RFCs.  (BCPs make recommendations for Best Current Practices in
   the Internet, and RFCs are the IETF's main technical documentation
   series, politely known as "Requests for Comments.")  See Section 5
   for more information.

   The acronyms used in this document are usually expanded in place, and
   are explained fully in  Section 8.

Acknowledgements

   The original version of this document, published in 1994, was written
   by Gary Malkin.  His knowledge of the IETF, insights, and unmatched
   writing style set the standard for this later revision.  Paul Hoffman
   wrote significant portions of this revision and provided
   encouragement and much-needed guidance. Other contributors include
   Scott Bradner, Michael Patton, Donald E. Eastlake III, the IETF
   Secretariat, and members of the User Services Working Group.

1. What Is the IETF?



Harris                                                          [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   The Internet Engineering Task Force is a loosely self-organized group
   of people who contribute to the engineering and evolution of Internet
   technologies. It is the principal body engaged in the development of
   new Internet standard specifications.  The IETF is unusual in that it
   exists as a collection of happenings, but is not a corporation and
   has no board of directors, no members, and no dues.

   Its mission includes:

   -  Identifying, and proposing solutions to, pressing operational and
      technical problems in the Internet;

   -  Specifying the development or usage of protocols and the near-term
      architecture to solve such technical problems for the Internet;

   -  Making recommendations to the Internet Engineering Steering Group
      (IESG) regarding the standardization of protocols and protocol
      usage in the Internet;

   -  Facilitating technology transfer from the Internet Research Task
      Force (IRTF) to the wider Internet community; and

   -  Providing a forum for the exchange of information within the
      Internet community between vendors, users, researchers, agency
      contractors, and network managers.

   The IETF meeting is not a conference, although there are technical
   presentations. The IETF is not a traditional standards organization,
   although many specifications are produced that become standards. The
   IETF is made up of volunteers, many of whom meet three times a year
   to fulfill the IETF mission.

   There is no membership in the IETF. Anyone may register for and
   attend any meeting. The closest thing there is to being an IETF
   member is being on the IETF or Working Group mailing lists (see the
   IETF Mailing Lists section).  This is where the best information
   about current IETF activities and focus can be found.

   Of course, no organization can be as successful as the IETF is
   without having some sort of structure. In the IETF's case, that
   structure is provided by other organizations, as described in BCP 11,
   "The Organizations Involved in the IETF Standards Process". If you
   participate in the IETF and only read one BCP, this is the one you
   should read.

1.1 Humble Beginnings

   The first IETF meeting was held in January, 1986, at Linkabit in San



Harris                                                          [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   Diego, with 15 attendees. The 4th IETF, held at SRI in Menlo Park in
   October, 1986, was the first that non-government vendors attended.
   The concept of Working Groups was introduced at the 5th IETF meeting
   at the NASA Ames Research Center in California in February, 1987. The
   7th IETF, held at MITRE in McLean, Virginia in July, 1987, was the
   first meeting with over 100 attendees.

   The 14th IETF meeting was held at Stanford University in July 1989.
   It marked a major change in the structure of the IETF universe. The
   IAB (then Internet Activities Board, now Internet Architecture
   Board), which until that time oversaw many "task forces," changed its
   structure to leave only two: the IETF and the IRTF. The IRTF is
   tasked to consider long-term research problems in the Internet. The
   IETF also changed at that time.

   After the Internet Society (ISOC) was formed in January, 1992, the
   IAB proposed to ISOC that the IAB's activities should take place
   under the auspices of the Internet Society. During INET92 in Kobe,
   Japan, the ISOC Trustees approved a new charter for the IAB to
   reflect the proposed relationship.

   The IETF met in Amsterdam, The Netherlands, in July 1993. This was
   the first IETF meeting held in Europe, and the US/non-US attendee
   split was nearly 50/50.  One in five IETF meetings are now held in
   Europe or Asia, and the number of non-US attendees continues to be
   high -- about 50%, even at meetings held in the US.

1.2 The Hierarchy

1.2.1 ISOC (Internet Society)

   The Internet Society is an international, non-profit, membership
   organization that fosters the expansion of the Internet. One of the
   ways that ISOC does this is through financial and legal support of
   the other "I" groups described here, particularly the IETF. ISOC's
   oversight of the IETF is remarkably hands-off, so many IETF
   participants don't even know about it. ISOC provides insurance
   coverage for many of the people in the IETF process, and acts as a
   public relations channel for the times that one of the "I" groups
   wants to say something to the press. The ISOC is one of the major
   unsung (and underfunded) heroes of the Internet.

1.2.3 IESG (Internet Engineering Steering Group)

   The IESG is responsible for technical management of IETF activities
   and the Internet standards process. As part of the ISOC, it
   administers the process according to the rules and procedures that
   have been ratified by the ISOC Trustees. However, the IESG doesn't do



Harris                                                          [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   much direct leadership, such as the kind you will find in many other
   standards organizations. The IESG ratifies or corrects the output
   from the IETF's Working Groups, gets WGs started and finished, and
   makes sure that non-WG drafts that are about to become RFCs are
   correct.

   The IESG consists of the Area Directors ("ADs"), who are selected by
   the Nominations Committee (which is usually called "Nomcom") and are
   appointed for two years. The process for choosing the members of the
   IESG is detailed in BCP 10, "IAB and IESG Selection, Confirmation,
   and Recall Process:  Operation of the Nominating and Recall
   Committees."

   The current areas are:

   -  Applications: protocols seen by user programs, such as e-mail and
      the Web
   -  General: catch-all for WGs that don't fit in other areas (which is
      very few)
   -  Internet: different ways of moving IP packets and DNS information
   -  Operations and Management: administration and monitoring
   -  Routing: getting packets to their destinations
   -  Security: authentication and privacy
   -  Transport: special services for special packets
   -  User Services: support for end users and user support organizations

   Because the IESG has a great deal of influence in the decision to
   help or to prevent Internet Drafts from becoming RFCs, many people
   look at the ADs as somewhat godlike creatures. IETF participants
   sometimes reverently ask an Area Director for their opinion on a
   particular subject. However, most ADs are nearly indistinguishable
   from mere mortals and rarely speak from mountaintops. In fact, when
   asked for specific technical comments, the ADs may often defer to
   members at large whom they feel have more knowledge than they do in
   that area.

   The ADs for a particular area are expected to know more about the
   combined work of the WGs in that area than anyone else. On the other
   hand, the entire IESG votes on each Internet Draft that is becoming
   an RFC, and it only takes two IESG members to block a draft from
   moving forward. This ensures that an AD's "pet project" doesn't make
   it onto the standards track if it will have a negative effect on the
   rest of the IETF protocols.

   This is not to say that the IESG never wields power. When the IESG
   sees a Working Group veering from its charter, or when a WG asks the
   IESG to make the WG's badly designed protocol a standard, the IESG
   will act. In fact, because of its high workload, the IESG usually



Harris                                                          [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   moves in a reactive fashion.  It approves most WG requests for
   Internet Drafts to become RFCs, and usually only steps in when
   something has gone very wrong. Another way to think about this is
   that the ADs are hired to think, not to just run the process. The
   quality of the IETF standards comes both from the review they get in
   the Working Groups and the review that the WG review gets from the
   ADs.

   The IETF is run by rough consensus, and it is the IESG that decides
   if a WG has come up with a result that is a real consensus. Because
   of this, one of the main reasons that the IESG might block something
   that was produced in a WG is that the result is not really consensus
   in the IETF as a whole, that is, among all of the WGs in all areas.
   For instance, the result of one WG might clash with a technology
   developed in a different WG. An important job of the IESG is to watch
   over the output of all the WGs to help prevent IETF protocols that
   are at odds with each other. This is why ADs are supposed to review
   the drafts coming out of areas other than their own.


1.2.4 IAB (Internet Architecture Board)

   The IAB is responsible for looking at the "big picture" of the
   Internet.  They are the ISOC's technical advisory group, and they
   often contribute to the IETF's process by focusing on topics that
   span many WGs and many areas.

   The IAB is responsible for approving appointments to the IESG from
   among the nominees submitted by the IETF nominations committee. Like
   the IESG, the IAB is selected for multi-year positions by Nomcom, as
   described in BCP 10.

   Probably the most important job done by the IAB is to act as liaison
   with groups outside the IETF that affect the IETF standards process.
   These groups include the RFC Editor and the IANA, whose contracts are
   both with the IAB. The IAB also has liaisons with other standards
   bodies, such as the ITU (International Telecommunication Union).

   The IAB is also in the unenviable position of being the court of
   appeal when someone complains that the IETF process has failed. This
   means that someone who feels that the IESG or Nomcom has done
   something wrong takes their complaint to the IAB. The appeals process
   is mentioned later in this document.

1.2.5 IANA (Internet Assigned Numbers Authority)

   The core registrar for the IETF's activities is the IANA. Many
   Internet protocols require that someone keep track of protocol items



Harris                                                          [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   that were added after the protocol came out. Typical examples of the
   kinds of registries needed are for TCP port numbers and MIME types.
   IANA is chartered by the IAB and these days is paid for by the ISOC.

   Five years ago, no one would have expected to ever see the IANA
   mentioned on the front page of a newspaper. IANA's role had always
   been very low key.  The fact that IANA was also the keeper of the
   root of the domain name system forced it to become a much more public
   entity, one which was badly maligned by a variety of people who never
   looked at what its role was.  Nowadays the domain name and IP address
   assignment functions are no longer part of the IETF's IANA, and are
   overseen by ICANN, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and
   Numbers.

   Even though being a registrar may not sound interesting, many IETF
   participants will testify to how important IANA has been for the
   Internet.  Having a stable, long-term repository run by careful and
   conservative operators makes it much easier for people to experiment
   without worrying about messing things up. IANA's founder, Jon Postel,
   was heavily relied upon to keep things in order while the Internet
   kept growing in leaps and bounds, and he did a fine job of it until
   his death in 1998.

1.2.6 RFC Editor

   At last, a group that doesn't have an acronym starting with "I!" The
   main role of the RFC Editor is to decide which Internet Drafts become
   RFCs. An important secondary role is to format the RFCs in a
   consistent fashion, and to be sure that there is at least one
   definitive repository for all RFCs (see http://www.rfc-editor.org/).
   The RFC editor does essentially no editing on documents, including
   not doing any spelling correction. (The process of getting an RFC
   published is described later in this document.)

   One of the most popular misconceptions in the IETF community is that
   the role of the RFC Editor is performed by IANA. In fact, the RFC
   Editor is a separate job, although both the RFC Editor and IANA have
   always been the same people. Both are contracted by the IAB, and both
   are paid for by ISOC.  The RFC Editor can be contacted by e-mail at
   rfc-ed@rfc-editor.org.

1.2.7 IETF Secretariat

   There are, in fact, a few people who are paid to maintain the IETF.
   The IETF Secretariat provides day-to-day logistical support, which
   mainly means coordinating face-to-face meetings and running the
   IETF-specific mailing lists (not the WG mailing lists). The
   Secretariat is also responsible for keeping the official Internet



Harris                                                          [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   Drafts directory up to date and orderly, and for helping the IESG do
   its work. The IETF Secretariat is financially supported by the fees
   of the face-to-face meetings.

1.3  IETF Mailing Lists

   Anyone who plans to attend an IETF meeting should join the IETF
   announcement mailing list. This is where all of the meeting
   information, Internet-Draft and RFC announcements, and IESG Protocol
   Actions and Last Calls are posted. To join the IETF announcement
   list, send a request to:

       ietf-announce-request@ietf.org

   People who would like to "get technical" may also join the IETF
   discussion list, "ietf@ietf.org". This is where discussions of cosmic
   significance are held (most Working Groups have their own mailing
   lists for discussions related to their work). To join the IETF
   discussion list, send a request to:

       ietf-request@ietf.org

   Both lists are archived on the IETF web site:

       http://www.ietf.org/maillist.html

   Do not, ever, under any circumstances, for any reason, send a request
   to join a list to the list itself!  The thousands of people on the
   list don't need, or want, to know when a new person joins. Similarly,
   when changing e- mail addresses or leaving a list, send your request
   only to the "-request" address, not to the main list. This means
   you!!

   The IETF discussion list is unmoderated. This means that anyone can
   express their opinions about issues affecting the Internet. However,
   it is not a place for companies or individuals to solicit or
   advertise, as noted in "IETF Discussion List Charter," RFC xxx.  Only
   the Secretariat can send messages to the announcement list.

   Even though the IETF mailing lists "represent" the IETF membership at
   large, it is important to note that attending an IETF meeting does
   not automatically include addition to either mailing list.

2. IETF Meetings

   The computer industry is rife with conferences, seminars,
   expositions, and all manner of other kinds of meetings. IETF face-
   to-face meetings are nothing like these. The meetings, held three



Harris                                                          [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   times a year, are week-long dweebfests whose primary goal is to
   reinvigorate the WGs to get their tasks done, and whose secondary
   goal is to promote a fair amount of mixing between the WGs and the
   areas. The cost of the meetings is paid by the people attending the
   meetings and by the corporate host for each meeting, although ISOC
   kicks in additional funds for things like the multicast simulcast of
   the meetings.

   For many people, IETF meetings are a breath of fresh air when
   compared to the standard computer industry conferences. There is no
   exposition hall, no tutorials, and no big-name industry pundits.
   Instead, there is lots of work, as well as a fair amount of time for
   socializing. IETF meetings are of little interest to sales and
   marketing folks, but of high interest to engineers and developers.

   Most IETF meetings are held in North America, because that's where
   most of the participants are from; however, meetings are held on
   other continents about once every year or two. The past few meetings
   have had about 2,000 attendees. There have been over 49 IETF meetings
   so far, and a list of upcoming meetings is available on the IETF web
   pages, http://www.ietf.org/meetings/0mtg-sites.txt.

   Newcomers to IETF face-to-face meetings are often in a bit of shock.
   They expect them to be like other standards bodies, or like computer
   conferences. Fortunately, the shock wears off after a day or two, and
   many new attendees get quite animated about how much fun they are
   having. One particularly jarring feature of recent IETF meetings is
   the use of wireless Internet connections throughout the meeting
   space. It is common to see half the people in a WG meeting reading
   e-mail or perusing the web during presentations they find
   uninteresting.

2.1 Registration

   To attend an IETF meeting you have to register and you have to pay
   the registration fee.  The meeting site and advance registration are
   announced about two months ahead of the meeting -- earlier if it is
   outside the U.S.  An announcement goes out via e-mail to the IETF-
   announce mailing list, and information is posted on the IETF web
   site, http://www.ietf.org, that same day.

   You may preregister and pay, preregister and pay later, preregister
   and pay on-site, or register and pay on-site.  To get a lower
   registration fee, you must register by the early registration
   deadline (about one month before the meeting).  You can still pay
   later or on-site. The registration fee covers all of the week's
   meetings, the Sunday evening reception (cash bar), daily continental
   breakfasts, and daily coffee breaks.



Harris                                                         [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   The easiest way to register in advance is via the web. Credit card
   payments on the web are encrypted and secure, or, if you prefer; you
   can use PGP to send your payment information to the Registrar
   (registrar@ietf.org).

   Registration is open throughout the week of the meeting.  However,
   the Secretariat highly recommends that attendees arrive for early
   registration, beginning at noon on Sunday and continuing throughout
   the 5:00 Sunday evening reception.  This is a popular event where you
   can get a bite to eat and socialize with other early arrivals.

   Registered attendees (and there aren't any other kind) receive a
   registration packet. It contains a general orientation sheet, a list
   of Working Group acronyms, the most recent agenda and a name tag, and
   the "at- a-glance" sheet. The at-a-glance is a very important
   reference and is used throughout the week. It contains Working Group
   and BOF room assignments and a map of room locations. Attendees who
   prepaid will also find their receipt in their packet.

   It's worth noting that for purposes of security, attendee databases
   are destroyed at the end of each meeting.  Neither attendee names and
   addresses or IETF mailing lists are ever offered for sale.

2.2 Newcomers' Orientation

   Newcomers are encouraged to attend the IETF Standards Process
   Orientation, which is especially designed for first-time attendees.
   The orientation is organized and conducted by the IETF Secretariat
   and is intended to provide useful introductory information.

   The orientation is typically about 30 minutes long and covers a
   number of topics: what's in the attendee packets, what all the dots
   on name tags mean and how to read the at-a-glance, and the structure
   of the IETF and the Internet standards process. There is ample time
   at the end for questions.  The Secretariat also provides handouts
   that include an overview of the IETF, a list of important files
   available online, and hard copies of the slides of the "IETF
   Structure and Internet Standards Process" presentation.  These very
   useful slides are also available online at
   http://www.ietf.org/newcomer/v3dcmnt.htm.

   The orientation is held on Sunday afternoon before the 5:00 p.m.
   reception.  However, attending the orientation does NOT mean you can
   go to the reception early!

2.3 Dress Code

   Since attendees must wear their name tags, they must also wear shirts



Harris                                                         [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   or blouses. Pants or skirts are also highly recommended. Seriously
   though, many newcomers are often embarrassed when they show up Monday
   morning in suits, to discover that everybody else is wearing t-
   shirts, jeans (shorts, if weather permits) and sandals. There are
   those in the IETF who refuse to wear anything other than suits.
   Fortunately, they are well known (for other reasons) so they are
   forgiven this particular idiosyncrasy. The general rule is "dress for
   the weather" (unless you plan to work so hard that you won't go
   outside, in which case, "dress for comfort" is the rule!).

2.4 Seeing Spots Before Your Eyes

   Some of the people at the IETF will have a little colored dot on
   their name tag. A few people have more than one. These dots identify
   people who are silly enough to volunteer to do a lot of extra work.
   The colors have the following meanings:

      blue    -  Working Group/BOF chair
      green   -  local host
      red     -  IAB member
      yellow  -  IESG member

   Local hosts are the people who can answer questions about the
   terminal room, restaurants and points of interest in the area.

   Some people have gold stars on their name tags. The stars indicate
   that those people chaired Working Groups or BOFs in the IETF area
   that submitted all of its Working Group/BOF minutes and area report
   from the previous meeting first. The stars are the Secretariat's way
   of saying "thank you" for providing the necessary information
   quickly.

   It is important that newcomers to the IETF not be afraid to strike up
   conversations with people who wear these dots. If the IAB and IESG
   members and Working Group and BOF chairs didn't want to talk to
   anybody, they wouldn't be wearing the dots in the first place.

   In addition, members of the Secretariat wear blue tinted name badges
   so they can be spotted at a distance.  Members of the press wear
   yellow badges.

   To make life simpler for the Secretariat, registration packets are
   also coded with little colored dots. These are only for Secretariat
   use, so nobody else needs to worry about them. Please, don't peel
   them off your packet and put them on your name tag.

2.5 Terminal Room




Harris                                                         [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   One of the most important (depending on your point of view) things
   the local host does is provide Internet access for the meeting
   attendees. In general, the connectivity is excellent. This is
   entirely due to the Olympian efforts of the local hosts, and their
   ability to beg, borrow and steal. The people and companies who donate
   their equipment, services and time are to be heartily congratulated
   and thanked.

   While preparation far in advance of the meeting is encouraged, there
   may be some unavoidable "last minute" things that can be accomplished
   in the terminal room. It may also be useful to people who need to
   make trip reports or status reports while things are still fresh in
   their minds.

2.6 Social Event

   Another of the most important things organized and managed by the
   local hosts is the IETF social event.  Sometimes, the social event is
   a computer or high-tech related event. At the Boston IETF, for
   example, the social was dinner at the Computer Museum. Other times,
   the social might be a dinner cruise or a trip to an art gallery.

   Newcomers to the IETF are encouraged to attend the social event.
   Everyone is encouraged to wear their name tags. The social event is
   designed to give people a chance to meet on a social, rather than
   technical, level.

2.7 Agenda

   The agenda for the IETF meetings is a very fluid thing. It is sent,
   in various forms, to the IETF announcement list three times prior to
   the meeting, and is also available on the web.  (The agenda for the
   49th IETF, for example, is at
   http://www.ietf.org/meetings/wg_agenda_49.html.) The final agenda is
   included in the registration packets. Of course, "final" in the IETF
   doesn't mean the same thing as it does elsewhere in the world. The
   final agenda is simply the version that went to the printer.  The
   Secretariat will post agenda changes on the bulletin board near the
   IETF registration desk (not the hotel registration desk).

   Assignments for breakout rooms (where the Working Groups and BOFs
   meet) and a map showing the room locations make up the at-a-glance
   sheet (included in the registration packets). Room assignments are as
   flexible as the agenda.  Some Working Groups meet multiple times
   during a meeting and every attempt is made to have a Working Group
   meet in the same room for each session.  Room assignment changes are
   not necessarily permanent for the week. Always check the at-a-glance
   first, then the bulletin board. When in doubt, check with a member of



Harris                                                         [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   the Secretariat at the registration desk.

2.8  Where Do I Fit In?

   The IETF is different things to different people. There are many
   people who have been very active in the IETF who have never attended
   an IETF meeting.  You should not feel obligated to come to an IETF
   meeting just to get a feel for the IETF. The following guidelines
   (based on stereotypes of people in various industries) might help you
   decide whether you actually want to come and, if so, what might be
   the best use of your time at your first meeting.

2.8.1  IS Managers

   As discussed throughout this document, an IETF meeting is nothing
   like any trade show you have attended. IETF meetings are singularly
   bad places to go if your intention is to find out what will be hot in
   the Internet industry next year. You can safely assume that going to
   Working Group meetings will confuse you more than it will help you
   understand what is happening, or will be happening, in the industry.

   This is not to say that no one from industry should go to IETF
   meetings. As an IS manager, you might want to consider sending
   specific people who are responsible for technologies that are under
   development in the IETF. As these people read the current Internet
   Drafts and the traffic on the relevant Working Group lists, they will
   get a sense of whether or not their presence would be worthwhile for
   your company or for the Working Groups.

2.8.2  Network Operators and ISPs

   Running a network is hard enough without having to grapple with new
   protocols or new versions of the protocols with which you are already
   dealing. If you work for the type of network that is always using the
   very latest hardware and software, and you are following the relevant
   Working Groups in your copious free time, you might find attending
   the IETF meeting valuable. The closer you are to the bleeding edge of
   networking, particularly in the areas of routing and switching, the
   more likely it is that you will be able to learn and contribute at an
   IETF meeting.

2.8.3  Networking Hardware and Software Vendors

   The image of the IETF being mostly pointy-headed academics may have
   been true in the past, but the heads have been smoothed and the jobs
   of typical attendees are now in industry. In most areas of the IETF,
   employees of vendors are the ones writing the protocols and leading
   the Working Groups.  Thus, it is completely appropriate for vendors



Harris                                                         [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   to attend. If you create Internet hardware or software, and no one
   from your company has ever attended an IETF meeting, it behooves you
   to come to a meeting if for no other reason than to tell the others
   how relevant the meeting was or was not to your business.

   This is not to say that companies should close during IETF meeting
   weeks and everyone should go to the meeting. Marketing folks, even
   technical marketing folks, are usually safe in staying away from the
   IETF as long as some of the technical people from the company are at
   the meeting.  Similarly, it isn't required, or likely useful, for
   everyone from a technical department to go, particularly if they are
   not all reading the Internet Drafts and following the Working Group
   mailing lists. Many companies have just a few designated meeting
   attendees who are chosen for their ability to do complete and useful
   trip reports.

2.8.4  Academics

   IETF meetings are often excellent places for computer science folk to
   find out what is happening in the way of soon-to-be-deployed
   protocols.  Professors and grad students (and sometimes overachieving
   undergrads) who are doing research in networking or communications
   can get a wealth of information by following Working Groups in their
   specific fields of interest. Wandering into different Working Group
   meetings can have the same effect as going to symposia and seminars
   in your department.

2.8.5  Computer Trade Press

   It is difficult to say whether the typical IETFer would want
   reporters for the computer trade press to come to IETF meetings or
   stay as far away as possible. Having a bit of press publicity for
   protocols that are almost near completion and will become significant
   in the industry in the next year can be a good thing. However, it is
   the rare reporter who can resist over-hyping a nascent protocol as
   the next savior for the Internet. Such stories do much more harm than
   good, both for the readers of the article and for the IETF.

   In recent years, a small number of magazines have assigned reporters
   and editors to cover the IETF in depth over a long period of time.
   These reporters have ample scars from articles that they got wrong,
   incorrect statements about the status of Internet Drafts, quotes from
   people who are unrelated to the IETF work, and so on. The fact that
   these reporters come back to IETF meetings shows that it is possible
   to get it right eventually.  However, IETF meetings are definitely
   not for reporters who are naive about the IETF process (although the
   fact that you are reading this document is a very good sign!).
   Further, if you think that you'll get a hot story from attending an



Harris                                                         [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   IETF meeting, you are likely to be disappointed.

   The main reason why a reporter might want to attend an IETF meeting
   is not to cover hot technologies (since that can be done in the
   comfort of your office by reading the mailing lists), but to meet
   people face to face.  Unfortunately, the most interesting people are
   the ones who are also the busiest during the IETF meeting, and some
   folks have a tendency to run away when they see a press badge.
   However, IETF meetings are excellent places to meet and speak with
   document authors and Working Group chairs; this can be quite valuable
   for reporters who are covering the progress of protocols.

2.9  Proceedings

   IETF proceedings are compiled in the two months following each
   meeting, and are available on the web and on CD.  Printed proceedings
   are available for some meetings. The proceedings usually start with a
   message from Steve Coya, the Executive Director of the IETF.  Each
   contains the final (hindsight) agenda, an IETF overview, area and
   working group reports, slides from the protocol and technical
   presentations, and the attendee list.  The attendee list includes
   names, affiliations, work and fax phone numbers, and e-mail addresses
   as provided on the registration form.  For information about
   obtaining copies of the proceedings, see the Web listing at
   http://www.ietf.org/proceedings/directory.html.

2.10  Other General Things

   The IETF Secretariat, and IETFers in general, are very approachable.
   Never be afraid to approach someone and introduce yourself. Also,
   don't be afraid to ask questions, especially when it comes to jargon
   and acronyms!

   Hallway conversations are very important. A lot of very good work
   gets done by people who talk together between meetings and over
   lunches and dinners.  Every minute of the IETF can be considered work
   time (much to some people's dismay).

   A "bar BOF" is an unofficial get-together, usually in the late
   evening, during which a lot of work gets done over drinks.  Bar BOFs
   spring up in many different places around an IETF meeting, such as
   restaurants, coffee shops, and (if we are so lucky) pools.

   It's unwise to get between a hungry IETFer (and there isn't any other
   kind) and coffee break brownies and cookies, no matter how
   interesting a hallway conversation is.

   IETFers are fiercely independent. It's safe to question opinions and



Harris                                                         [Page 16]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   offer alternatives, but don't expect an IETFer to follow orders.

   The IETF, and the plenary session in particular, are not places for
   vendors to try to sell their wares. People can certainly answer
   questions about their company and its products, but bear in mind that
   the IETF is not a trade show. This does not preclude people from
   recouping costs for IETF related t-shirts, buttons and pocket
   protectors.

   There is always a "materials distribution table" near the
   registration desk. This desk is used to make appropriate information
   available to the attendees (e.g., copies of something discussed in a
   Working Group session, description of online IETF-related
   information, etc.). Please check with the Secretariat before placing
   materials on the desk; the Secretariat has the right to remove
   material that they feel is not appropriate.

3.0 Working Groups (WGs)

   The vast majority of the IETF's work is done in many "Working
   Groups"; at the time of this writing, there are about 115 different
   WGs. (The term "Working Group" is often seen capitalized, but
   probably not for a very good reason.) BCP 25, "IETF Working Group
   Guidelines and Procedures," is an excellent resource for anyone
   participating in WG discussions.

   A WG is really just a mailing list with a bit of adult supervision.
   You "join" the WG by subscribing to the mailing list; all mailing
   lists are open to anyone. Some IETF WG mailing lists only let
   subscribers to the mailing list post to the mailing list, while
   others let anyone post. Each WG has one or two chairs.

   More importantly, each WG has a charter that the WG is supposed to
   follow.  The charter states the scope of discussion for the WG, as
   well as its goals. The WG's mailing list and face-to-face meetings
   are supposed to focus on just what is in the charter, and not to
   wander off on other "interesting" topics. Of course, looking a bit
   outside the scope of the WG is occasionally useful, but the large
   majority of the discussion should be on the topics listed in the
   charter. In fact, some WG charters actually specify what the WG will
   not do, particularly if there were some attractive but nebulous
   topics brought up during the drafting of the charter. The list of all
   WG charters makes interesting reading for folks who want to know what
   the different WGs are supposed to be doing.

3.1 Working Group Chairs

   The role of the WG chairs is described in both BCP 11 and BCP 25.



Harris                                                         [Page 17]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   Basically, their job is to keep the discussion moving forward towards
   the milestones in the WG charter, which is usually publication of one
   or more RFCs. They are not meant to be taskmasters, but are
   responsible for assuring positive forward motion and preventing
   random wandering.

   As you can imagine, some WG chairs are much better at their jobs than
   others. When a WG has fulfilled its charter, it is supposed to cease
   operations. (Most WG mailing lists continue on after a WG is closed,
   still discussing the same topics as the WG did.) In the IETF, it is a
   mark of success that the WG closes up because it fulfilled its
   charter.  This is one of the aspects of the IETF that newcomers who
   have experience with other standards bodies have a hard time
   understanding. However, some WG chairs never manage to get their WG
   to finish, or keep adding new tasks to the charter so that the WG
   drags on for many years. The output of these aging WGs is often not
   nearly as useful as the earlier products, and the messy results are
   sometimes called "degenerative Working Group syndrome."

   One important role of the chair is to decide which Internet Drafts
   get published as "official" Working Group drafts, and which don't. In
   practice, there is actually not much procedural difference between WG
   drafts and independent drafts; for example, many WG mailing lists
   also discuss independent drafts (at the discretion of the WG chair).
   Procedures for Internet Drafts are covered in much more detail later
   in this document.

   WG chairs are strongly advised to go to the new chairs' training
   lunch the first day of the IETF meeting.  If you're interested in
   what they hear there, take a look at the slides at
   http://www.ietf.org/wgchair/index.htm.

3.2  Getting Things Done in a Working Group

   One fact that confuses many novices is that the face-to-face WG
   meetings are much less important in the IETF than they are in most
   other organizations. Any decision made at a face-to-face meeting must
   also gain consensus on the WG mailing list. There are numerous
   examples of important decisions made in WG meetings that are later
   overturned on the mailing list, often because someone who couldn't
   attend the meeting pointed out a serious flaw in the logic used to
   come to the decision.

   Another aspect of Working Groups that confounds many people is the
   fact that there is no formal voting. The general rule on disputed
   topics is that the Working Group has to come to "rough consensus,"
   meaning that a very large majority of those who care must agree. The
   exact method of determining rough consensus varies from Working Group



Harris                                                         [Page 18]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   to Working Group. The lack of voting has caused some very long delays
   for some proposals, but most IETF participants who have witnessed
   rough consensus after acrimonious debates feel that the delays often
   result in better protocols. (And, if you think about it, how could
   you have "voting" in a group that anyone can join, and when it's
   impossible to count the participants?)

3.3  Preparing for Working Group Meetings

   The most important thing that everyone (newcomers and seasoned
   experts) should do before coming to a face-to-face meeting is to read
   the Internet Drafts and RFCs beforehand. WG meetings are explicitly
   not for education:  they are for developing the group's documents.
   Even if you do not plan to say anything in the meeting, you should
   read the group's documents before attending so you can understand
   what is being said.

   It's up to the WG chair to set the meeting agenda, usually a few
   weeks in advance. If you want something discussed at the meeting, be
   sure to let the chair know about it. The agendas for all the WG
   meetings are available in advance (see
   http://www.ietf.org/meetings/wg_agenda_xx.html, where 'xx' is the
   meeting number), but many WG chairs are lax (if not totally
   negligent) about turning them in.

   The Secretariat only schedules WG meetings a few weeks in advance,
   and the schedule often changes as little as a week before the first
   day. If you are only coming for one WG meeting, you may have a hard
   time booking your flight with such little notice, particularly if the
   Working Group's meeting changes schedule. Be sure to keep track of
   the current agenda so you can schedule flights and hotels. But, when
   it comes down to it, you probably shouldn't be coming for just one WG
   meeting. It's likely that your knowledge could be valuable in a few
   WGs, assuming that you've read the drafts and RFCs for those groups.

   If you're giving a presentation at a face-to-face meeting, you should
   probably come with a few slides prepared. Projectors for laptop-based
   presentations are available in all the meeting rooms.  And here's a
   tip for your slides:  don't put your company's logo on every one,
   even though it's common practice outside the IETF. The IETF frowns on
   this kind of corporate advertising, and most presenters don't even
   put their logo on their opening slide. The IETF is about technical
   content, not company boosterism.

3.4  Working Group Mailing Lists

   As previously mentioned, the IETF announcement and discussion mailing
   lists are the central mailing lists for IETF activities. However,



Harris                                                         [Page 19]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   there are many other mailing lists related to IETF work. For example,
   every Working Group has its own discussion list. In addition, there
   are some long-term technical debates which have been moved off of the
   IETF list onto lists created specifically for those topics. It is
   highly recommended that everybody follow the discussions on the
   mailing lists of the Working Groups which they wish to attend. The
   more work that is done on the mailing lists, the less work that will
   need to be done at the meeting, leaving time for cross pollination
   (i.e., attending Working Groups outside one's primary area of
   interest in order to broaden one's perspective).

   The mailing lists also provide a forum for those who wish to follow,
   or contribute to, the Working Groups' efforts, but can't attend the
   IETF meetings.

   Most IETF discussion lists have a "-request" address which handles
   the administrative details of joining and leaving the list. It is
   generally frowned upon when such administrivia appears on the
   discussion mailing list.

   Most IETF discussion lists are archived. That is, all of the messages
   sent to the list are automatically stored on a host for anonymous FTP
   access.  Many such archives are listed online at
   ftp://ftp.ietf.org/ietf-mail- archive/.  If you don't find the list
   you're looking for, send a message to the list's "-request" address
   (not to the list itself!)

3.5 Interim Working Group Meetings

   Working groups sometimes hold interim meetings between IETFs.
   Interim meetings aren't a substitute for IETF meetings, however -- a
   group can't decide to skip a meeting in a location they're not fond
   of and meet in Cancun three weeks later, for example.  Interim
   meetings require AD approval, and need to be announced at least one
   month in advance.  Location and timing need to allow fair access for
   all participants. Like regular IETF meetings, someone needs to take
   notes and send them to minutes@ietf.org, and the group needs to take
   attendance.

4. BOFs

   In order to form a Working Group, you need a charter and someone who
   is able to be chair. In order to get those things, you need to get
   people interested so that they can help focus the charter and
   convince an Area Director that the project is worthwhile. A face-to-
   face meeting is useful for this. In fact, very few WGs get started by
   an Area Director; most start after a face-to-face BOF because
   attendees have expressed interest in the topic.



Harris                                                         [Page 20]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   A BOF meeting has to be approved by the Area Director in the relevant
   area before it can be scheduled. If you think you really need a new
   WG, approach an AD informally with your proposal and see what they
   think.  The next step is to request a meeting slot at the next face-
   to-face meeting. Of course, you don't need to wait for that meeting
   to get some work done, such as setting up a mailing list and starting
   to discuss a charter.

   BOF meetings have a very different tone than WG meetings. The purpose
   of a BOF is to make sure that a good charter with good milestones can
   be created, and that there are enough people willing to do the work
   needed in order to create standards. Some BOFs have Internet Drafts
   already in process, while others start from scratch. An advantage of
   having a draft before the BOF is to help focus the discussion.  On
   the other hand, having a draft might tend to limit what the other
   folks in the BOF want to do in the charter. It's important to
   remember that most BOFs are held in order to get support for an
   eventual Working Group, not to get support for a particular document.

   Many BOFs don't turn into WGs for a variety of reasons. A common
   problem is that not enough people can agree on a focus for the work.
   Another typical reason is that the work wouldn't end up being a
   standard -- if, for example, the document authors don't really want
   to relinquish change control to a WG. (We'll discuss change control
   later in this document.)  Only two BOFs can be scheduled on a
   particular subject; either a WG has to form, or the topic should be
   dropped.

5. RFCs and Internet Drafts

   If you're new to the IETF and are looking for a particular RFC or
   Internet- Draft, go to the RFC Editors Web pages, http://www.rfc-
   editor.org/rfc.html.  That site also has links to other RFC
   collections, many with search capabilities.  If you know the number
   of the RFC youre looking for, go to the IETF RFC pages,
   http://www.ietf.org/rfc.html.  For Internet-Drafts, the best resource
   is the IETF web site, http://www.ietf.org/ID.html, where you can
   search by title and keyword.

5.1 Getting a Standard Published

   One of the most common questions seasoned IETFers hear from newcomers
   is, "How do I get an IETF standard published?" A much better question
   is, "Should I write an IETF standard?" since the answer is not always
   "yes". If you do decide to try to write a document that becomes an
   IETF standard, the process is not all that hard, and there is plenty
   of written guidance on how to do it.




Harris                                                         [Page 21]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   Every IETF standard is published as an RFC (a "Request For Comments,"
   but everyone just calls them RFCs), and every RFC starts out as an
   Internet Draft (often called an "I-D"). The basic steps for getting
   something published as an IETF standard are:

      1.  Publish the document as an Internet Draft
      2.  Receive comments on the draft
      3.  Edit your draft based on the comments
      4.  Repeat steps 1 through 3 a few times
      5.  Ask an Area Director to take your draft to the IESG
      6.  Make any changes deemed necessary by the IESG (this might
          include giving up on becoming a standard)
      7.  Wait for it to be published by the RFC Editor

   A much more complete explanation of these steps is contained in BCP
   9, "The Internet Standards Process." Anyone who writes a draft that
   they hope will become an IETF standard must read BCP 9 so that they
   can follow the path of their document through the process. BCP 9 goes
   into great detail on a topic that is very often misunderstood, even
   by seasoned IETF participants:  different types of RFCs go through
   different processes and have different rankings. There are six kinds
   of RFCs:

      -  Proposed standards
      -  Draft standards
      -  Internet standards (sometimes called "full standards")
      -  Experimental protocols
      -  Informational documents
      -  Historic standards

   Only the first three (proposed, draft, and full) are standards within
   the IETF. A good summary of this can be found in the aptly titled RFC
   1796, "Not All RFCs are Standards."

   There are also two sub-series of RFCs, known as FYIs and BCPs. The
   For Your Information RFC sub-series was created to document overviews
   and topics which are introductory or appeal to a broad audience.
   Frequently, FYIs are created by groups within the IETF User Services
   Area. Best Current Practice documents describe the application of
   various technologies in the Internet.

5.2 Letting Go Gracefully, or, "Change Control for Internet Standards"

   IETF standards exist so that people will use them to write Internet
   programs that interoperate. They don't exist to document the
   (possibly wonderful) ideas of their authors, nor do they exist so
   that a company can say "we have an IETF standard." If a standards-
   track RFC only has one implementation (whereas two are required for



Harris                                                         [Page 22]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   it to advance on the standards track), it was probably a mistake to
   put it on the standards track in the first place.

   The biggest reason some people do not want their documents put on the
   IETF standards track is that they must give up change control of the
   protocol.  That is, as soon as you propose that your protocol become
   an IETF standard, you must fully relinquish control of the protocol.
   If there is general agreement, parts of the protocol can be
   completely changed, whole sections can be ripped out, new things can
   be added, and the name can be changed.

   Some authors find it very hard to give up control of their pet
   protocol.  If you are one of those people, don't even think about
   trying to get your protocol to become an IETF standard. On the other
   hand, if your goal is the best standard possible with the widest
   implementation, then you might find the IETF process to your liking.

   Incidentally, the change control on Internet standards doesn't end
   when the protocol is put on the standards track. The protocol itself
   can be changed later for a number of reasons, the most common of
   which is that implementors discover a problem as they implement the
   standard. These later changes are also under the control of the IETF,
   not the editors of the standards document.

5.3 Internet Drafts

   First things first. Every document that ends up in the RFC repository
   starts life as an Internet Draft. Internet Drafts are tentative
   documents--they're meant for readers to comment on, so authors can
   mull over those comments and decide which ones to incorporate in the
   draft. In order to remind folks of their tentativeness, Internet-
   Drafts are automatically removed from the online directories after
   six months. They are most definitely not standards or even
   specifications. As BCP 9 says:

        An Internet-Draft is NOT a means of "publishing" a
        specification; specificaions are published through the RFC
        mechanism ... Internet-Drafts have no formal status, and are
        subject to change or removal at any time. Under no circumstances
        should an Internet-Draft be referenced by any paper, report, or
        Request-for-Proposal, nor should a vendor claim compliance with
        an Internet-Draft.

   You can always tell a person who doesn't understand the IETF (or is
   intentionally trying to fool people) when they brag about having
   published an Internet draft; it takes no significant effort.

   An I-D should have approximately the same format as an RFC. Contrary



Harris                                                         [Page 23]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   to many people's beliefs, an I-D does not need to look exactly like
   an RFC, but if you can use the same formatting procedures used by the
   RFC Editor when you create your I-Ds, it will simplify the RFC
   Editor's work when your draft is published as an RFC. RFC 2223,
   "Instructions to RFC Authors," describes the nroff formatting used by
   the RFC Editor.

5.3.1 Recommended Reading for Writers

   Before you create the first draft of your Internet Draft, you should
   read three documents:

      - More important than just explaining formatting, RFC 2223 also
        explains what needs to be in an Internet Draft before it can
        become an RFC. This document describes all the sections and
        notices that will need to be in your document, and it's good
        to have them there from the beginning so that readers aren't
        surprised when you put them in later versions.

      - BCP 22, "Guide for Internet Standards Writers," provides tips
        that will help you write a standard that leads to
        interoperability. For instance, it explains how to choose the
        right number of protocol options, how to respond to out-of-spec
        behavior, and how to show state diagrams.

      - The online "Guidelines to Authors of Internet-Drafts,"
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-guidelines.txt, has up-to-date
        information about the process for turning in Internet Drafts,
        as well as the most current boilerplate information that has
        to be included in each Internet Draft.


5.3.2 Filenames and Other Matters

   When youre ready to turn in your Internet Draft, send it to the
   Internet Drafts editor at internet-drafts@ietf.org. There is a real
   person at the other end of this mail address -- their job is to make
   sure you've included the minimum items you need for the Internet
   Draft to be published.  When you submit the first version of the
   draft, the draft editor supplies the filename for the draft. If the
   draft is an official Working Group product, the name will start with
   "draft-ietf-" followed by the designation of the WG, followed by a
   descriptive word or two, followed by "00.txt."

   For example, a draft in the S/MIME WG about creating keys might be
   named "draft-ietf-smime-keying-00.txt". If its not the product of a
   Working Group, the name will start with "draft-" and the last name of
   one of the authors followed by a descriptive word or two, followed by



Harris                                                         [Page 24]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   "00.txt."  For example, a draft that someone named Hoffman wrote
   might be named "draft- hoffman-keying-00.txt". You are welcome to
   suggest names; however, it is up to the Internet Drafts editor (and,
   if it is an official WG draft, the WG chair) to come up with the
   filename.

   After the first edition of a draft, the number in the filename is
   incremented; for instance, the second edition of the S/MIME draft
   named above would be "draft-ietf-smime-keying-01.txt". Note that
   there are cases where the filename changes after the first version,
   such as when a personal effort is pulled into a Working Group.

5.3.3 Common Nits

   When you think you are finished with the draft process and are ready
   to request that the draft become an RFC, you should definitely read
   Considerations for Internet Drafts, http://www.ietf.org/ID-nits.html,
   a list of common "nits" that have been known to stop documents in the
   IESG.  In fact, you should probably read that document well before
   you are finished, so that you don't have to make a bunch of last-
   minute changes.

5.4 Standards-Track RFCs

   The procedure for creating and advancing a standard is described in
   BCP 9.  After an Internet Draft has been sufficiently discussed and
   there is rough consensus that what it says would be a useful
   standard, it is presented to the IESG for consideration. If the draft
   is an official WG draft, the WG chair sends it to the appropriate
   Area Director after it has gone through Working Group last call. If
   the draft is an individual submission, the draft's author or editor
   submits it to the appropriate Area Director. BCP 9 also describes the
   appeals process for people who feel that a Working Group chair, an
   AD, or the IESG has made the wrong decision in considering the
   creation or advancement of a standard.

   After it is submitted to the IESG, the IESG announces an IETF-wide
   last call. This helps get the attention of people who weren't
   following the progress of the draft, and can sometimes cause further
   changes to the draft. It is also a time when people in the WG who
   feel that they weren't heard can make their comments to everyone. The
   IETF last call is two weeks for drafts coming from WGs and four weeks
   for individual submissions.

   If the IESG approves the draft to become an Internet Standard, they
   ask the RFC Editor to publish it as a Proposed Standard. After it has
   been a Proposed Standard for at least six months, the RFC's author
   (or the appropriate WG chair) can ask for it to become a Draft



Harris                                                         [Page 25]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   Standard. Before that happens, however, someone needs to convince the
   appropriate Area Director that there are at least two independent
   interoperable implementations of each part of the standard. This is a
   good test of the usefulness of the standard as a whole, as well as an
   excellent way to check if the standard was really readable.

   A few things typically happen at this point. First, it's common to
   find that some of the specifications in the standard need to be
   reworded because one implementor thought they meant one thing while
   another implementor thought they meant something else. Another common
   occurrence is that none of the implementations actually tried to
   implement a few of the features of the standard; these features get
   removed not just because no one tested them, but also because they
   weren't needed.

   Don't be surprised if a particular standard doesn't progress from
   Proposed to Draft. In fact, most of the standards in common use are
   Proposed Standards and never move forward. This may be because no one
   took the time to try to get them to Draft, or some of the normative
   references in the standard are still at Proposed Standard, or it may
   be that everyone found more important things to do.

   A few years after a document has been a Draft Standard, it can become
   an Internet Standard, also known as "full standard." This doesn't
   happen often, and is usually reserved for protocols that are
   absolutely required for the Internet to function. The IESG goes over
   the document with a fine- tooth comb before making a Draft Standard
   an Internet Standard.

5.4.1 Telling It Like It Is -- Using MUST and SHOULD and MAY

   Writing specifications that get implemented the way you want is a bit
   of an art. You can keep the specification very short, with just a
   list of requirements, but that tends to cause implementors to take
   too much leeway.  If you instead make the specification very wordy
   with lots of suggestions, implementors tend to miss the requirements
   (and often disagree with your suggestions anyway). An optimal
   specification is somewhere in between.

   One way to make it more likely that developers will create
   interoperable implementations of standards is to make sure it is
   clear what is being mandated in a specification. Early RFCs used all
   kinds of expressions to explain what was needed, so implementors
   didn't always know which parts were suggestions and which were
   requirements. As a result, standards writers in the IETF generally
   agreed to limit their wording to a few specific words with a few
   specific meanings.




Harris                                                         [Page 26]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   RFC 1123, "Requirements for Internet Hosts -- Application and
   Support," written way back in 1989, had a short list of words that
   had appeared to be useful, namely "must," "should," and "may." These
   definitions were updated and further refined in BCP 14, "Key words
   for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels," which is widely
   referenced in current Internet standards. BCP 14 also specifically
   defines "must not" and "should not," and lists a few synonyms for the
   words defined.

   In a standard, in order to make it clear that you are using the
   definitions from BCP 14, you should do two things. First, refer to
   BCP 14 (although most people refer to it as RFC 2119, because that is
   what BCP 14 tells you to do), so that the reader knows how you are
   defining your words. Second, you should point out which instances of
   the words you are using come from BCP 14.  The accepted practice for
   this is to capitalize the words. That is why you see "MUST" and
   "SHOULD" capitalized in IETF standards.

   BCP 14 is a short document, and should be read by everyone who is
   reading or writing IETF standards. Although the definitions of "must"
   and "must not" are fairly clear, the definitions of "should" and
   "should not" cause a great deal of discussion in many WGs. When
   reviewing an Internet Draft, the question is often raised, "should
   that sentence have a MUST or a SHOULD in it?" This is, indeed, a very
   good question, because specifications shouldn't have gratuitous
   MUSTs, but also should not have SHOULDs where a MUST is needed for
   interoperability. This goes to the crux of the question of over-
   specifying and under-specifying requirements in standards.

5.4.2 Normative References in Standards

   One aspect of writing IETF standards that trips up many novices (and
   quite a few long-time IETF folk) is the rule about how to make
   "normative references" to non-IETF documents or to other RFCs in a
   standard. A normative reference is a reference to a document that
   must be followed in order to implement the standard.  A non-normative
   reference is one that is helpful to an implementor but is not needed.
   As described above, a "MUST" specification would certainly be
   normative, so any reference needed to implement the "MUST" would be
   normative. A "SHOULD" or "MAY" specification is not necessarily
   normative, but it could be normative based on what is being required.
   There is definitely room for debate here!

   An IETF standard may make a normative reference to any other
   standards- track RFC that is at the same standards level or higher,
   or to any "open standard" that has been developed outside the IETF.
   The "same level or higher" rule means that before a standard can move
   from Proposed to Draft, all of the RFCs for which there is a



Harris                                                         [Page 27]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   normative reference must also be at Draft or Internet Standard. This
   rule gives implementors assurance that everything in a Draft Standard
   or Internet Standard is quite stable, even the things referenced
   outside the standard. This can also delay the publication of the
   Draft or Internet Standard by many months (sometimes even years)
   while the other documents catch up.

   There is no hard and fast rule about what is an "open standard," but
   generally this means a stable standard that anyone can get a copy of
   (although they might have to pay for it) and that was made by a
   generally recognized standards group. If the external standard
   changes, you have to reference the particular instantiation of that
   standard in your specification, as with a designation of the date of
   the standard. Some external standards bodies don't make old standards
   available, which is a problem for IETF standards that need to be used
   in the future. When in doubt, a draft author should ask the WG chair
   or appropriate Area Director if a particular external standard can be
   used in an IETF standard.

5.4.3 IANA Considerations

   More and more IETF standards require the registration of some
   protocol parameters, such as named options in the protocol. The main
   registry for all IETF standards has long been IANA. Because of the
   large and diverse kinds of registries that standards require, IANA
   needs to have specific information about how to register the
   parameters, what not to register, who (if anyone) will decide what is
   to be registered, and so on.

   Anyone writing an Internet standard that may need an IANA registry
   needs to read BCP 26, "Guidelines for Writing an IANA Considerations
   Section in RFCs," which describes how RFC authors should properly ask
   for IANA to start or take over a registry. IANA also maintains
   registries that were started long before BCP 26 was produced.

5.4.4 Patents in IETF Standards

   The problems of intellectual property have cropped up more and more
   often in the past few years, particularly with respect to patents.
   The goal of the IETF is to have its standards widely used and
   validated in the marketplace. If creating a product that uses a
   standard requires getting a license for a patent, people are less
   likely to implement the standard.  Thus, the general rule has been
   "use good non-patented technology where possible."

   Of course, this isn't always possible. Sometimes patents appear after
   a standard has been established. Sometimes theres a patent on
   something that is so valuable that there isn't a non-patented



Harris                                                         [Page 28]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   equivalent. Sometimes, the patent holder is generous and promises to
   give all implementors of a standard a royalty-free license to the
   patent, thereby making it almost as easy to implement as it would
   have been if no patent existed.

   The IETF's methods for dealing with patents in standards are a
   subject of much debate. You can read about the official rules in BCP
   9, but you should assume that the application of those rules is
   flexible and depends on the type of patent, the patent holder, and
   the availability of alternate technologies that are not encumbered by
   patents.

   Patent holders who freely allow their patents to be used by people
   implementing IETF standards often get a great deal of good will from
   the folks in the IETF. Such generosity is more common than you might
   think. For example, RFC 1822 is a license from IBM for one of its
   security patents, and the security community has responded very
   favorably to IBM for this (whereas a number of other companies have
   made themselves pariahs for their intractability on their security
   patents).

5.5 Informational and Experimental RFCs

   As we noted earlier, not all RFCs are standards. In fact, plenty of
   important RFCs are not on standards track at all. Currently, there
   are two designations for RFCs that are not meant to be standards:
   Informational, like the Tao, and Experimental. (There is actually a
   third, Historical, but that is reserved for documents that were on
   the standards track and have been removed due to lack of current use,
   or that more recent thinking indicates the technology is actually
   harmful to the Internet.)

   The role of Informational RFCs is often debated in the IETF. Many
   people like having them, particularly for specifications that were
   created outside the IETF but are referenced by IETF documents. They
   are also useful for specifications that are the precursors for work
   being done by IETF Working Groups. On the other hand, some people
   refer to Informational RFCs as "standards" even though the RFCs are
   not standards, usually to fool the gullible public about something
   that the person is selling or supporting.  When this happens, the
   debate about Informational RFCs is renewed.

   Experimental RFCs are for specifications that may be interesting, but
   for which it is unclear if there will be much interest in
   implementing them.  That is, a specification might solve a problem,
   but if it is not clear many people think that the problem is
   important, or think that they will bother fixing the problem with the
   specification, the specification might be labeled an Experimental



Harris                                                         [Page 29]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   RFC. If, later, the specification becomes popular, it can be re-
   issued as a standards-track RFC. Experimental RFCs are also used to
   get people to experiment with a technology that looks like it might
   be standards track material, but for which there are still unanswered
   questions.

6. How to Contribute to the IETF

   Read -- Review the Internet Drafts in your area of expertise, and comment
        on them in the Working Groups. Participate in the discussion in a
        friendly, helpful fashion, with the goal being the best Internet
        standards possible. Listen much more than you speak.

   Implement -- Write programs that use the current Internet standards. The
        standards aren't worth much unless they are available to Internet
        users. Implement even the "minor" standards, since they will become
        less minor if they appear in more software. Report any problems you
        find with the standards to the appropriate Working Group so that the
        standard can be clarified in later revisions. One of the oft-quoted
        tenets of the IETF is "running code wins," so you can help support the
        standards you want to become more widespread by creating more running
        code.

   Write -- Edit or co-author Internet Drafts in your area of expertise. Do
        this for the benefit of the Internet community, not to get your name
        (or, even worse, your company's name) on a document. Draft authors are
        subject to all kinds of technical (and sometimes personal) criticism;
        receive it with equanimity and use it to improve your draft in order
        to produce the best and most interoperable standard.

   Open -- Avoid proprietary standards. If you are an implementor, exhibit a
        strong preference for IETF standards. If the IETF standards aren't as
        good as the proprietary standards, work to make the IETF standards
        better. If youre a purchaser, avoid products that use proprietary
        standards that compete with the open standards of the IETF, and tell
        the companies you buy from that you are doing so.

   Free -- If your company controls a patent that is used in an IETF standard,
        convince them to make the patent available at no cost to everyone who
        is implementing the standard. In the past few years, patents have
        caused a lot of serious problems for Internet standards because they
        prevent some companies from being able to freely implement the
        standards. Fortunately, many companies have generously offered
        unlimited licenses for particular patents in order to help the IETF
        standards flourish. These companies are usually rewarded with positive
        publicity for the fact that they are not as greedy or short-sighted as
        other patent-holders.




Harris                                                         [Page 30]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   Join -- Become a member of ISOC. More importantly, urge any company that
        has benefited from the Internet to become a corporate member of ISOC,
        since this has the greatest financial benefit for the group. It will,
        of course, also benefit the Internet as a whole.

7. IETF and the Outside World

7.1 IETF and Other Standards Groups

   As much as many IETF participants would like to think otherwise, the
   IETF does not exist in a standards vacuum. There are many (perhaps
   too many) other standards organizations whose decisions affect the
   Internet. There are also a fair number of standards bodies who
   ignored the Internet for a long time and now want to get a piece of
   the action.

   In general, the IETF tries to have cordial relationships with other
   significant standards bodies. This isn't always easy, since many
   other bodies have very different structures than the IETF, and the
   IETF is mostly run by volunteers who would probably prefer to write
   standards rather than meet with representatives from other bodies.
   Even so, some other standards bodies make a great effort to interact
   well with the IETF despite the obvious cultural differences.

   At the time of this writing, the IESG has some liaisons with large
   standards bodies, including the ITU (International Telecommunication
   Union), the W3C, the Unicode Consortium, the ATM Forum, and ISO-
   IEC/JTC1 (The Joint Technical Committee of the International
   Organization for Standardization and International Electrotechnical
   Commission). The IESG list of liaisons,
   ftp://ftp.ietf.org/ietf/1iesg-liaisons.txt, shows that there are many
   different liaisons to ISO-IEC/JTC1 subcommittees.

7.2 Press Coverage of the IETF

   Given that the IETF is one of the best-known bodies that is helping
   move the Internet forward, it is natural for the computer press (and
   even the trade press) to want to cover its actions. Such publicity is
   a good thing for the IETF if it is accurate. As you can imagine, it
   is easy for the press to get stories about the IETF wrong, and they
   seem to do so regularly.

   Major press errors fall into two categories: saying that the IETF is
   considering something when in fact there is just an Internet Draft in
   a Working Group, and saying that the IETF approved something when all
   that happened was that an Informational RFC was published. In both
   cases, the press is not fully to blame for the problem, since they
   are usually alerted to the story by a company trying to get publicity



Harris                                                         [Page 31]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   for a protocol that they developed or at least support. Of course, a
   bit of research by the reporter would probably get them in contact
   with someone who could straighten them out, such as a WG chair or an
   Area Director. The official press contact for the IETF is the IETF
   Secretariat.

   Reporters who want to find out about "what the IETF is doing" on a
   particular topic would be well-advised to talk to more than one
   person who is active on that topic in the IETF, and should probably
   try to talk to the WG chair in any case. Its impossible to determine
   what will happen with a draft by looking at the draft or talking to
   the draft's author.  Fortunately, all WGs have archives that a
   reporter can look through for recent indications about what the
   progress of a draft is; unfortunately, few reporters have the time or
   inclination to do this kind of research.  Because the IETF doesn't
   have a press liaison, a magazine or newspaper that runs a story with
   errors won't hear directly from the IETF and therefore often won't
   know what they did wrong, so they might easily do it again later.

8. References

   "Tao" is the basic principle behind the teachings of Lao-tse, a
   Chinese master. Its familiar symbol is the black and white Yin-Yang
   circle. Taoism conceives the universe as a single organism, and human
   beings as interdependent parts of a cosmic whole.  Tao is sometimes
   translated "the way," but according to Taoist philosophy the true
   meaning of the word cannot be expressed in words.

8.1 Frequently Asked Questions (and Their Answers)

   Q:  My Working Group moved this morning.  Where is it now?
   A:  Check the at-a-glance sheet and the message board for announcements.

   Q:  Where is room 'foo'?
   A:  Check the map on the at-a-glance sheet.  An enlarged version is
       on the bulletin board.

   Q:  Where can I get a copy of the proceedings?
   A:  Proceedings of each meeting are available on the Web and on CD, and
       printed versions are available for some meetings.  Indicate that you want a
       copy when you register.  For more information, see the Web listing at
       http://www.ietf.org/proceedings/directory.html.

   Q:  When is on-site registration?
   A:  On-site registration is available from noon Sunday through the Sunday
       evening reception, and from then on throughout the week.

   Q:  Where is lunch served?



Harris                                                         [Page 32]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   A:  The meeting does not include lunch or dinner.  Ask a local host
       (somebody with a green dotted badge) for a recommendation.

   Q:  Where are the receipts for the social event?
   A:  The social is not managed by the IETF Secretariat.  Ask a local  host.

8.2 Useful E-mail Addresses

   ietf-info@ietf.org           General queries about the IETF
   ietf-rsvp@ietf.org           Queries about meeting locations and fees
   ietf-request@ietf.org        Requests to join/leave IETF lists
   ietf-web@ietf.org            Web queries/comments
   internet-drafts@ietf.org     Internet Draft submissions and queries
   proceedings@ietf.org         IETF Proceedings Coordinator
   rfc-ed@rfc-editor.org        RFC Editor
   ietf-secretariat@ietf.org    Queries for the Secretariat
   minutes@ietf.org             Where to send Working Group minutes

8.3 Useful Documents and Files

   The IETF web site, www.ietf.org, is the best source for information
   about meetings, Working Groups, Internet-Drafts, RFCs, and much more.
   The same information is available in the "ietf" directory on
   anonymous FTP sites worldwide. For a listing of these sites, see:

           http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   Many useful filenames and URLs are listed below.  Filenames beginning
   with "0" (zero) pertain to IETF meetings; these may refer to a
   recently held meeting if the first announcement of the next meeting
   has not yet been sent to the IETF mailing list.  File names beginning
   with "1" (one) contain general IETF information.  This is only a
   partial list of the available files.  (The 'yymm' below refers to the
   year and month.)

   o 0mtg-agenda.txt                         Agenda for the meeting
     www.ietf.org/meetings/agenda.html

   o 0mtg-rsvp.txt                           Meeting registration form
     www.ietf.org/meetings/reg-form.html

   o 0mtg-sites.txt                          Future meeting sites and
     www.ietf.org/meetings/0mtg-sites.txt    dates

   o 0mtg-multicast-guide-yymm.txt           Schedule for MBone/
                                             multicast sessions

   o 0mtg-traveldirections-yymm.txt          Directions to the meeting



Harris                                                         [Page 33]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


     www.ietf.org/meetings/                  site
         directions-49.html

   o 0tao.txt                                This document
     www.ietf.org/tao.html

   o 1directories.txt                        Guide to IETF information
     www.ietf.org/ietf/1directories.txt      including shadow
                                             directories and contents;
                                             FTP/Web/email access;
                                             proceedigs; mailing lists

   o 1id-guidelines.txt                      Guidelines to authors of
     www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-guidelines.txt    Internet-Drafts

   o 1ietf-description.txt                   Short description of the
     www.ietf.org/ietf/                      IETF/IESG, including a
        1ietf-description.txt                list of area directors

   o 1proceedings-request.txt                Proceedings order form
     www.ietf.org/ietf/
        1proceedings-request.txt

   o 1wg-summary.txt                         List of all Working
     www.ietf.org/ietf/                      Groups by area,
       /1wg-summary.txt                      including chairs(s) and
                                             mailing list info

   o 1wg-summary-by-acronym.txt              Same as above, but
     www.ietf.org/ietf/                      sorted by acronym
       1wg-summary-by-acronym.txt

   o 1wg-charter.txt                         Abbreviated versions of
     www.ietf.org/html.charters/             all current Working
        wg-dir.html                          Group charters

   o 1wg-charters-by-acronym.txt             Same as above, but
                                             sorted by acronym

   The full charters and minutes of the working groups and BOFs are
   archived archived under the "ietf" directory (see 1directories.txt
   for a complete explanation).

   Other useful files include:

   o  Slides from the Newcomers' Orientation
      http://www.ietf.org/newcomer/v3dcmnt.htm




Harris                                                         [Page 34]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


      Meeting hints and procedures, structure of the IETF, overview
      of the standards process.

   o  Slides from the Working Group Chair Training Workshop
      http://www.ietf.org/wgchair/index.htm

      Types of IETF standards, how Working Groups reach concensus,
      Last Calls, conflict resolution, and much more.

8.4 IETF Area Abbreviations

   APP      Applications
   GEN      General Interest
   INT      Internet
   OPS      Operations & Management
   RTG      Routing
   SEC      Security
   TSV      Transport
   USV      User Services

8.5 Acronyms Used in the Tao

   AD       Area Director
   BOF      Birds Of a Feather
   FAQ      Frequently Asked Question
   FYI      For Your Information (RFC)
   IAB      Internet Architecture Board
   IANA     Internet Assigned Numbers Authority
   ICANN    Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers,
              http://www.icann.org/
   I-D      Internet-Draft
   IESG     Internet Engineering Steering Group,
              http://www.ietf.org/iesg.html
   IETF     Internet Engineering Task Force, http://www.ietf.org/
   IMR      Internet Monthly Report
   INET     Internet Society Conference,
              http://www.isoc.org/isoc/conferences/inet/
   IRTF     Internet Research Task Force, http://www.irtf.org/
   ISO      International Organization for Standardization,
              http://www.iso.ch/
   ISO-     Joint Technical Committee of the International
    IEC/      Organization for Standardization and International
    JTCI      Electrotechnical Commission, http://www.jtc1.org/
   ISOC     Internet Society, http://www.isoc.org
   ITU      International Telecommunication Union, http://www.itu.int
   RFC      Request For Comments
   STD      Standard (RFC)
   W3C      World Wide Web Consortium, http://www.w3.org/



Harris                                                         [Page 35]

INTERNET-DRAFT              The Tao of IETF               September 2000


   WG       Working Group

Editor Contact

   Susan Harris
   Merit Network, Inc.
   4251 Plymouth Road, Suite C
   Ann Arbor, MI  48105
   srh@merit.edu










































Harris                                                         [Page 36]


