


Network Working Group                                        S. Shalunov
Internet-Draft                                              July 7, 2008
Intended status: Standards Track
Expires: January 8, 2009


Transport for Advanced Networking Applications (TANA) Problem Statement
              draft-shalunov-tana-problem-statement-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 8, 2009.


















Shalunov                 Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           TANA Problem Statement                July 2008


Abstract

   The IETF P2PI workshop conducted in the end of May 2008 at MIT in
   Boston has identified a number of potential documents for the IETF to
   work on.

   One is a transport protocol with congestion control mechanism that
   enables an advanced networking application to minimize the extra
   delay it induces in the bottleneck while implementing an end-to-end
   version of scavenger service.  At least one such protocol has now
   been implemented by a major peer-to-peer application and deployed in
   the wild with favorable results.

   Another is a document that addresses community concerns about the use
   of multiple transport connections by peer-to-peer applications, both
   when these connections run to the same peer and to different peers.

   These two items appear to fall within the Transport area, but not
   within the charter of any existing working group.  It is not obvious
   what WG's charter could be naturally extended to encompass these two
   items.  The TANA BoF is held to explore the problem space, gauge the
   interest in the problems within the Transport area, and to see if the
   community and the area directors believe that it makes sense to form
   a TANA working group within the Transport area to chartered to work
   on (1) standardizing end-to-end congestion control that enables
   advanced application to minimize the delay they introduce into the
   network and a protocol using it and (2) a document describing the
   current practice of peer-to-peer apps' use of multiple transport
   connections and recommendations in this space.






















Shalunov                 Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           TANA Problem Statement                July 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Congestion control that minimizes delay and a protocol
       using it . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Use of multiple transport connections by peer-to-peer
       applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 10








































Shalunov                 Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           TANA Problem Statement                July 2008


1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].














































Shalunov                 Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           TANA Problem Statement                July 2008


2.  Congestion control that minimizes delay and a protocol using it

   The standard congestion control in TCP is based on loss and has not
   been designed to drive delay to any given value.  Because TCP needs
   losses to back off, when a FIFO bottleneck lacks AQM, TCP fills the
   buffer, effectively maximizing possible delay.  Large number of the
   thinnest links in the Internet, particularly most uplinks of home
   connections, lack AQM.  They also frequently contain enough buffer
   space to get delays into hundreds of milliseconds and even seconds.
   There is no benefit to having delays this large, but there are very
   substantial drawbacks for interactive applications: games and VoIP
   become impossible and even web browsing becomes very slow.

   It is desirable to have a congestion control mechanism that would
   allow to keep the latency across the congested bottleneck low even as
   it is saturated.  This would allow applications that send large
   amounts of data, particularly upstream on home connections, such as
   peer-to-peer application, to operate without destroying the
   experience in interactive applications.  It is possible to design
   congestion control mechanisms that take advantage of delay
   measurements and can back off before loss occurs.  One such mechanism
   has been deployed by BitTorrent in the wild with the BitTorrent DNA
   client.  This mechanism not only allows to keep delay across a
   bottleneck low, but also yields quickly in the presence of competing
   traffic with loss-based congestion control.

   Standardization of a congestion control mechanism that meets these
   design objectives would enable other advanced networking applications
   to better get out of the way of interactive apps.






















Shalunov                 Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           TANA Problem Statement                July 2008


3.  Use of multiple transport connections by peer-to-peer applications

   The community is concerned about the possible use of multiple
   transport connections by peer-to-peer clients, particularly if the
   goal of such use is to circumvent fairness mechanisms in TCP.

   Peer-to-peer clients are designed to open connections to multiple
   other peers to organize a well-connected mesh.  There is confusion
   about whether they are also designed to open multiple connections to
   the same peer to get an unfair share of bottleneck capacity.  (I am
   personally not familiar with examples of P2P clients that are
   designed to open multiple connections to the same destination.)

   While the use of multiple transport connections, even to the same
   destination, has been common since the advent of the web browser,
   peer-to-peer applications are believed by some to open an unusually
   large number of connections and send data for particularly long
   periods of time.

   The most common P2P protocol, BitTorrent, uses a mechanism called
   "choking" to limit the number of connections that actually send and
   receive data.  Many more connections are open that used for data.
   Most connections are only used for small pieces of metadata.  This
   further complicates the analysis.

   Both the IETF transport community and the designers of P2P apps would
   benefit from clarity produced by a document that would (1) describe
   the current practice of multiple connections use by peer-to-peer apps
   and (2) make recommendations about the best such practices.






















Shalunov                 Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           TANA Problem Statement                July 2008


4.  Security Considerations

   None.
















































Shalunov                 Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           TANA Problem Statement                July 2008


5.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.















































Shalunov                 Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           TANA Problem Statement                July 2008


Author's Address

   Stanislav Shalunov
















































Shalunov                 Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           TANA Problem Statement                July 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Shalunov                 Expires January 8, 2009               [Page 10]

