Secure Inter-Domain Routing                                 M. Lepinski 
Working Group                                                   S. Kent 
Internet Draft                                         BBN Technologies 
Intended status: Informational                        February 25, 2008 
Expires: August 2008                                                    
                                    
                                      
           An Infrastructure to Support Secure Internet Routing 
                       draft-ietf-sidr-arch-03.txt 


Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that       
   any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is       
   aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she       
   becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of       
   BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 25, 2008. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 

Abstract 

   This document describes an architecture for an infrastructure to 
   support secure Internet routing. The foundation of this architecture 
   is a public key infrastructure (PKI) that represents the allocation 
   hierarchy of IP address space and Autonomous System Numbers; 
   certificates from this PKI are used to verify signed objects that 
   authorize autonomous systems to originate routes for specified IP 
 
 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                 [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

   address prefixes. The data objects that comprise the PKI, as well as 
   other signed objects necessary for secure routing, are stored and 
   disseminated through a distributed repository system. This document 
   also describes at a high level how this architecture can be used to 
   add security features to common operations such as IP address space 
   allocation and route filter construction.   

Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [1]. 

Table of Contents 

   1. Introduction...................................................3 
   2. PKI for Internet Number Resources..............................4 
      2.1. Role in the overall architecture..........................5 
      2.2. CA Certificates...........................................5 
      2.3. End-Entity (EE) Certificates..............................7 
      2.4. Trust Anchors.............................................7 
      2.5. Default Trust Anchor Considerations.......................8 
      2.6. Representing Early-Registration Transfers (ERX)...........9 
   3. Route Origination Authorizations..............................10 
      3.1. Role in the overall architecture.........................11 
      3.2. Syntax and semantics.....................................11 
   4. Repositories..................................................13 
      4.1. Role in the overall architecture.........................13 
      4.2. Contents and structure...................................13 
      4.3. Access protocols.........................................15 
      4.4. Access control...........................................15 
   5. Manifests.....................................................16 
      5.1. Syntax and semantics.....................................16 
   6. Local Cache Maintenance.......................................17 
   7. Common Operations.............................................18 
      7.1. Certificate issuance.....................................18 
      7.2. ROA management...........................................19 
         7.2.1. Single-homed subscribers (without portable allocations)
         ...........................................................20 
         7.2.2. Multi-homed subscribers.............................20 
         7.2.3. Portable allocations................................21 
      7.3. Route filter construction................................21 
   8. Security Considerations.......................................22 
   9. IANA Considerations...........................................22 
   10. Acknowledgments..............................................23 
   11. References...................................................24 
      11.1. Normative References....................................24 
 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                 [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

      11.2. Informative References..................................24 
   Authors' Addresses...............................................25 
   Intellectual Property Statement..................................25 
   Disclaimer of Validity...........................................26 
    
 
1. Introduction 

   This document describes an architecture for an infrastructure to 
   support improved security for BGP routing [2] for the Internet. The 
   architecture encompasses three principle elements: 

     . a public key infrastructure (PKI) 

     . digitally-signed routing objects to support routing security 

     . a distributed repository system to hold the PKI objects and the 
        signed routing objects 

   The architecture described by this document supports, at a minimum, 
   two aspects of routing security; it enables an entity to verifiably 
   assert that it is the legitimate holder of a set of IP addresses or a 
   set of Autonomous System (AS) numbers, and it allows the holder of IP 
   address space to explicitly and verifiably authorize one or more ASes 
   to originate routes to that address space.  In addition to these 
   initial applications, the infrastructure defined by this architecture 
   also is intended to be able to support security protocols such as S-
   BGP [10] or soBGP [11]. This architecture is applicable to the 
   routing of both IPv4 and IPv6 datagrams. IPv4 and IPv6 are currently 
   the only address families supported by this architecture. Thus, for 
   example, use of this architecture with MPLS labels is beyond the 
   scope of this document.  

   In order to facilitate deployment, the architecture takes advantage 
   of existing technologies and practices.  The structure of the PKI 
   element of the architecture corresponds to the existing resource 
   allocation structure. Thus management of this PKI is a natural 
   extension of the resource-management functions of the organizations 
   that are already responsible for IP address and AS number resource 
   allocation. Likewise, existing resource allocation and revocation 
   practices have well-defined correspondents in this architecture.  To 
   ease implementation, existing IETF standards are used wherever 
   possible; for example, extensive use is made of the X.509 certificate
   profile defined by PKIX [3] and the extensions for IP Addresses and 
   AS numbers representation defined in RFC 3779 [5]. Also CMS [4] is 
   used as the syntax for the newly-defined signed objects required by 
   this infrastructure. 
 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                 [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

   As noted above, the infrastructure is comprised of three main 
   components: an X.509 PKI in which certificates attest to holdings of 
   IP address space and AS numbers; non-certificate/CRL signed objects 
   (Route Origination Authorizations and manifests) used by the 
   infrastructure; and a distributed repository system that makes all of 
   these signed objects available for use by ISPs in making routing 
   decisions.  These three basic components enable several security 
   functions; this document describes how they can be used to improve 
   route filter generation, and to perform several other common 
   operations in such a way as to make them cryptographically 
   verifiable.  

2. PKI for Internet Number Resources 

   Because the holder of a block IP address space is entitled to define 
   the topological destination of IP datagrams whose destinations fall 
   within that block, decisions about inter-domain routing are 
   inherently based on knowledge the allocation of the IP address space. 
   Thus, a basic function of this architecture is to provide 
   cryptographically verifiable attestations as to these allocations. In 
   current practice, the allocation of IP address is hierarchic. The 
   root of the hierarchy is IANA. Below IANA are five Regional Internet 
   Registries (RIRs), each of which manages address and AS number 
   allocation within a defined geopolitical region. In some regions the 
   third tier of the hierarchy includes National Internet Registries and 
   (NIRs) as well as Local Internet Registries (LIRs) and subscribers 
   with so-called ''portable'' (provider-independent) allocations. (The 
   term LIR is used in some regions to refer to what other regions 
   define as an ISP. Throughout the rest of this document we will use 
   the term LIR/ISP to simplify references to these entities.) In other 
   regions the third tier consists only of LIRs/ISPs and subscribers 
   with portable allocations.  

   In general, the holder of a set of IP addresses may sub-allocate 
   portions of that set, either to itself (e.g., to a particular unit of 
   the same organization), or to another organization, subject to 
   contractual constraints established by the registries.  Because of 
   this structure, IP address allocations can be described naturally by 
   a hierarchic public-key infrastructure, in which each certificate 
   attests to an allocation of IP addresses, and issuance of subordinate 
   certificates corresponds to sub-allocation of IP addresses.  The 
   above reasoning holds true for AS number resources as well, with the 
   difference that, by convention, AS numbers may not be sub-allocated 
   except by regional or national registries. Thus allocations of both 
   IP addresses and AS numbers can be expressed by the same PKI.  Such a 
   PKI is a central component of this architecture. 

 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                 [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

2.1. Role in the overall architecture 

   Certificates in this PKI are called Resource Certificates, and 
   conform to the certificate profile for such certificates [6].  
   Resource certificates attest to the allocation by the (certificate) 
   issuer of IP addresses or AS numbers to the subject.  They do this by 
   binding the public key contained in the Resource Certificate to the 
   IP addresses or AS numbers included in the certificate's IP Address 
   Delegation or AS Identifier Delegation Extensions, respectively, as 
   defined in RFC 3779 [5].   

   An important property of this PKI is that certificates do not attest 
   to the identity of the subject. Therefore, the subject names used in 
   certificates are not intended to be ''descriptive.'' That is, this 
   PKI is intended to provide authorization, but not authentication. 
   This is in contrast to most PKIs where the issuer ensures that the 
   descriptive subject name in a certificate is properly associated with 
   the entity that holds the private key corresponding to the public key 
   in the certificate. Because issuers need not verify the right of an 
   entity to use a subject name in a certificate, they avoid the costs 
   and liabilities of such verification. This makes it easier for these 
   entities to take on the additional role of CA.  

   Most of the certificates in the PKI assert the basic facts on which 
   the rest of the infrastructure operates.  CA certificates within the 
   PKI attest to IP address space and AS number holdings.  End-entity 
   (EE) certificates are issued by resource holder CAs to delegate the 
   authority attested by their allocation certificates. The primary use 
   for EE certificates is the validation of Route Origination 
   Authorizations (ROAs). Additionally, signed objects called manifests 
   will be used to help ensure the integrity of the repository system, 
   and the signature on each manifest will be verified via an EE 
   certificate.  

2.2. CA Certificates 

   Any holder of Internet resources who is authorized to sub-allocate 
   them must be able to issue Resource Certificates to correspond to 
   these sub-allocations.  Thus, for example, CA certificates will be 
   associated with each of the RIRs, NIRs, and LIRs/ISPs.  A CA 
   certificate also is required to enable a resource holder to issue 
   ROAs, because it must issue the corresponding end-entity certificate 
   used to validate each ROA. Thus some subscribers also will need to 
   have CA certificates for their allocations, e.g., subscribers with 
   portable allocations, to enable them to issue ROAs. (A subscriber who 
   is not multi-homed, whose allocation comes from an LIR/ISP, and who 
   has not moved to a different LIR/ISP, need not be represented in the 
 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                 [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

   PKI. Moreover, a multi-homed subscriber with an allocation from an 
   LIR/ISP may or may not need to be explicitly represented, as 
   discussed in Section 6.2.2) 

   Unlike in most PKIs, the distinguished name of the subject in a CA 
   certificate is chosen by the certificate issuer. If the subject of a 
   certificate is an RIR, then the distinguished name of the subject 
   will be chosen to convey the identity of the registry and should 
   consist of (a subset of) the following attributes: country, 
   organization, organizational unit, and common name. For example, an 
   appropriate subject name for the APNIC RIR might be: 

      . Country: AU 

      . Organization: Asia Pacific Network Information Centre 

      . Common Name: APNIC Resource Certification Authority 

   If the subject of a certificate is not an RIR, (e.g., the subject is 
   a NIR, or LIR/ISP) the distinguished name MUST consist only of the 
   common name attribute and must not attempt to convey the identity of 
   the subject in a descriptive fashion. Additionally, the subject's 
   distinguished name must be unique among all certificates issued by a 
   given authority. In this PKI, the certificate issuer, being an 
   internet registry or LIR/ISP, is not in the business of verifying the 
   legal right of the subject to assert a particular identity. 
   Therefore, selecting a distinguished name that does not convey the 
   identity of the subject in a descriptive fashion minimizes the 
   opportunity for the subject to misuse the certificate to assert an 
   identity, and thus minimizes the legal liability of the issuer. Since 
   all CA certificates are issued to subjects with whom the issuer has 
   an existing relationship, it is recommended that the issuer select a 
   subject name that enables the issuer to easily link the certificate 
   to existing database records associated with the subject. For 
   example, an authority may use internal database keys or subscriber 
   IDs as the subject common name in issued certificates.  

   Each Resource Certificate attests to an allocation of resources to 
   its holder, so entities that have allocations from multiple sources 
   will have multiple CA certificates. A CA also may issue distinct 
   certificates for each distinct allocation to the same entity, if the 
   CA and the resource holder agree that such an arrangement will 
   facilitate management and use of the certificates. For example, an 
   LIR/ISP may have several certificates issued to it by one registry, 
   each describing a distinct set of address blocks, because the LIR/ISP 
   desires to treat the allocations as separate. 

 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                 [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

2.3. End-Entity (EE) Certificates 

   The private key corresponding to public key contained in an EE 
   certificate is not used to sign other certificates in a PKI. The 
   primary function of end-entity certificates in this PKI is the 
   verification of signed objects that relate to the usage of the 
   resources described in the certificate, e.g., ROAs and manifests.  
   For ROAs and manifests there will be a one-to-one correspondence 
   between end-entity certificates and signed objects, i.e., the private 
   key corresponding to each end-entity certificate is used to sign 
   exactly one object, and each object is signed with only one key.  
   This property allows the PKI to be used to revoke these signed 
   objects, rather than creating a new revocation mechanism. When the 
   end-entity certificate used to sign an object has been revoked, the 
   signature on that object (and any corresponding assertions) will be 
   considered invalid, so a signed object can be effectively revoked by 
   revoking the end-entity certificate used to sign it. 

   A secondary advantage to this one-to-one correspondence is that the 
   private key corresponding to the public key in a certificate is used 
   exactly once in its lifetime, and thus can be destroyed after it has 
   been used to sign its one object.  This fact should simplify key 
   management, since there is no requirement to protect these private 
   keys for an extended period of time.  

   Although this document defines only two uses for end-entity 
   certificates, additional uses will likely be defined in the future.  
   For example, end-entity certificates could be used as a more general 
   authorization for their subjects to act on behalf of the holder of 
   the specified resources.  This could facilitate authentication of 
   inter-ISP interactions, or authentication of interactions with the 
   repository system.  These additional uses for end-entity certificates 
   may require retention of the corresponding private keys, even though 
   this is not required for the private keys associated with end-entity 
   certificates keys used for verification of ROAs and manifests, as 
   described above. 

2.4. Trust Anchors 

   In any PKI, each relying party (RP) is free to choose its own set of 
   trust anchors. This general property of PKIs applies here as well. 
   There is an extant IP address space and AS number allocation 
   hierarchy. IANA is the obvious candidate to be the TA, but 
   operational considerations may argue for a multi-TA PKI, e.g., one in 
   which both IANA and the RIRs form a default set of trust anchors.  
   Nonetheless, every relying party is free to choose a different set of 
   trust anchors to use for certificate validation operations.  
 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                 [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

   For example, an RP (e.g., an LIR/ISP) could create a self-signed 
   certificate to which all address space and/or all AS numbers are 
   assigned, and for which the RP knows the corresponding private key. 
   The RP could then issue certificates under this trust anchor to 
   whatever entities in the PKI it wishes, with the result that the 
   certificate paths terminating at this locally-installed trust anchor 
   will satisfy the RFC 3779 validation requirements. 

   An RP who elects to create and manage its own set of trust anchors 
   may fail to detect allocation errors that arise under such 
   circumstances, but the resulting vulnerability is local to the RP. 

2.5. Default Trust Anchor Considerations 

   IANA forms the root of the extant IP address space and AS number 
   allocation hierarchy. Therefore, it is natural to consider a model in 
   which most relying parties have as their single trust anchor a self-
   signed IANA certificate whose RFC 3779 extensions specify the 
   entirety of the AS number and IP address spaces.  

   As an example of such model, consider the use of private IP address 
   space (i.e., 10/8, 172.16/12, and 192.168/16 in IPv4 and FC00::/7 in 
   IPv6). IANA could issue a CA certificate for these blocks of private 
   address space and then destroy the private key corresponding to the 
   public key in the certificate. In this way, any relying party who 
   configured IANA as their sole trust anchor would automatically reject 
   any ROA containing private addresses, appropriate behavior with 
   regard to routing in the public Internet. On the other hand, such an 
   approach would not interfere with an organization that wishes to use 
   private address space in conjunction with BGP and this PKI 
   technology. Such an organization could configure its relying parties 
   with an additional, local trust anchor that issues certificates for 
   private addresses used within the organization. In this manner, BGP 
   advertisements for these private addresses would be accepted within 
   the organization but would be rejected if mistakenly sent outside the 
   private address space context in question. 

   In the DNSSEC context, IANA (as the root of the DNS) is already 
   experimenting with the operational procedures needed to digitally 
   sign the root zone. This is very much analogous to the role it would 
   play if it were to act as the default trust anchor for the RPKI, even 
   though DNSSEC does not make use of X.509 certificates. Nonetheless, 
   it is appropriate consider alternative default trust anchor models, 
   if IANA does not act in this capacity. This motivates the 
   consideration of alternative default trust anchor options for RPKI 
   relying parties. 

 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                 [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

   Essentially all allocated IP address and AS number resources are sub-
   allocated by IANA to one of the five RIRs. Therefore, one could 
   consider a model in which the default trust anchors are a set of five 
   self-signed certificates, one for each RIR. There are two 
   difficulties that such an approach must overcome. 

   The first difficulty is that IANA retains authority for 44 /8 
   prefixes in IPv4 and a /26 prefix in IPv6. Therefore, any approach 
   that recommends the RIRs as default trust anchors will also require 
   as a default trust anchor an IANA certificate who's RFC 3779 
   extensions correspond to this address space. Additionally, there are 
   about 49 /8 prefixes containing legacy allocations that are not each 
   allocated to a single RIR. Currently, for the purpose of 
   administering reverse DNS zones, each of these prefixes is 
   administered by a single RIR who delegates authority for allocations 
   within the prefix as appropriate. This existing arrangement could be 
   used as the template for the assignment of administrative 
   responsibility for the certification of these address blocks in the 
   RPKI. Such an arrangement would in no way alter the administrative 
   arrangements and the associated policies that apply to the individual 
   legacy allocations that have been made from these address blocks. 

   The second difficulty is that the resource allocations of the RIRs 
   may change several times a year. Typically in a PKI, trust anchors 
   are quite long-lived and distributed to relying parties via some out-
   of-band mechanism. However, such out-of-band distribution of new 
   trust anchors is not feasible if the allocations change every few 
   months. Therefore, any approach that recommends the RIRs as default 
   trust anchors must provide an in-band mechanism for managing the 
   changes that will occur in the RIR allocations (as expressed via RFC 
   3779 extensions). 

2.6. Representing Early-Registration Transfers (ERX) 

   Currently, IANA allocates IPv4 address space to the RIRs at the level 
   of /8 prefixes. However, there exist allocations that cross these RIR 
   boundaries. For example, A LACNIC customer may have an allocation 
   that falls within a /8 prefix administered by ARIN. Therefore, the 
   resource PKI must be able to represent such transfers from one RIR to 
   another in a manner that permits the validation of certificates with 
   RFC 3779 extensions. 






 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                 [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

                       +-------------------------------+ 
                       |                               | 
                       |      LACNIC Administrative    | 
                       |             Boundary          | 
                       |                               | 
        +--------+     |           +--------+          |      +--------+ 
        |  ARIN  |     |           | LACNIC |          |      |  RIPE  | 
        |  ROOT  |     |           |  ROOT  |          |      |  ROOT  | 
        +--------+     |           +--------+          |      +--------+ 
                \      |                               |       / 
                 ------------                      ------------ 
                       |     \                    /    | 
                       |   +--------+     +--------+   |       
                       |   | LACNIC |     | LACNIC |   |          
                       |   |   CA   |     |   CA   |   |          
                       |   +--------+     +--------+   | 
                       |                               | 
                       +-------------------------------+ 
    
                          FIGURE 1: Representing EXR  

   To represent such transfers, RIRs will need to manage multiple CA 
   certificates, each with distinct public (and corresponding private) 
   keys. Each RIR will have a single ''root'' certificate (e.g., a self-
   signed certificate or a certificate signed by IANA, see Section 2.5), 
   plus one additional CA certificate for each RIR from which it 
   receives a transfer. Each of these additional CA certificates will be 
   issued under the ''root'' certificate of the RIR from which the 
   transfer is received. This means that although the certificate is 
   bound to the RIR that receives the transfer, for the purposes of 
   certificate path construction and validation, it does not appear 
   under that RIR's ''root'' certificate (see Figure 1).  

3. Route Origination Authorizations 

   The information on IP address allocation provided by the PKI is not, 
   in itself, sufficient to guide routing decisions.  In particular, BGP 
   is based on the assumption that the AS that originates routes for a 
   particular prefix is authorized to do so by the holder of that prefix 
   (or an address block encompassing the prefix); the PKI contains no 
   information about these authorizations.  A Route Origination 
   Authorization (ROA) makes such authorization explicit, allowing a 
   holder of address space to create an object that explicitly and 
   verifiably asserts that an AS is authorized originate routes to 
   prefixes. 


 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

3.1. Role in the overall architecture 

   A ROA is an attestation that the holder of a set of prefixes has 
   authorized an autonomous system to originate routes for those 
   prefixes.  A ROA is structured according to the format described in 
   [7].  The validity of this authorization depends on the signer of the 
   ROA being the holder of the prefix(es) in the ROA; this fact is 
   asserted by an end-entity certificate from the PKI, whose 
   corresponding private key is used to sign the ROA.   

   ROAs may be used by relying parties to verify that the AS that 
   originates a route for a given IP address prefix is authorized by the 
   holder of that prefix to originate such a route. For example, an ISP 
   might use ROAs as inputs to route filter construction for use by its 
   BGP routers. These filters would prevent importation of any route in 
   which the origin AS of the AS-PATH attribute is not an AS that is 
   authorized (via a valid ROA) to originate the route. (See Section 6.3 
   for more details.) 

   Initially, the repository system will be the primary mechanism for 
   disseminating ROAs, since these repositories will hold the 
   certificates and CRLs needed to verify ROAs.  In addition, ROAs also 
   could be distributed in BGP UPDATE messages or via other 
   communication paths, if needed to meet timeliness requirements. 

3.2. Syntax and semantics 

   A ROA constitutes an explicit authorization for a single AS to 
   originate routes to one or more prefixes, and is signed by the holder 
   of those prefixes. A detailed specification of the ROA syntax can be 
   found in [7] but, at a high level, a ROA consists of (1) an AS 
   number; (2) a list of IP address prefixes; and (3) a flag indicating 
   whether an exact match is required between the IP address prefix(es) 
   of the ROA and the IP address prefix(es) originated by the AS, or 
   whether the AS is also authorized to advertise long (more specific) 
   prefixes.  

   Note that a ROA contains only a single AS number. Thus, if an ISP has 
   multiple AS numbers that will be authorized to originate routes to 
   the prefix(es) in the ROA, an address space holder will need to issue 
   multiple ROAs to authorize the ISP to originate routes from any of 
   these ASes. 

   A ROA is signed using the private key corresponding to the public key 
   in an end-entity certificate in the PKI. In order for a ROA to be 
   valid, its corresponding end-entity (EE) certificate must be valid 
   and the IP address prefixes of the ROA must exactly match the IP 
 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

   address prefix(es) specified in the EE certificate's RFC 3779 
   extension. Therefore, the validity interval of the ROA is implicitly 
   the validity interval of its corresponding certificate. A ROA is 
   revoked by revoking the corresponding EE certificate. There is no 
   independent method of invoking a ROA. One might worry that this 
   revocation model could lead to long CRLs for the CA certification 
   that is signing the EE certificates. However, routing announcements 
   on the public internet are generally quite long lived. Therefore, as 
   long as the EE certificates used to verify a ROA are given a validity 
   interval of several months, the likelihood that many ROAs would need 
   to revoked within time that is quite low. 

             ---------                ---------                
             |  RIR  |                |  NIR  |                 
             |  CA   |                |  CA   |                 
             ---------                ---------                 
                 |                        |            
                 |                        |             
                 |                        |           
             ---------                ---------                
             |  ISP  |                |  ISP  |                 
             |  CA 1 |                |  CA 2 |                 
             ---------                ---------    
              |     \                      |         
              |      -----                 |      
              |           \                |          
          ----------    ----------      ----------                
          |  ISP   |    |  ISP   |      |  ISP   |                 
          |  EE 1a |    |  EE 1b |      |  EE 2  |                 
          ----------    ----------      ----------    
              |             |               | 
              |             |               | 
              |             |               | 
          ----------    ----------      ----------                
          | ROA 1a |    | ROA 1b |      | ROA 2  |                               
          ----------    ----------      ---------- 
    
   FIGURE 2: This figure illustrates an ISP with allocations from two 
   sources (and RIR and an NIR). It needs two CA certificates due to RFC 
   3779 rules. 

   Because each ROA is associated with a single end-entity certificate, 
   the set of IP prefixes contained in a ROA must be drawn from an 
   allocation by a single source, i.e., a ROA cannot combine allocations 
   from multiple sources. Address space holders who have allocations 
   from multiple sources, and who wish to authorize an AS to originate 
   routes for these allocations, must issue multiple ROAs to the AS. 
 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

4. Repositories 

   Initially, an LIR/ISP will make use of the resource PKI by acquiring 
   and validating every ROA, to create a table of the prefixes for which 
   each AS is authorized to originate routes. To validate all ROAs, an 
   LIR/ISP needs to acquire all the certificates and CRLs. The primary 
   function of the distributed repository system described here is to 
   store these signed objects and to make them available for download by 
   LIRs/ISPs. The digital signatures on all objects in the repository 
   ensure that unauthorized modification of valid objects is detectable 
   by relying parties. Additionally, the repository system uses 
   manifests (see Section 5) to ensure that relying parties can detect 
   the deletion of valid objects and the insertion of out of date, valid 
   signed objects.   

   The repository system is also a point of enforcement for access 
   controls for the signed objects stored in it, e.g., ensuring that 
   records related to an allocation of resources can be manipulated only 
   by authorized parties. The use access controls prevents denial of 
   service attacks based on deletion of or tampering to repository 
   objects. Indeed, although relying parties can detect tampering with 
   objects in the repository, it is preferable that the repository 
   system prevent such unauthorized modifications to the greatest extent 
   possible. 

4.1. Role in the overall architecture 

   The repository system is the central clearing-house for all signed 
   objects that must be globally accessible to relying parties.  When 
   certificates and CRLs are created, they are uploaded to this 
   repository, and then downloaded for use by relying parties (primarily 
   LIRs/ISPs). ROAs and manifests are additional examples of such 
   objects, but other types of signed objects may be added to this 
   architecture in the future. This document briefly describes the way 
   signed objects (certificates, CRLs, ROAs and manifests) are managed 
   in the repository system. As other types of signed objects are added 
   to the repository system it will be necessary to modify the 
   description, but it is anticipated that most of the design principles 
   will still apply. The repository system is described in detail in 
   [9]. 

4.2. Contents and structure 

   Although there is a single repository system that is accessed by 
   relying parties, it is comprised of multiple databases. These 
   databases will be distributed among registries (RIRs, NIRs, 
   LIRs/ISPs). At a minimum, the database operated by each registry will 
 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

   contain all CA and EE certificates, CRLs, and manifests signed by the 
   CA(s) associated with that registry. Repositories operated by 
   LIRs/ISPs also will contain ROAs. Registries are encouraged maintain 
   copies of repository data from their customers, and their customer's 
   customers (etc.), to facilitate retrieval of the whole repository 
   contents by relying parties. Ideally, each RIR will hold PKI data 
   from all entities within its geopolitical scope. 

   For every certificate in the PKI, there will be a corresponding file 
   system directory in the repository that is the authoritative 
   publication point for all objects (certificates, CRLs, ROAs and 
   manifests) verifiable via this certificate. A certificate's Subject 
   Information Authority (SIA) extension provides a URI that references 
   this directory. Additionally, a certificate's Authority Information 
   Authority (AIA) extension contains a URI that references the 
   authoritative location for the CA certificate under which the given 
   certificate was issued. That is, if certificate A is used to verify 
   certificate B, then the AIA extension of certificate B points to 
   certificate A, and the SIA extension of certificate A points to a 
   directory containing certificate B (see Figure 2). 

                   +--------+            
        +--------->| Cert A |<----+ 
        |          | CRLDP  |     |        +---------+ 
        |          |  AIA   |     |    +-->| A's CRL |<-+ 
        |  +--------- SIA   |     |    |   +---------+  | 
        |  |       +--------+     |    |                | 
        |  |                      |    |                | 
        |  |                  +---+----+                | 
        |  |                  |   |                     | 
        |  |  +---------------|---|-----------------+   | 
        |  |  |               |   |                 |   |  
        |  +->|   +--------+  |   |   +--------+    |   | 
        |     |   | Cert B |  |   |   | Cert C |    |   | 
        |     |   | CRLDP ----+   |   | CRLDP -+--------+ 
        +----------- AIA   |      +----- AIA   |    | 
              |   |  SIA   |          |  SIA   |    | 
              |   +--------+          +--------+    |  
              |                                     | 
              +-------------------------------------+ 
    

   FIGURE 3: In this example, certificates B and C are issued under 
   certificate A. Therefore, the AIA extensions of certificates B and C 
   point to A, and the SIA extension of certificate A points to the 
   directory containing certificates B and C. 

 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

   If a CA certificate is reissued with the same public key, it should 
   not be necessary to reissue (with an updated AIA URI) all 
   certificates signed by the certificate being reissued. Therefore, a 
   certification authority SHOULD use a persistent URI naming scheme for 
   issued certificates. That is, reissued certificates should use the 
   same publication point as previously issued certificates having the 
   same subject and public key, and should overwrite such certificates. 

4.3. Access protocols 

   Repository operators will choose one or more access protocols that 
   relying parties can use to access the repository system.  These 
   protocols will be used by numerous participants in the infrastructure 
   (e.g., all registries, ISPs, and multi-homed subscribers) to maintain 
   their respective portions of it.  In order to support these 
   activities, certain basic functionality is required of the suite of 
   access protocols, as described below.  No single access protocol need 
   implement all of these functions (although this may be the case), but 
   each function must be implemented by at least one access protocol. 

   Download: Access protocols MUST support the bulk download of 
   repository contents and subsequent download of changes to the 
   downloaded contents, since this will be the most common way in which 
   relying parties interact with the repository system.  Other types of 
   download interactions (e.g., download of a single object) MAY also be 
   supported. 

   Upload/change/delete: Access protocols MUST also support mechanisms 
   for the issuers of certificates, CRLs, and other signed objects to 
   add them to the repository, and to remove them.  Mechanisms for 
   modifying objects in the repository MAY also be provided.  All access 
   protocols that allow modification to the repository (through 
   addition, deletion, or modification of its contents) MUST support 
   verification of the authorization of the entity performing the 
   modification, so that appropriate access controls can be applied (see 
   Section 4.4). 

   Current efforts to implement a repository system use RSYNC [12] as 
   the single access protocol.  RSYNC, as used in this implementation, 
   provides all of the above functionality. A document specifying the 
   conventions for use of RSYNC in the PKI will be prepared. 

4.4. Access control 

   In order to maintain the integrity of information in the repository, 
   controls must be put in place to prevent addition, deletion, or 
   modification of objects in the repository by unauthorized parties. 
 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 15] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

   The identities of parties attempting to make such changes can be 
   authenticated through the relevant access protocols.  Although 
   specific access control policies are subject to the local control of 
   repository operators, it is recommended that repositories allow only 
   the issuers of signed objects to add, delete, or modify them. 
   Alternatively, it may be advantageous in the future to define a 
   formal delegation mechanism to allow resource holders to authorize 
   other parties to act on their behalf, as suggested in Section 2.3 
   above. 

5. Manifests 

   A manifest is a signed object listing of all of the signed objects 
   issued by an authority responsible for a publication in the 
   repository system. For each certificate, CRL, or ROA issued by the 
   authority, the manifest contains both the name of the file containing 
   the object, and a hash of the file content.  

   As with ROAs, a manifest is signed by a private key, for which the  
   corresponding public key appears in an end-entity certificate. This 
   EE certificate, in turn, is signed by the CA in question. The EE 
   certificate private key may be used to issue one for more manifests. 
   If the private key is used to sign only a single manifest, then the 
   manifest can be revoked by revoking the EE certificate. In such a 
   case, to avoid needless CRL growth, the EE certificate used to 
   validate a manifest SHOULD expire at the same time that the manifest 
   expires. If an EE certificate is used to issue multiple (sequential) 
   manifests for the CA in question, then there is no revocation 
   mechanism for these individual manifests.  

   Manifests may be used by relying parties when constructing a local 
   cache (see Section 6) to mitigate the risk of an attacker who deletes 
   files from a repository or replaces current signed objects with stale 
   versions of the same object. Such protection is needed because 
   although all objects in the repository system are signed, the 
   repository system itself is untrusted. 

5.1. Syntax and semantics 

   A manifest constitutes a list of (the hashes of) all the files in a 
   repository point at a particular point in time. A detailed 
   specification of manifest syntax is provided in [8] but, at a high 
   level, a manifest consists of (1) a manifest number; (2) the time the 
   manifest was issued; (3) the time of the next planned update; and (4) 
   a list of filename and hash value pairs.   


 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 16] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

   The manifest number is a sequence number that is incremented each 
   time a manifest is issued by the authority. An authority is required 
   to issue a new manifest any time it alters any of its items in the 
   repository, or when the specified time of the next update is reached. 
   A manifest is thus valid until the specified time of the next update 
   or until a manifest is issued with a greater manifest number, 
   whichever comes first. (Note that when an EE certificate is used to 
   sign only a single manifest, whenever the authority issues the new 
   manifest, the CA MUST also issue a new CRL which includes the EE 
   certificate corresponding to the old manifest. The revoked EE 
   certificate for the old manifest will be removed from the CRL when it 
   expires, thus this procedure ought not result in significant CRLs 
   growth.)  

6. Local Cache Maintenance 

   In order to utilize signed objects issued under this PKI (e.g. for 
   route filter construction, see Section 6.3), a relying party must 
   first obtain a local copy of the valid EE certificates for the PKI. 
   To do so, the relying party performs the following steps: 

     1. Query the registry system to obtain a copy of all certificates, 
        manifests and CRLs issued under the PKI. 

     2. For each CA certificate in the PKI, verify the signature on the 
        corresponding manifest. Additionally, verify that the current 
        time is earlier than the time indicated in the nextUpdate field 
        of the manifest. 

     3. For each manifest, verify that certificates and CRLs issued 
        under the corresponding CA certificate match the hash values 
        contained in the manifest. If the hash values do not match, use 
        an out-of-band mechanism to notify the appropriate repository 
        administrator that the repository data has been corrupted.  

     4. Validate each EE certificate by constructing and verifying a 
        certification path for the certificate (including checking 
        relevant CRLs) to the locally configured set of TAs. (See [6] 
        for more details.) 

   Note that when a relying party performs these operations regularly, 
   it is more efficient for the relying party to request from the 
   repository system only those objects that have changed since the 
   relying party last updated its local cache. Note also that by 
   checking all issued objects against the appropriate manifest, the 
   relying party can be certain that it is not missing an updated 
   version of any object.  
 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 17] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

7. Common Operations 

   Creating and maintaining the infrastructure described above will 
   entail additional operations as ''side effects'' of normal resource 
   allocation and routing authorization procedures.  For example, a 
   subscriber with ''portable'' address space who entes a relationship 
   with an ISP will need to issue one or more ROAs identifying that ISP, 
   in addition to conducting any other necessary technical or business 
   procedures.  The current primary use of this infrastructure is for 
   route filter construction; using ROAs, route filters can be 
   constructed in an automated fashion with high assurance that the 
   holder of the advertised prefix has authorized the first-hop AS to 
   originate an advertised route. 

7.1. Certificate issuance 

   There are several operational scenarios that require certificates to 
   be issued.  Any allocation that may be sub-allocated requires a CA 
   certificate, e.g., so that certificates can be issued as necessary 
   for the sub-allocations. Holders of ''portable'' address allocations 
   also must have certificates, so that a ROA can be issued to each ISP 
   that is authorized to originate a route to the allocation (since the 
   allocation does not come from any ISP). Additionally, multi-homed 
   subscribers may require certificates for their allocations if they 
   intend to issue the ROAs for their allocations (see Section 6.2.2). 
   Other holders of resources need not be issued CA certificates within 
   the PKI. 

   In the long run, a resource holder will not request resource 
   certificates, but rather receive a certificate as a side effect of 
   the allocation process for the resource. However, initial deployment 
   of the RPKI will entail issuance of certificates to existing resource 
   holders as an explicit event. Note that in all cases, the authority 
   issuing a CA certificate will be the entity who allocates resources 
   to the subject. This differs from most PKIs in which a subject can 
   request a certificate from any certification authority.  

   If a resource holder receives multiple allocations over time, it may 
   accrue a collection of resource certificates to attest to them.  If a 
   resource holder receives multiple allocations from the same source, 
   the set of resource certificates may be combined into a single 
   resource certificate, if both the issuer and the resource holder 
   agree. This is effected by consolidating the IP Address Delegation 
   and AS Identifier Delegation Extensions into a single extension (of 
   each type) in a new certificate.  However, if the certificates for 
   these allocations contain different validity intervals, creating a 

 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 18] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

   certificate that combines them might create problems, and thus is NOT 
   RECOMMENDED.  

   If a resource holder's allocations come from different sources, they 
   will be signed by different CAs, and cannot be combined.  When a set 
   of resources is no longer allocated to a resource holder, any 
   certificates attesting to such an allocation MUST be revoked. A 
   resource holder SHOULD NOT to use the same public key in multiple CA 
   certificates that are issued by the same or differing authorities, as 
   reuse of a key pair complicates path construction. Note that since 
   the subject's distinguished name is chosen by the issuer, a subject 
   who receives allocations from two sources generally will receive 
   certificates with different subject names.  

7.2. ROA management      

   Whenever a holder of IP address space wants to authorize an AS to 
   originate routes for a prefix within his holdings, he MUST issue an 
   end-entity certificate containing that prefix in an IP Address 
   Delegation extension. He then uses the corresponding private key to 
   sign a ROA containing the designated prefix and the AS number for the 
   AS.  The resource holder MAY include more than one prefix in the EE 
   certificate and corresponding ROA if desired. As a prerequisite, 
   then, any address holder that issues ROAs for a prefix must have a 
   resource certificate for an allocation containing that prefix.  The 
   standard procedure for issuing a ROA is as follows: 

     1. Create an end-entity certificate containing the prefix(es) to be     
        authorized in the ROA. 

     2. Construct the payload of the ROA, including the prefixes in the     
        end-entity certificate and the AS number to be authorized. 

     3. Sign the ROA using the private key corresponding to the end-
        entity certificate (the ROA is comprised of the payload 
        encapsulated in a CMS signed message [7]). 

     4. Upload the end-entity certificate and the ROA to the repository     
        system. 

   The standard procedure for revoking a ROA is to revoke the 
   corresponding end-entity certificate by creating an appropriate CRL 
   and uploading it to the repository system.  The revoked ROA and end- 
   entity certificate SHOULD BE removed from the repository system. 



 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 19] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

7.2.1. Single-homed subscribers (without portable allocations) 

   In BGP, a single-homed subscriber with a non-portable allocation does 
   not need to explicitly authorize routes to be originated for the 
   prefix(es) it is using, since its ISP will already advertise a more 
   general prefix and route traffic for the subscriber's prefix as an 
   internal function.  Since no routes are originated specifically for 
   prefixes held by these subscribers, no ROAs need to be issued under 
   their allocations; rather, the subscriber's ISP will issue any 
   necessary ROAs for its more general prefixes under resource 
   certificates its own allocation. Thus, a single-homed subscriber with 
   a non-portable allocation is not included in the RPKI, i.e., it does 
   not receive a CA certificate, nor issue EE certificates or ROAs. 

7.2.2. Multi-homed subscribers 

   In order for multiple ASes to originate routers for prefixes held by 
   a multi-homed subscriber, each AS must have a ROA that explicitly 
   authorizes such route origination. There are two ways that this can 
   be accomplished.  

   One option is for the multi-homed subscriber to obtain a CA 
   certificate from the ISP who allocated the prefixes to the 
   subscriber. The multi-homed subscriber can then create a ROA (and 
   associated end-entity certificate) that authorizes a second ISP to 
   originate routes to the subscriber prefix(es). The ROA for the second 
   ISP generally SHOULD be set to require an exact match, if the intent 
   is to enable backup paths for the prefix. Note that the first ISP, 
   who allocated the prefixes, will want to advertise the more specific 
   prefix for this subscriber (vs. the encompassing prefix). Either the 
   subscriber or the first ISP will need to issue an EE certificate and 
   ROA for the (more specific) prefix, authorizing this ISP to advertise 
   this more specific prefix. 

   A second option is that the multi-homed subscriber can request that 
   the ISP that allocated the prefixes create a ROA that authorizes the 
   second ISP to originate routes to the subscriber's prefixes. (The ISP 
   also creates an EE certificate and ROA for its own advertisement of 
   the subscriber prefix, as above.) This option does not require that 
   the subscriber be issued a certificate or participate in ROA 
   management. Therefore, this option is simpler for the subscriber, and 
   is preferred if the option is supported by the ISP performing the 
   allocation.   




 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 20] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

7.2.3. Portable allocations 

   A resource holder is said to have a portable (provider independent) 
   allocation if the resource holder received its allocation from a 
   regional or national registry.  Because the prefixes represented in 
   such allocations are not taken from an allocation held by an ISP, 
   there is no ISP that holds and advertises a more general prefix. A 
   holder of a portable allocation MUST authorize one or more ASes to 
   originate routes to these prefixes. Thus the resource holder MUST 
   generate one or more EE certificates and associated ROAs to enable 
   the AS(es) to originate routes for the prefix(es) in question. This 
   ROA is required because none of the ISP's existing ROAs authorize it 
   to originate routes to that portable allocation. 

7.3. Route filter construction 

   The goal of this architecture is to support improved routing 
   security.  One way to do this is to use ROAs to construct route 
   filters that reject routes that conflict with the origination 
   authorizations asserted by current ROAs, which can be accomplished 
   with the following procedure: 

     1. Obtain a local copy of all currently valid EE certificates, as 
        specified in Section 5. 

     2. Query the repository system to obtain a local copy of all ROAs 
        issued under the PKI. 

     3. Verify that the each ROA matches the hash value contained in the 
        manifest of the CA certificate used to verify the EE certificate 
        that issued the ROA and that no ROAs are missing. (ROAs are 
        contained in files with a ''.roa'' suffix, so missing ROAs are 
        readily detected.)    

     4. Validate each ROA by verifying that it's signature is verifiable 
        by a valid end-entity certificate that matches the address 
        allocation in the ROA. (See [7] for more details.) 

     5. Based on the validated ROAs, construct a table of prefixes and 
        corresponding authorized origin ASes (or vice versa). 

   A BGP speaker that applies such a filter is thus guaranteed that for 
   a given IP address prefix, all routes that the BGP speaker accepts 
   for that prefix were originated by an AS that is authorized by the 
   owner of the prefix to authorize routes to that prefix.  


 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 21] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

   The first three steps in the above procedure might incur a 
   substantial overhead if all objects in the repository system were 
   downloaded and validated every time a route filter was constructed.  
   Instead, it will be more efficient for users of the infrastructure to 
   initially download all of the signed objects and perform the 
   validation algorithm described above. Subsequently, a relying party 
   need only perform incremental downloads and validations on a regular 
   basis.  A typical ISP using the infrastructure might have a daily 
   schedule to download updates from the repository, upload any 
   modifications it has made, and construct route filters. 

   It should be noted that the transition to 4-byte AS numbers (see RFC 
   4893 [13]) weakens the security guarantees achieved by BGP speakers 
   who do not support 4-byte AS numbers (referred to as OLD BGP 
   speakers). RFC 4893 specifies that all 4-byte AS numbers (except 
   those whose first two bytes are entirely zero) be mapped to the 
   reserved value 23456 before being sent to a BGP speaker who does not 
   understand 4-byte AS numbers. Therefore, when an ISP creates a route 
   filter for use by an OLD BGP speaker, it must allow any 4-byte AS 
   number to advertise routes for an IP address prefix if there exists a 
   ROA that authorizes any 4-byte AS number to advertise routes to that 
   prefix. This means that if an OLD BGP speaker accepts a route that 
   was originated by an AS with a 4-byte AS number, there is no 
   guarantee that it was originated by an authorized 4-byte AS number 
   (unless the route was propagated by an intermediate NEW BGP speaker 
   who performed route filtering as described above). 

8. Security Considerations 

   The focus of this document is security; hence security considerations 
   permeate this specification. 

   The security mechanisms provided by and enabled by this architecture 
   depend on the integrity and availability of the infrastructure it 
   describes.  The integrity of objects within the infrastructure is 
   ensured by appropriate controls on the repository system, as 
   described in Section 4.4. Likewise, because the repository system is 
   structured as a distributed database, it should be inherently 
   resistant to denial of service attacks; nonetheless, appropriate 
   precautions should also be taken, both through replication and backup 
   of the constituent databases and through the physical security of 
   database servers 

9. IANA Considerations 

   This document makes no request of IANA.  

 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 22] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an 
   RFC 

10. Acknowledgments 

   The architecture described in this draft is derived from the 
   collective ideas and work of a large group of individuals. This work 
   would not have been possible without the intellectual contributions 
   of George Michaelson, Robert Loomans, Sanjaya and Geoff Huston of 
   APNIC, Robert Kisteleki and Henk Uijterwaal of the RIPE NCC, Time 
   Christensen and Cathy Murphy of ARIN, Rob Austein of ISC and Randy 
   Bush of IIJ.  

   Although we are indebted to everyone who has contributed to this 
   architecture, we would like to especially thank Rob Austein for the 
   concept of a manifest, Geoff Huston for the concept of managing 
   object validity through single-use EE certificate key pairs, and 
   Richard Barnes for help in preparing an early version of this 
   document. 




























 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 23] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

11. References 

11.1. Normative References 

   [1]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

   [2]   Rekhter, Y., Li, T., and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway Protocol 4 
         (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, January 2006 

   [3]   Housley, R., et al., "Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure 
         Certificate and Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile", RFC 
         3280, April 2002. 

   [4]   Housley, R., ''Cryptographic Message Syntax'', RFC 3852, July 
         2004. 

   [5]   Lynn, C., Kent, S., and K. Seo, "X.509 Extensions for IP            
         Addresses and AS Identifiers", RFC 3779, June 2004. 

   [6]   Huston, G., Michaelson, G., and Loomans, R., "A Profile for 
         X.509 PKIX Resource Certificates", draft-ietf-sidr-res-certs-
         09, November 2007. 

   [7]   Lepinski, M., Kent, S., and Kong, D., "A Profile for Route 
         Origin Authorizations (ROA)", draft-ietf-sidr-roa-format-02, 
         February 2008. 

   [8]   Austein, R., et al., ''Manifests for the Resource Public Key 
         Infrastructure'', draft-ietf-sidr-rpki-manifests-00, January 
         2008. 

11.2. Informative References 

   [9]   Huston, G., Michaelson, G., and Loomans, R., ''A Profile for 
         Resource Certificate Repository Structure'', draft-huston-sidr-
         repos-struct-01, February 2008. 

   [10]  Kent, S., Lynn, C., and Seo, K., "Secure Border Gateway 
         Protocol (Secure-BGP)'', IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in 
         Communications Vol. 18, No. 4, April 2000.  

   [11]  White, R., "soBGP", May 2005, <ftp://ftp-
         eng.cisco.com/sobgp/index.html>  

   [12]   Tridgell, A., "rsync", April 2006, 
         <http://samba.anu.edu.au/rsync/>  
 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 24] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

   [13]  Vohra, Q., and Chen, E., ''BGP Support for Four-octet AS Number 
         Space'', RFC 4893, May 2007. 

 

Authors' Addresses 

   Matt Lepinski 
   BBN Technologies 
   10 Moulton St. 
   Cambridge, MA 02138 
       
   Email: mlepinski@bbn.com 
    
    
   Stephen Kent 
   BBN Technologies 
   10 Moulton St. 
   Cambridge, MA 02138 
       
   Email: kent@bbn.com 

    

Intellectual Property Statement 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 25] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture          February 2008 
    

Disclaimer of Validity 

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS 
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 

 




























 
 
Lepinski and Kent      Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 26] 

