



Network Working Group                                        R. Van Rein
Internet-Draft                                           OpenFortress.nl
Intended status: Standards Track                         27 January 2022
Expires: 31 July 2022


            Requirements for Domain-Issued Currency (Monee)
                      draft-vanrein-monee-reqs-00

Abstract

   Monee allows people to operate a currency under a domain name, using
   a monetary system that expresses value added, not debt.  Currency is
   intentionally created where and when value is added, and destroyed
   where and when value is destroyed.  Inflation is possible, but
   revealed as a temporary blot on a currency.  New currencies are
   bootstrapped locally and may then expand in expanding circles.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 31 July 2022.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.



Van Rein                  Expires 31 July 2022                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Monee Requirements               January 2022


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  History of Currencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.2.  Monee as Transparant Currency . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     1.3.  Monee as Network Currency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     1.4.  Monee as Humane Currency  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     1.5.  Monee as Transition Currency  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   2.  Currency Identitification and Naming  . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   3.  Balance Information and Transaction Information . . . . . . .   9
     3.1.  Basic Balance and Transactions  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     3.2.  Bootstrap Balance and Transactions  . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     3.3.  Conflict Balance and Transactions . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     3.4.  Balance and Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     3.5.  Storage Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
     3.6.  Technology Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   4.  Paths between Currencies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
     4.1.  Evaluating a Foreign Currency . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
     4.2.  Suggesting a Trading Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     4.3.  Trusting Currency Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22

1.  Introduction

   This requirements document introduces the currency design of Monee,
   along with the data and procedures that are needed for it.  The
   design is abstract, framing the requirements of an interoperable
   protocol.

   TODO: Much of the Introduction section is interpretation, and not
   technical.  Unsure whether this should stay here, but some
   introduction into the underlying concepts of Monee are necessary,
   somewhere.

   Monee supports two economic schools of thought; TODO-check-
   literature-for-details: it defaults to the Austrian school of
   economics around Mises and Hayek, where money is fully backed, like
   under the gold standard; it can also support Keynesian economy of
   inflation through partial reserves as a temporary approach to growth.
   A core value of Monee is that it makes this distinction abundantly
   clear, and enables markets to trade with fully backed currency with
   individual exceptions being made outside of such markets and based on
   detailed information about the level of inflation.  Gresham's law



Van Rein                  Expires 31 July 2022                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Monee Requirements               January 2022


   suggests that users will prefer fully backed currencies.  Currencies
   with partial backing complicate the negotations because of the risk
   involved.

   Monee can achieve price stability, and has no need for any interest
   rate.  Rather than borrowing and debt, the concept of the currencies
   is to show added (real) value.  For bootstrapping of new initiatives,
   early adopters may choose to share in the risk and possibly receive a
   higher award upon success.  Islamic banking bans interest, and has
   shown similar mechanisms to work well.

1.1.  History of Currencies

   During barter trade, two persons swap goods at a negotiated ratio.
   Using money as an intermediate value, barter trade can be split into
   two transactions.  These halves of the barter trade no longer need to
   find each other to trade directly.

   The first forms of money were coins from valuable materials like gold
   or cocoa beans; or they were rare natural things like sea shells.
   When these monetary forms were replaced with debt statements, they
   became easier to handle.  But paper statements are easy to produce,
   so it was however necessary to trust the party who issued such debt
   statements.  Initially, debt statements were issued by gold smiths
   who stored gold in their vaults; later, this became a service of
   national banks.

   Given the convenience of handling money, stored gold is not taken out
   a lot, and it could be assumed that only a part of it would ever be
   called for, which paved the way for betrayal, wherein more debt
   statements were issued than covered in gold.  This is called
   inflation.  More debt statements represent the same productivity and
   the market mechanism renegotiates prices; after some time, the
   purchasing power of a debt statement is lower.

   Inflation used to be done in secret, and later publicly introduced as
   a temporary measure.  Having learned that it is never reversed, the
   democratic variant on secrecy is to present it openly but in an
   incomprehensible manner.  Deflation, which is the reverse process,
   calls upon the original over-spending party to destroy their debt
   statements, which is a painful encounter with their over-spending; it
   corrects the purchasing value, but this advantage is evenly spread
   over all other debt statements.  So it calls upon a party to weaken
   its own position to benefit others.  Deflation is highly unlikely and
   is rarely implemented.






Van Rein                  Expires 31 July 2022                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Monee Requirements               January 2022


   The situations worsens when inflation is not measured as a coverage
   ratio of debt statements divided by its backing, but if it rises as
   an annual percentage.  This means that purchasing power is
   continually being eroded, and discourages long-term savings such as
   pensions.  It also suggests towards fast consumption, instead of
   investing in future purchasing power.

   Since inflation benefits those who release debt statements, it
   disadvantages those who work to add real human value to an economy.
   The result is a financial industry that trades with excessive amounts
   of money that have no relation to the amounts of money available to
   people who are actually productive.  Also, without democratic
   controls over how this money is spent, it has become completely
   uninteresting to the financial industry to deal with the small
   amounts of money involved in sustaining productivity.

   Inflation causes current savings to reduce in purchasing power in the
   future.  This is a motivation for consumption, rather than saving or
   investing for future financial resilience.  This triggers
   consumption, even if this is unwise in the long run and makes
   humanity as a whole consume more resources than our one planet can
   sustain.

   Under inflation, people with more money than they can spend see their
   posessions erode, unless they invest it somewhere.  A common
   structure is then to apply an interest rate to compensate for
   inflation, compensate for a risk of defaulting and perhaps add extra
   for profit.  Interest works as a money pump from those who lack money
   to those who have it.  Contrast this to Islamic banking, where the
   lender partakes in business risk and profit, often with some control
   over how the investment money is put to use.  Combining this system
   of investment with one free of inflation, there would be no principal
   cause left to hamper price stability.  Investing always incurs a
   risk, and should never be done with money that cannot be missed; in
   this light, it is a good sign that price stability takes away the
   pressure to invest.  Those with money to invest can use it to help
   develop the economic activity of others, and may spread their risk by
   relating to more than one other.

1.2.  Monee as Transparant Currency

   Monee permits inflation, but only as a local property of a currency,
   and it is blatantly clear.  This clarity will usually limit trading
   partners to those who want to support a new business initiative, and
   who are willing to take a temporary risk while it is starting.  As
   long as the value added exceeds the value taken for it, there is a
   possibility for profit, which allows the currency to deflate and
   evolve to one that is fully backed.



Van Rein                  Expires 31 July 2022                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Monee Requirements               January 2022


   From then on, there is no longer a need to risk inflation and price
   instability when trading with this currency; as long as growth takes
   a careful pace, it can be fully backed by confirmations of having
   added value.  By constraining trading partners until this point, it
   is now beneficial to the currency issuer to deflate it to the point
   where value has been added.  Any excess value can be spent freely in
   trading, both in support of uncertain new initiatives and for
   everyday trading with fully backed Monee currencies.

   TODO: Find a way to represent interest, outlandish as it may be to
   Monee.

1.3.  Monee as Network Currency

   Monee uses network connectivity to allow people to trade directly,
   and express offering of value by minting their own currency.  Value
   is considered to have been added when it is confirmed by another who
   cancels some of their own currency in return for it.  This might be
   called a trade, but the currency is an expression of value added
   rather than a debt statement; under the Monee system, being rich is
   the same as having been useful to others.

   Monee needs to establish a market mechanism, both to find the
   exchange ratios between currencies and to establish trust in any
   statements made for a currency.  The exchange ratio must leave room
   for mutual profit, so the ratio is not the same in both directions,
   but comparing them is a possible factor to consider when evaluating
   trust.  Other elements of this trust evaluation are the degree of
   overlap in mutually trusted relations.  Parallel and sequential paths
   via such relations can be used to derive a suggested trading ratio
   between the currencies.  This information is free for interpretation
   by anyone (and their software should help with this) and will depend
   on individual taste and the level of risk that one can tolerate.  In
   the absense of inflation it does seem reasonable to expect price
   stability by default.

   Contrast that with speculation, like on markets for bulk goods (rice,
   beans, ...) which works by predicting their future prices and trading
   them through bond futures, causing a rise in the sales price of such
   bulk goods.  This benefits traders but is financed with inflated
   money and can raise the cost of living for the poorest on the planet.
   Such derived financial products are difficult to make with Monee.
   Debt is transferrable, but that is not true for confirmations of
   value-adding, nor for promises of such future confirmations.  Without
   interest, many financial derivatives are impossible.  Price stability
   takes away most gambling power, because it makes Monee currency
   owners less prone to accept uncertainty, in the interest of their own
   purchasing power.  TODO:IS:ALL:THIS:CORRECT?



Van Rein                  Expires 31 July 2022                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Monee Requirements               January 2022


1.4.  Monee as Humane Currency

   Monee currencies work like a wallet.  Currency increases in return
   for work, and it decreases when taking out value added by others.
   This is how everyday money works.  The difference is that the wallet
   has its own currency, which is created when and where value is added,
   and destroyed when and where value disappears.

   Being empowered to create currency astounds many, but it allows Monee
   to express added value, rather than owning someone else's debt; Monee
   has a more constructive approach to money.  Most considering money
   creation get naughty, imagining the minting of piles of money, but
   they soon realise that money is not a purpose of its own.  Their real
   wish is purchasing power, which calls for trust in the currency, and
   inflation backfires on that.  Inflation has bad karma in Monee, and
   modesty forbids from boundless creation of currency.  This makes
   Monee a tool for achieving price stability.

   The ability to create money is an open invitation to people to think
   about how they can earn it.  Put differently, how they can be
   producers rather than mere consumers driven by market powers.  Even
   the backfiring effect of inflation should not be a show-stopper,
   because it is simpler than monetary restrictions imposed by banks,
   employers and governments.  Most people can be useful to others in
   ways that they themselves find trivial; it is social and economical
   to let that develop.  Variety in currencies has been shown before to
   empower people who failed to function under the stifled mechanisms of
   national currencies.

   A vital part of Monee is that it can be bootstrapped from small
   communities, without any call on outside funding.  Barter trade is
   the simplest way to establish trust between local peers, but more
   elaborate schemes can also be founded in local trust.  An initial
   currency may be inflationary, and show for it, but locality can
   provide an alternate basis of trust and help a new initiative to get
   started by sharing in its risk.  To this end, promises to future
   payments may be considered acceptable, as an explicit inflationary
   form of spending but possibly at a different exchange ratio than
   would have been the case without inflation.  All this can be done
   without a bank.

   Note how this means that interest is not required under Monee.
   Interest is a problematic concept, because it rises at an exponential
   pace while pumping funds from those who need it to those who already
   have it.  To achieve price stability, one should not engage in
   offerings with interest rates but instead be open to differentiated
   pricing to reflect variations in risk.




Van Rein                  Expires 31 July 2022                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Monee Requirements               January 2022


   Most businesses generate a profit at some point, and this allows them
   to deflate their currency.  Since inflation is blatantly obvious, it
   quickly becomes a personal wish to get it out of the way.  Providers
   who started off with inflated currency will see the gradual drop in
   inflation and that would keep them happy.  In general, businesses may
   need to pop in and out of inflation, and the amount of inflation can
   be taken as a sign of some despair.

   When businesses mature, they will start looking for more customers.
   This would be a gradual process, based on an expanding network where
   potential customers judge their connectivity to a new business
   relation based on overlap in networks.  Initially a new business may
   be mostly isolated from anyone else, but it is normal for the network
   to spread and bring new customers in reach.  This may call for more
   uncertainty, increasing with distance.

   This mostly repeals branding strategies of marketing; the network
   offers word-of-mouth as a better recommendation, and there is little
   use to instignate some perceived value to give the product a
   superficial gleam; this would work when customers are disconnected,
   but connections between them may easily lead to ridiculing an
   inaccurate gleam.  In short, this model is not a yellow-brick road to
   World Domination.  It is not expected to scale at an exponential
   pace, or to a monstrous size.  This may make it more supportive of
   diversity and less of monotonicity.

1.5.  Monee as Transition Currency

   Inflated currencies erode purchasing power.  Such currencies are
   unfit to save money in, but the same effect eases the burden of
   payback on a loan.  Governments are aware of this, and sustain loans
   over very long periods, if not indefinitely.

   Monee can offer price stability, and is therefore likely to become a
   currency of choice for everyday trading (according to Gresham's law).
   It is also a more likely form of savings, possibly with 100% backing
   by commodities such as gold.

   This may cause users to move away from inflating currencies, which
   can be tolerated if it happens at a calm pace.  Cash withdrawal pulls
   inflated portions away from financial markets, but if those are
   expected then it is feasible to prepare for the change.  In the
   asymptotic case, only loans would remain in these inflationary
   systems.  These could be based with 100% covering commidities that
   the banks take out of circulation.






Van Rein                  Expires 31 July 2022                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             Monee Requirements               January 2022


   Monee can also be used to express inflationary national currencies,
   posted under the domain names of (central) banks.  This would release
   vital trading information in an easily understood form, and may be
   seen as part of democratic accountability.  It may also be used for
   risk assessment while trading it with Monee currencies.  Monee
   considers a (central) bank as any other user who mints their own
   currency.

   Governments are encouraged to interact with Monee and not force their
   citizens to convert to an inflationary currency.  History has often
   shown that it empowers citizens to welcome alternate currencies,
   provided they can be normally earned and spent.  Being able to
   interact with one's government in terms of these alternate currencies
   offers great protection in times that a national currency fails.
   This yields protection from such catastrophies as runs on a bank,
   attacks on banking infrastructure, hyperinflation and bursting
   bubbles.  This protecion works for citizens as well as their
   government.

   This transition may well remove funds from financial markets.  This
   should reduce investments with unbacked currency that drive up prices
   of bulk goods such as corn and soy.  It will also improve the ratio
   between the circulated debt and any commodities held by (central)
   banks, and thereby deflate their currency.  The trick is now to use
   this change to remove inflation completely, and grow into a fully
   backed currency.  The adoption of Monee as a payment system for
   everyday trade is likely to incraase sensitivity for partial reserve,
   and make a currency less acceptable if it is inflationary.  After
   all, under Monee a (central) bank is just another creator of money.

   It is a good idea to have standardised exchange options, which remove
   money from one system and inject it into another.  The exchange task
   may involve a mix of accounted storage of cash with audited
   destruction of superfluous cash.  Such things might be organised by
   individuals, under guidance of a bank's statements as to what no
   longer constitutes legal tender, but this is could be a bit messy; it
   does not benefit monetary stability if people start posting videos in
   which they give public proof of an exchange by burning uniquely
   numbered bank notes.  Standard exchange options should be helpful to
   smoothen any such transition.

   Assuming that everyday trading converts to one with stable prices, it
   would be riskful to take out loans that incur an interest rate.  The
   model of Islamic banking is the more attractive form of external
   funding, bringing participation and financial guidance instead of
   relentless payment obligations with a worst-case risk of bankruptcy.





Van Rein                  Expires 31 July 2022                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             Monee Requirements               January 2022


   This transition is expected to reestablish trust in the financial
   industry, and a gradual process as described above is probably a more
   desirable process than waiting for the rupture of banks and their
   currencies.

2.  Currency Identitification and Naming

   Monee currencies are identified by a public key and it has a starting
   time that is incorporated into every signature with the key.
   Signatures are used to commit to balance sheets and transactions.
   Detached signatures are summarised in a distributed hash table,
   rendering the signed information undeniable because the currency
   looses control over publication locations.

   Besides an identity, a currency can have any number of names that
   consist of a domain name and a currency name.  The currency name may
   be prefixed with "+monee+" (without quotes) to form a user name; for
   a domain name ecb.int and currency name euro, a URL-style name
   +monee+euro@ecb.int can be used with protocols like email, chat or
   telephony.  The domain name is used to locate a database that can
   provide balance and transaction details to match the signature
   information found in the distributed hash table.  Aliases could
   exist, but the signing key that forms the identity is the only way to
   engage in minting transactions.

   During its life, a currency may add or remove names.  There may be
   multiple consecutive names, but for the same identity they must
   represent the same information.  In times when a currency has no
   name, it cannot be operated.  This specification considers only
   domain-based names, but future extensions may add variants.  Not all
   implementations may be able to connect to all names of a currency,
   and the domain-based form should be a fair default scheme for most
   general uses.

3.  Balance Information and Transaction Information

   To support the functions of a Monee system, parties must learn of
   each other's currencies by way of a balance sheet with standard items
   that software can evaluate to guide policy-based decisions.  The
   information that is made available aims to balance between the
   privacy of individual trades and the purpose of establishing how a
   currency developed in history.

   Transactions take place on two balance sheets at the same time, and
   each has its own currency and value.  In addition, conflict
   resolution may call for third party involvement.  The following
   symbols will be used to change the balances in the respective
   currencies used for the role:



Van Rein                  Expires 31 July 2022                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             Monee Requirements               January 2022


   VAR   CURRENCY/ROLE   MEANING

    $1   producer        amount of currency
    $2   consumer        amount of currency
    $3   arbiter         amount of currency
    #1   producer        arbitration fee
    #2   consumer        arbitration fee
    #3   arbiter         arbitration fee

3.1.  Basic Balance and Transactions

   This is an example of a basic balance sheet for a Monee currency:

   Liquid     123   Minted         7
                    Valued       116
            -----              -----
   Debit      123   Credit       123

   Transactions often make an atomic change to two balances:

   1.Liquid  123   1.Minted     7          2.Liquid  479  2.Minted    0
                   1.Valued   116                         2.Valued  479
           -----            -----                  -----          -----
   1.Debit   123   1.Credit   123          2.Debit   479  2.Credit  479

   TODO: Find a way to represent interest, outlandish as it may be to
   Monee.

   In this picture, the posts have the following meaning:

   Minted  is the amount of currency that is currently created, without
         having been confirmed as "value added" by another currency.

   Liquid  is the amount of currency available for spending.  Since it
         rises along with Minted, this value is increased as part of
         inflation.

   Valued  is the amount of currency free from inflation.  This value
         equals the Debit sum minus the inflation, which is found in all
         other Credit posts.  In this simple balance sheet, Valued =
         Liquid - Minted.

   In this simple balance sheet, inflation is defined by Minted.

   The following table summarises transactions that operate on these
   balance sheets:





Van Rein                  Expires 31 July 2022                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             Monee Requirements               January 2022


   TRANSACTION   PRECONDITION        UPDATES

   create                            1.Minted += $1, Liquid += $1

   destroy       $1 <= 1.Minted,     1.Minted -= $1, Liquid -= $1
                 $1 <= 1.Liquid

   value         $2 <= 2.Valued,     2.Valued -= $2, 2.Liquid -= $2,
                 $1 <= 2.Liquid      1.Valued += $1, 1.Liquid += $1

   devalue       $1 <= 1.Valued,     1.Valued -= $1, 1.Liquid -= $1
                 $1 <= 1.Liquid

   barter2       $1 <= 1.Minted,     1.Valued += $1, 1.Minted -= $1,
                 $2 <= 2.Minted      2.Valued += $2, 2.Minted -= $2

   Note how value does not change 2.Minted but just adds the value as
   new liquidity.  Minting is a currency-local operation.  Devaluation
   exists for symmetry but does not usually make any sense; it deletes
   information about approval.  Barter trade is mutual value-addition.
   The pattern is simple, with an example shown for 2 people.  Unlike
   the value transaction, the barter operation does not implicitly
   create currency.  The reason is that barter trade always occurs with
   both parties present.

   Note how barter trade offers an elegant mechanism for bootstrapping
   currencies; first each currency mints currency to represent goods
   available for barter trade, and after completing the barter trade
   they have shown the value of the goods they traded by way of the
   currency.

3.2.  Bootstrap Balance and Transactions

   As an extension to the basic balance, this adds a few posts that help
   to bootstrap a currency:

   Liquid     123   Minted         7
                    Promised       6
                    Future        20
                    Valued        90
            -----              -----
   Debit      123   Credit       123

   Transactions often make an atomic change to two balances:







Van Rein                  Expires 31 July 2022                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft             Monee Requirements               January 2022


   1.Liquid  123   1.Minted     7          2.Liquid  479  2.Minted    0
                                                          2.Promised  6
                   1.Future    20
                   1.Valued    96                         2.Valued  473
           -----            -----                  -----          -----
   1.Debit   123   1.Credit   123          2.Debit   479  2.Credit  479

   In this picture, the posts have the following meaning:

   Promised  is the amount of currency that we used to confirm added
         value in other currencies.  Normally that would lower the
         Liquid post, but initially that may be too low and so the
         Promised post is increased.  Soon after the Liquid is high
         enough, both the Liquid and Promised posts will be reduced.
         Promise!

   Future  is the amount of currency for added value, but the ones
         expressing that needed to raise their Promised post instead of
         lowering their Liquid post.  The value in Future moves to
         Liquid at the same time as the reduction of Liquid and Promised
         in the other currency.

   Valued  is the amount of currency free from inflation.  In this
         simple balance sheet, Valued = Liquid - ( Minted + Future +
         Promised ) although the total amount of appreciation is then
         Valued + Future, but assuming that might take in a risk from
         this currency.

   In this balance sheet, inflation is defined by Minted + Promised +
   Future.

   This example balance shows the two sides of a promise in one balance
   sheet; this is not always combined.  Once in stable operation, a
   currency is likely to have no Promised post left, but it may still
   support others through the Future post.  Those others then have the
   matching Promised post.

   The following table summarises the new transactions that operate on
   these balance sheets:












Van Rein                  Expires 31 July 2022                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft             Monee Requirements               January 2022


TRANSACTION   PRECONDITION        UPDATES

promise       $2 <= 2.Minted      2.Promised += $2, 2.Minted -= $2,
                                  1.Future   += $1, 1.Liquid += $1

monetise      $2 <= 2.Promised,   1.Future   -= $1, 1.Valued += $1,
              $2 <= 2.Valued,     2.Promised -= $2, 2.Minted += $2,
              $1 <= 1.Future      2.Valued   -= $2, 2.Minted += $2
#TODO# CHECK THIS CAREFULLY, DISAPPEARS TWICE FROM 2.Credit?!?

deliver       $2 <= 2.Promised,   2.Promised -= $2, 2.Liquid -= $2,
              $2 <= 2.Liquid,     1.Future   -= $1, 1.Valued += $1,
              $1 <= 1.Future
#TODO# CHECK THIS CAREFULLY, DOES NOT DISAPPEAR FROM 2.Valued?!?

defect        $1 <= 1.Future      1.Future   -= $1, 1.Minted += $1

#DROPPED# $2 <= 2.Liquid,\n$2 <= 2.Promised,   2.Promised -= $2, 2.Liquid -= $2,

   Note how promises show up as inflation until they are delivered by
   the consumer or monetised by the producer; promises are like holding
   a promise to payment without having turned it into money.  Defecting
   on a promise is considered a destructive step to take, but it stops
   weighing on this inflation post.

3.3.  Conflict Balance and Transactions

   It would be harmful to stability if a statement of added value could
   be retracted.  On the other hand, trading conflicts are a reality
   that should be dealt with.  In fact, showing (unresolved) conflicts
   as part of the balance information can provide useful information.
   This option exists for those currencies who intend to promise
   confliction resolution to simplify the formation of new trust.

   Disputes should not be a one-sided mechanism to overpower a currency.
   Disputes made by parties who complain all the time must be considered
   of lower impact on a currency's trustworthiness than complaints by
   parties who rarely complain.

   A complaint about falsely provided information, such as suppressing a
   transaction or forking another sequence of balances is considered
   well-founded, and can be formally verified.  Temporary downtime of a
   database may end up as unfounded when the currency comes up in
   reasonable time.

   Procedures to settle a conflict may start with an attempt by the
   currency issuer to correct any problems.  When this is not considered
   reasonable, a mutually agreeable third party may be asked to provide



Van Rein                  Expires 31 July 2022                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft             Monee Requirements               January 2022


   arbitrage.  To enable such settlements, the parties should allow the
   third party to control the currency booking, which they reserve on
   special balance posts.  The arbiter may require additional funding of
   the procedure by the loosing party.

   When trading conflicts is raised after a party adds value to our
   currency, we need a few more balance posts:

   Liquid     123   Minted         7
                    Argued         0
                    Debated        3
                    Arbiter        1
                    Valued       112
            -----              -----
   Debit      123   Credit       123

   Transactions often make an atomic change to two balances, and not
   shown here, may even update the balance of an arbiter:

   1.Liquid  123   1.Minted     7          2.Liquid  479  2.Minted    0
                                                          2.Argued    1
                   1.Debated    3
                   1.Arbiter    1
                   1.Valued   112                         2.Valued  478
           -----            -----                  -----          -----
   1.Debit   123   1.Credit   123          2.Debit   479  2.Credit  479

   Note that the Argued post is on the client side of an argument while
   Debated and Arbiter sit on the serving side.

   In this picture, the posts have the following meaning:

   Argued  is the amount of currency that was subtracted from Valued in
         exchange for services, but that is now being questioned.  The
         other side will first save the value in their Debated post and
         may later move it into their Arbiter post.  When settled,
         Argued is reduced by the amount and either Valued or Minted is
         raised.

   Debated  is the amount of currency that was Valued but later gave
         rise to discussion.  This may apply to all or part of the added
         value.  It may be resolved between the two currencies, or a
         mutually agreeable third may be asked to listen in.  When
         settled, Debated is reduced by the amount and either Liquid is
         reduced or Valued is raised again.

   Arbiter  is the amount of currency that was Debated but with no




Van Rein                  Expires 31 July 2022                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft             Monee Requirements               January 2022


         mutual resolution it has been forwarded to a third party for
         arbitrage.  When settled, Arbiter is reduced by the amount and
         either Liquid is reduced or Valued is raised again.

   Valued  is the amount of currency free from inflation.  This value
         equals the Debit sum minus the inflation, which is found in all
         other Credit posts.  In this simple balance sheet, Valued =
         Liquid - ( Minted + Argued + Debated + Arbiter ).

   In this balance sheet, inflation is defined by Minted + Argued +
   Debated + Arbiter.  The reason to include Debated is that it is not
   Valued and may be a sign of inflation.  Individual policies for trust
   in currencies may of course override this, and choose to not take
   Debated into account as part of inflation.

   The conflict resolution operations reference a prior transaction, but
   they introduce their own values for $1 and $2 which must not be
   higher than in the referenced transaction, and whose ratios must
   match that of the original transaction.

   The following table summarises the new transactions that operate on
   these balance sheets:

TRANSACTION   PRECONDITION        UPDATES

debate        $1 <= 1.Valued      1.Debated += $1, 1.Valued -= $1,
                                  2.Argued  += $2, 2.Liquid += $2

settleF       $1 <= 1.Debated,    1.Debated -= $1, 1.Minted += $1,
              $2 <= 2.Argued      2.Argued  -= $2, 2.Valued += $2

settleU       $1 <= 1.Debated,    1.Debated -= $1, 1.Valued += $1,
              $2 <= 2.Argued,     2.Argued  -= $2, 2.Minted += $2

escalate      $1 <= 1.Liquid      1.Arbiter += $1, 1.Liquid -= $1

rulingF       $1 <= 1.Arbiter,    1.Arbiter -= $1, 1.Minted += $1,
              $2 <= 2.Argued      2.Argued  -= $2, 2.Minted += $2,
                                  1.Minted  += #1, 3.Valued += #3  TODO:BALANCE

rulingU       $1 <= 1.Arbiter,    1.Arbiter -= $1, 1.Valued += $1,
              $2 <= 2.Argued      2.Argued  -= $2, 2.Minted += $2,
                                  2.Minted  += #2, 3.Valued += #3  TODO:BALANCE

   After a debate is opened, the two parties may reach a mutual
   settlement, and if that fails then the Debate can be escalted to a
   mutually agreed Arbiter to pass a ruling.  The settle and ruling
   transactions can be any composition of F/U partials, for founded/



Van Rein                  Expires 31 July 2022                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft             Monee Requirements               January 2022


   unfounded.  Arbitration costs an amount #3 which is split over #1 and
   #2, and also into F/U partials.  The ratios between $1 and $2 (and
   $3) is always the same as in the debated transaction, as is the case
   for #1, #2 and #3.  After handling a conflict, funds may be dumped in
   Minted, which may then be cleaned up locally by destroying that
   amount of currency; take note that a few changes in one transaction
   may add up.

   Monee may develop to standardise conflict resolution procedures and
   funding mechanisms.

3.4.  Balance and Processes

   Operations on balances are restricted to a few well-known
   transactions.  These transactions have preconditions.  In addition,
   some transactions are follow-ups on other transactions and must be
   the only follow-up.

   Yet another constraint on transactions is that they are signed by a
   deciding party, which is usually the one whose currency is
   disadvantaged.  The other party can keep a copy and has proof at any
   future time if a transaction was to be removed.

   The following table shows per transaction who will sign the
   transaction and for follow-up transactions which other kind it may
   reference:

   TRANSACTION   SIGNER     REFERENCES

   create        producer   -
   destroy       producer   -
   barter        TODO:??    -
   value         consumer   -
   devalue       producer   -

   promise       consumer   -
   monetise      producer   promise
   deliver       consumer   promise
   defect        producer   promise

   debate        consumer   value
   debate        TODO:??    barter
   settle        producer   debate
   escalate      producer   debate
   escalate      consumer   debate
   escalate      consumer   settle
   ruling        arbiter    escalate




Van Rein                  Expires 31 July 2022                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft             Monee Requirements               January 2022


3.5.  Storage Considerations

   Transactions occur in all currencies impacted by them.  One currency
   is generally disadvantaged, and this is the one to sign the
   transaction.  The other end can use the signature to enforce the
   existence of the transaction.  It is considered an offense if such a
   transaction is removed from either side, and a reason for corrective
   measures, possibly even discrediting the failing currency so spending
   it becomes difficult.

   Old trading history may be summarised to accommodate privacy, as long
   as it continues to assure inclusion of past transactions.  Bloom
   filters tuned to a low risk of false positives accommodate that.  The
   entries would be hashes of issuer-signed agreements with others,
   which those others may at any time test for presence of a
   transaction.

   Balances and intervening transactions are combined into a Merkle
   tree.  This is helpful for verifying that no changes were made in
   previously committed records.  Committing such balances is done by
   signing the Merkle tree outcome with the currency's public key and
   publishing the result.

   The Merkle values are computed as follows:

   *  The initial Merkle hash is computed over the starting time and the
      public key.  The initial balance is not explicitly incorporated;
      its balance posts are all-zero and its timestamp is the starting
      time.

   *  Other currencies may be referenced by this same hash, computed
      with their starting time and public key, and also no initial
      balance.

   *  Each transaction is hashed as its binary representation followed
      by the binary representation of the new balance, including the
      hash over its starting time and public key.

   *  Each balance is hash as its binary representation, including the
      timestamp for the balance, the balance posts and a Bloom filter
      incorporating all the binary representations of other currencies
      changed in transactions since the preceding balance.

   *  After one or more transactions, a new Merkle hash is computed over
      the previous Merkle hash, a list of transaction hashes in time
      order and a balance hash that applies at the end.





Van Rein                  Expires 31 July 2022                 [Page 17]

Internet-Draft             Monee Requirements               January 2022


   The last value is signed by the currency's public key, and published
   in the distributed hash table as a follow-up to the prior Merkle hash
   for the then-latest balance.  New currencies start by publishing the
   initial Merkle hash to make such a then-latest balance available.

3.6.  Technology Considerations

   Merkle trees are sensitive to their input formatting; this should be
   a canonical form, with a unique representation for every combination
   of data values.  The traditional format for such security
   requirements has long been DER, and newer approaches have stuggled
   with these requirements, so DER still seems like the best option.
   DER includes framing of the encoded data.

   To retrieve data from a remote server, we can benefit from abilities
   such as search, synchronise and access control.  It is useful to
   point to a database server from DNS records [RFC2782].  There is only
   one portable database protocol that goes this far with its
   standardised support, and that is LDAP [RFC4511].  It also happens to
   integrate well with DER (it uses the more general BER format for the
   protocol).

   The publication of data in a distributed hash tree calls for a
   network; ideally, this is a generally agreed-upon form, such as
   Kademlia (which currently is not standardised).  The contents of
   Kademlia would point from one signed Merkle tree to the next one.  An
   interesting variation might be GNUnet, which more difficult to attack
   because its route starts with a few random legs.

4.  Paths between Currencies

4.1.  Evaluating a Foreign Currency

   TODO

   *  Inflation of a currency is defined as the sum of Minted and
      Promised posts.  It should not be considered relative to Valued
      and/or Future, because scaling with current size expresses support
      for exponential growth, which may impair diversity.  To benefit
      stability and quality, it is better to consider inflation as a
      ratio of the considered ValueAddition.










Van Rein                  Expires 31 July 2022                 [Page 18]

Internet-Draft             Monee Requirements               January 2022


   *  Minting is a sign of inflation, and must be considered carefully.
      Liquid businesses have it set to 0, young businesses may be a bit
      higher, but it is a sign of growth and that may interfere with
      diversity.  If minting is allowed to be a percentage, it would
      support exponential growth, rather than a linear pace from fixed
      minting where individual attention can be applied.  When
      considering minting, consider it in relation to the value that is
      about to be added.

   *  Futures are a sign of being helped out to develop or grow.  It is
      a sign that others expressed trust, although it matters who they
      are and whether they are actually trying to pay on their promise.
      This means that Futures are something to consider carefully, but
      not to reject too quickly.  It depends on the willingness to
      investigate.

   *  Promises are a sign of having started to help out others, but when
      the Value post is high enough, then a Promise is a sign that this
      work is not finished, stopping the supported party from getting
      started.

   *  When the distributed hash table points to a newer balance,
      consider what caused this surprise.  Your cache may need updating,
      but the currency's database should never be behind.

   *  Trust should be combined with the above to derive a risk estimate.
      The precise computation is a matter of local taste.  When clients
      decide what the norms are, then sellers can choose how selective
      they want to be.  The model should not load the decision code into
      clients, so as not to replicate the privacy assaults that have
      become the norm under HTTP.

   *  Exchange rates that differ wildly in the two directions may be
      considered suspect.  See the next section for suggestions of a
      trading ratio.

   Monee may develop to standardise requirement profiles.  This probably
   starts with choices between software configurations.

4.2.  Suggesting a Trading Ratio

   Any expression that a foreign currency has added value is paired to a
   reduction in a visiting currency.  This calls for an exchange rate
   between the two currencies.  A prior exchange rate could serve as a
   hint, especially because a system without inflation can offer price
   stability.  In lieu of such history it can be useful to suggest an
   exchange ratio.




Van Rein                  Expires 31 July 2022                 [Page 19]

Internet-Draft             Monee Requirements               January 2022


   Suggested trading ratios are never more than a suggestion; they may
   be accepted or rejected by either side.  The best derivations
   consider a risk for various trading ratios, thereby giving grounds
   for negotiation and even supportive of policy automation; payments
   for online media access can be more riskful than for physically
   sending gold nuggets.

   Any paths between the two currencies can be taken into account, but
   the relationships for adding value form a directed graph, and the
   opposite relationship is strictly unrelated.  Sequential paths
   between the two currencies can each suggest a ratio, and these may be
   multiplied to find the path's overall ratio.  Parallel paths may be
   taken as alternatives, and a (weighted) average, possibly with
   standard deviation, can be used to combine their suggestions.
   Finally, overlapping portions of parallel paths may be applied with a
   reduced weight to allow equal impact by all legs.

   Monee may develop to standardise ratio calculations.  This probably
   starts with choices between software configurations.

4.3.  Trusting Currency Information

   Monee is not different from other currencies when it comes to trust,
   but a network of individual currencies does need to evaluate trust
   more carefully.  Central banks conceal the relations of their
   currency to other currencies and, increasingly, debt of bankrupt
   nations and financial crisis circumventions.  Their currency is a
   package deal, and we can take it or leave it.  Monee allows everyone
   to make their own decisions while trading.

   The reason why people trust money is rather pragmatic: "Will it buy
   me what I need?" and, as part of that, "Will it still be good in the
   future if I accept it now?"  To be accepted, alternative currencies
   always need to take care of this, even if the default currency is in
   a deep crisis; mistrust in an old system does not make people accept
   a new system until these issues are addressed.

   A conservative approach to these questions is 100% backing in an
   asset such as gold.  It is a sufficient condition, but not a
   necessary one.  Care should be taken not to resort to debt papers,
   and continue to focus on added value, but other than that it may well
   be possible to weave asset-backed value notions into a Monee
   currency.

   Monee currencies may choose to add value that may be replicated
   easily, such as growing organic tomatoes, being attentive to another
   person's problems and so on.  These things add value without
   suffering from the poor replication properties of classic money.



Van Rein                  Expires 31 July 2022                 [Page 20]

Internet-Draft             Monee Requirements               January 2022


   This is why Monee allows users to mint their own currency.  It simply
   makes no sense to centralise that function where it has no bearing on
   the value added, and where a lure to abuse would be created.

   When spending Monee, the question is if the person who offers to add
   value will indeed add that value, if proper conflict handling is in
   place in case they do not, and whether others have had trust in this
   offering.  What matters most in this situation is whether the
   appreciation of added value is meaningful to the prospective
   consumer.

   This is why they need to explore the paths from their currency to
   that of the producer, and see if there is overlap with people whose
   judgement they value.  These people are the foundation of the
   upcoming trade.  There might also be intermediates that are
   considered counter-indications, but that mechanism should be used
   with care; this could create a destructive business opportunity
   consisting that adds negative judgement to a (competitor's) currency.
   Likewise, conflict handling is a useful measurement of problematic
   trading, but if a conflict comes from a customer who raises many
   conflicts relative to positive outcomes, then their conflicts are not
   very informative.  Such statusses may in fact be verified by the
   producer before offering or accepting a trade.

   The network over which parties trade is, at least in principle, a
   personal network.  Communities may form, both locally or founded on a
   shared mindset, and function as a hop towards the parties that all
   others are trading with.  A person may trust such a network and, if
   the feeling is mutual, such a network may trust the person too.  This
   adds extra trust validation paths that allows new trading to take
   place.  Note how this does not start from a global scale, but rather
   allows networks to grow.

   In the end, the implementation of trust policies is personal, and
   Monee simply provides the desired information to make reasonable
   judgements.  Software for Monee is likely to provide options with
   parameter tuning, and may even support scripting plugins for
   individual regimens.  To producers, this means that they could be up
   to anything.  The need to protect web browsers from agressive web
   sites suggests that customers should dictate the rules, and producers
   should be welcomed to follow if they want.

   Monee may develop to standardise trust policies.  It would be a
   consumer's choice which one to accept, a standardised one or a
   personal policy.






Van Rein                  Expires 31 July 2022                 [Page 21]

Internet-Draft             Monee Requirements               January 2022


5.  Security Considerations

   TODO: Trust in information being supplied, specifically completeness.

   TODO: Where to find information that discredits a currency.

6.  IANA Considerations

   None.

7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2782]  Gulbrandsen, A., Vixie, P., and L. Esibov, "A DNS RR for
              specifying the location of services (DNS SRV)", RFC 2782,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2782, February 2000,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2782>.

7.2.  Informative References

   [RFC4511]  Sermersheim, J., Ed., "Lightweight Directory Access
              Protocol (LDAP): The Protocol", RFC 4511,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4511, June 2006,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4511>.

Author's Address

   Rick van Rein
   OpenFortress.nl
   Haarlebrink 5
   Enschede

   Email: rick@openfortress.nl

















Van Rein                  Expires 31 July 2022                 [Page 22]
