


Network Working Group                                        J. Korhonen
Internet-Draft                                               TeliaSonera
Expires: March 5, 2006                                           S. Park
                                                     SAMSUNG Electronics
                                                                J. Zhang
                                                      University of York
                                                          September 2005


   Link Characteristic Information for IP Mobility Problem Statement
         draft-korhonen-mobopts-link-characteristics-ps-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 5, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This document discusses the problems related to the link
   characteristic information delivery from the mobile node to other
   relevant network nodes.  The purpose of this document is to set the
   scope and goals for possible future work on generic link
   characteristic information delivery for optimizing IP mobility



Korhonen, et al.          Expires March 5, 2006                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Link Characteristic Information      September 2005


   performance.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1   Overview of the Problem  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2   Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Assumptions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Background and Motivations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1   Multimode Wireless Terminals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2   Heterogeneous Networks and Terminal Mobility . . . . . . .  5
     3.3   Adaptive Application and Services  . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.4   Traffic Shaping  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.5   Network-Initiated Handover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.6   Signaling Support  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Design Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.1   Goals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.2   Non-Goals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Usage Scenarios  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.1   Scenario 1 - peer to mobility anchor node link
           characteristic delivery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.2   Scenario 2 - peer to peer link characteristic delivery . .  9
     5.3   Scenario 3 - multiple-destination link characteristic
           delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.4   Scenario 4 - link characteristic delivery delegation . . .  9
   6.  IANA considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   8.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     9.1   Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     9.2   Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 13


















Korhonen, et al.          Expires March 5, 2006                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Link Characteristic Information      September 2005


1.  Introduction

   Recently more and more mobile nodes are equipped with multiple
   interfaces for different L2 technologies.  These mobile nodes may be
   reachable through different links at the same time or use each
   interface alternately depending on the network environment.  In the
   latter case, transitions between heterogeneous links (vertical
   handovers) occur.  Existing IP mobility solutions, such as Mobile IP
   [RFC3344] [RFC3775], HIP [I-D.ietf-hip-arch] and MOBIKE [I-D.ietf-
   mobike-design], do not provide a mechanism to indicate which type of
   link the mobile node is currently attached to.  Therefore, sudden
   changes of access link characteristics caused by vertical handovers
   are usually not quickly observed by higher layer applications until a
   certain mechanism (e.g. congestion control or error recovery
   mechanism) is invoked some time later when it senses a misuse of the
   network capacity.  This can cause undesirable disruptions or
   performance degradation to the ongoing connections.  For example,
   when the mobile node performs a handover from an IEEE 802.11b WLAN
   link (high bandwidth link) to a CDMA Cellular link (low bandwidth
   link), the home agent and correspondent nodes may still send their
   traffics to the mobile node as if the 802.11b bandwidth is still
   available.  Thus, the ratio of packet loss will eventually increase.

   In some cases, the mobile node's available bandwidth may also vary
   considerably on handovers between the same type of links (horizontal
   handovers) due to the different traffic loads on the old and the new
   link.  Moreover, even the mobile node stays on the same link, the
   available bandwidth may change significantly due to the variations of
   the traffic load on current link.  Both of these situations may lead
   to similar adverse effects as those on vertical handovers.

   This document discusses the problems related to the link
   characteristic information delivery from the mobile node to other
   relevant network nodes (i.e. correspondent nodes, Mobile IP home
   agent and any other network nodes that may consider the link
   characteristic information useful).  The purpose of this document is
   to set the scope and goals for possible future work on generic link
   characteristic information delivery for optimizing IP mobility
   performance.

1.1  Overview of the Problem

   The fundamental problem or rather the fundamental feature of all
   widely accepted and standardized IP mobility enabling technologies is
   that they are mobile node centric, operating on top of the link layer
   and lacking proper dialogues about the access link characteristics
   with the relevant remote network nodes.  With the emergence of
   multimode mobile terminals and the roaming capability between



Korhonen, et al.          Expires March 5, 2006                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Link Characteristic Information      September 2005


   different access technologies, there is a need of sharing accurate
   link characteristic information with the remote communicating nodes,
   due to the fact that wireless access links are most likely the
   bottleneck of the communication path.  This is expected to reduce or
   even avoid possible complications to the IP transport and service
   quality when the access link characteristics change considerably.

   Currently there is no standardized protocol for such link
   characteristic information delivery.  Therefore, some new signaling
   mechanism is needed.  At the same time, the new signaling mechanism
   to be defined SHOULD avoid significantly increasing the amount of
   signaling traffic load, especially over wireless links.  Moreover,
   examining the tradeoff between the added delivery and computation
   load of the new mechanism and gained advantage is also an issue that
   needs serious considerations.

1.2  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

2.  Assumptions

   This document has a few fundamental assumptions concerning the
   general networking environment and certain capabilities supported by
   the mobile node in the case that the link characteristics delivery
   functionality is to be deployed.  These assumptions are listed as
   follows:

   o  There exists a security relationship between the mobile node and
      the remote nodes that participate in the link characteristic
      information communications.  This security relationship has been
      set up before the mobile node and the remote nodes can make use of
      the link characteristic information.

   o  Link characteristic information messages are piggybacked on top of
      mobility protocol or signaling protocol that is used between the
      mobile node and the remote nodes.

   o  All mobile nodes, correspondent nodes, mobility management nodes
      and other network entities are not expected to understand or
      support link characteristic information notification if they do
      not need this particular feature.  Legacy nodes and network
      entities also fall into this category.






Korhonen, et al.          Expires March 5, 2006                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Link Characteristic Information      September 2005


   o  The mobile node has the required capabilities to gather relevant
      link information on those links it is connected to or is about to
      connect, or name and identify these links uniquely.  This means
      the link characteristic information may not only be tied to those
      links the mobile node is currently actively using.

3.  Background and Motivations

   In this section we discuss the background and motivations for
   developing a link characteristic information delivery mechanism.

3.1  Multimode Wireless Terminals

   Recently multimode wireless terminals have become more and more
   common.  For example, most modern mobile terminals are equipped with
   a selection of cellular radios, various IEEE 802.11 family radios and
   Bluetooth radios.  It is possible that more than one of these radios
   are activated to attach to network alternatively or simultaneously.
   Also, the idea of always on-line via wireless is not far fetched
   anymore.

3.2  Heterogeneous Networks and Terminal Mobility

   Due to the impressive growth of various wireless technologies,
   different access radios overlap, providing mobile users a
   heterogeneous wireless access environment.  Mobile terminals are
   increasingly expected to be able to seamless handover between these
   different access technologies in order to maintain connections and
   achieve best QoS while moving.

   However, the characteristics and capabilities of these different
   access networks differ considerably for example in available
   bandwidth, roundtrip times, bit error rates and queue management,
   though in most cases wireless access links remain as the bottleneck
   of the whole communication path.  Therefore, vertical handovers may
   lead to abrupt changes on the link performance.

   Link characteristics may also change considerably when the mobile
   node handovers between the same type of link, due to the different
   traffic loads on the old and the new link.  Furthermore, even when
   the mobile node connects to the same link and no handover occurs,
   link performance can change abruptly (for example when radio
   conditions change) especially in some cellular networks.

   However, these are at least initially unknown to upper layer
   mechanisms due to the current IP mobility management protocols.  Some
   upper layer transport protocols and services can adapt to the changed
   connection condition, however reactively until the network capacity



Korhonen, et al.          Expires March 5, 2006                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Link Characteristic Information      September 2005


   misuse (over-utilization or under-utilization) event has occurred and
   been detected some time later.  Thus those upper layer protocols,
   applications and services may experience unnecessarily unoptimal
   performance during this period.  Unfortunately there is currently no
   way of signaling this kind of information from the mobile node to the
   remote network nodes in communications.

3.3  Adaptive Application and Services

   Adaptive applications and services can greatly benefit from a
   standardized mechanism that notifies abrupt changes of the link
   characteristics in a proactively manner.  That would allow
   applications and services to adapt to the new connection conditions
   immediately instead of through some generally conservative adapting
   and error handling mechanisms.  After all, these mechanisms were not
   designed to handle the situation discussed in this document, so that
   they are not efficient in the scenarios in question.

   One possible example of an adaptive application benefiting from the
   link characteristics information would be streaming services for
   mobile vehicles.  Assume a certain mobile vehicle can connect to the
   network using various access technologies -- using macro cellular
   access when the vehicle is on move and using 802.11 WLAN access when
   the vehicle is not moving and within a hotspot coverage.  The
   adaptive application could then immediately scale the streaming
   service content based on the mobile node's reported link capabilities
   -- without waiting for the possible streaming protocol feedback
   mechanism to discover the increased or decreased bandwidth of the
   link.

3.4  Traffic Shaping

   In the case that some or all traffic destined to the mobile node goes
   through a mobility anchor node (e.g. the home agent in Mobile IPv6
   bi-directional tunneling mode or previous access router in Mobile IP
   fast handover protocols), it would be useful for the mobility anchor
   node to shape the traffic towards the mobile node according to the
   current link characteristic information provided by the mobile node.
   For example, if the mobile node has announced its current link
   capacity as 64kbps, the mobility anchor node has no point forwarding
   more traffic than the announced data rate to overflow the mobile
   node's access link.  Instead, the mobility anchor node may limit the
   forwarding rate itself or notify the remote peers (e.g. the
   correspondent nodes) to reduce their traffic by some means.

3.5  Network-Initiated Handover

   In some future circumstances, remote network nodes, such as the



Korhonen, et al.          Expires March 5, 2006                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Link Characteristic Information      September 2005


   Mobile IP home agent, may wish to suggest the mobile node to handover
   to another access network possibly based on the required service
   quality or certain administrative policies.  With a link
   characteristics information delivery mechanism, the remote nodes
   would have more knowledge to be used for such decision makings.

3.6  Signaling Support

   Currently there is no existing standardized or IP mobility solution
   independent mechanism to signal link characteristic information from
   the mobile node to the relevant remote network nodes.  The relevant
   remote network nodes include mobility management nodes (e.g.  Mobile
   IP home agent), correspondent nodes, and any other network nodes that
   may consider the link characteristic information useful.

4.  Design Considerations

4.1  Goals

   This section lists the general goals for the link characteristic
   information delivery mechanism design.  The link characteristic
   information delivery solution MUST fulfill all the goals listed
   below:

   G1 Mobility solution independent -- The link characteristic
      information delivery solution MUST not be tied to a specific IP
      mobility solution such as Mobile IP or HIP.

   G2 Transport protocol independent -- The transport of the link
      characteristic information MUST not be dependant on any particular
      transport protocol.

   G3 Link technology independent -- The transport of the link
      characteristic information MUST not be dependant on some
      particular link technology and link technology specific way of
      carrying information.

   G4 Applicable when the mobile node is either multi-homed or not -- In
      the multi-homed case, multiple interfaces of the mobile node may
      be activated to send and receive traffic.  The solution MUST be
      able to handle the link characteristic information for each link
      separately.  The solution SHOULD also support combining the
      knowledge of all its available access links.








Korhonen, et al.          Expires March 5, 2006                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Link Characteristic Information      September 2005


   G5 Applicable when the remote peers are also mobiles -- In this case
      the peers of both sides may support the link characteristics
      information delivery, and the solution MUST be able to handle the
      "double jump" situations.

   G6 Applicable when multiple communicating nodes are present on one
      interface of the mobile node -- The mobile node SHOULD support an
      algorithm to assign the link capacity and notify the share to each
      communicating node separately.

   G7 The link characteristic information encapsulation format MUST be
      applicable to any existing and future link technology -- This goal
      basically means that the actual contents and encapsulation format
      of the link characteristic information MUST be extendable to new
      link types and new link characteristics data.

   G8 The mobile node SHOULD be able to delegate its link characteristic
      information delivery to other mobility management node and undo
      the delegation when applicable and desired.

4.2  Non-Goals

   This section lists the issues that are considered as strictly out of
   scope of this problem statement document.

   o  Defining a new transport protocol or mechanism to carry the link
      characteristic information.

   o  Defining any new security mechanisms or requirements.

   o  Placing any requirements on the cross layer communications about
      the link characteristic information.

   o  Unidirectional links.

   o  Non-IP-capable links.

   o  Defining how the link characteristic information delivery
      initiator (usually the mobile node) gathers its access link
      characteristic information.

   o  Defining how the link characteristic information delivery
      responder (the relevant remote network nodes) actually make use of
      the link characteristic information.  For example the remote peer
      may use the link characteristic information to optimize the
      transport layer protocols by some specific algorithm particularly
      tied to the transport layer protocols in question.




Korhonen, et al.          Expires March 5, 2006                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Link Characteristic Information      September 2005


   o  Defining the link capacity assignment algorithm when multiple
      communicating nodes are present on one interface of the mobile
      node.  The assignment algorithms are left for the specific
      applications and protocols that actually utilize the link
      characteristic information.

5.  Usage Scenarios

   This section discusses some possible usage scenarios that could
   benefit from the link characteristics information delivery in more
   detail.

5.1  Scenario 1 - peer to mobility anchor node link characteristic
     delivery

   In this scenario the mobile node delivers the link characteristics
   information only to the mobility anchor node.  This scenario is valid
   for example for Mobile IP without route optimization.  Correspondent
   nodes are completely left outside of the link characteristic
   information delivery.

5.2  Scenario 2 - peer to peer link characteristic delivery

   In this scenario the mobile node delivers link characteristic
   information to one or more correspondent nodes.  The protocol used to
   encapsulate and deliver the link characteristic information MUST
   allow communicating directly with correspondent nodes.  This scenario
   applies for example to HIP or route optimized Mobile IPv6 where both
   peers could be mobile and are using peer to peer communications.  In
   this scenario it is possible that the mobile node acts as the role of
   both the sender and receiver of the link characteristic information.

5.3  Scenario 3 - multiple-destination link characteristic delivery

   This scenario is the generalization of scenarios 1 and 2.  The mobile
   node delivers link characteristic information to the mobility anchor
   node as well as some correspondent nodes.  This scenario applies for
   example to the case that in Mobile IPv6 the mobile node communicates
   with some of the correspondent nodes using the route optimization
   mode while the others using the bi-directional tunneling mode.

5.4  Scenario 4 - link characteristic delivery delegation

   In this scenario the mobile node purposely delegates its link
   characteristic information delivery to some other network node.  The
   node taking care of the delegated link characteristic information
   delivery MUST be able to capture all traffic coming from and going to
   the mobile node.  For example this scenario is applicable for access



Korhonen, et al.          Expires March 5, 2006                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Link Characteristic Information      September 2005


   systems with centralized radio resource management, where the
   management node monitors the connected mobile nodes and their access
   link resources continuously.  The link characteristic information
   delivery delegation can allow reducing the signaling overhead on
   links where the link conditions vary frequently.

6.  IANA considerations

   This particular document does not define any new name spaces to be
   managed by IANA.  This document does not either reserve any new
   numbers or names under any existing name space managed by IANA.

7.  Security Considerations

   Potentially, the model proposed in this document may be misused by an
   attacker to indicate fabricated link characteristic information to
   the mobility management nodes or correspondent nodes.  However, the
   link characteristic information is always intended to be carried as
   part of the existing mobility-related signaling.  In this case the
   link characteristic information rely on the used transport mechanism
   to guarantee the security for the message delivery.  The used
   mechanism for the link characteristic information transport MUST
   provide the data origin authentication, integrity and replay
   protection, and SHOULD provide confidentiality protection when there
   is a need.

   Attackers who have the capability of fabricating valid transport
   messages of the link characteristic information are able to launch
   more serious attacks than those potentially caused by the link
   characteristic delivery model.  Therefore, it is believed that the
   deployment of the link characteristic information delivery does not
   introduce new security vulnerabilities to the mobility solution of
   choice.

8.  Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Rajeev Koodli and Koshiro Mitsuya for
   their valuable comments and suggestions.

9.  References

9.1  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.






Korhonen, et al.          Expires March 5, 2006                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Link Characteristic Information      September 2005


9.2  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-hip-arch]
              Moskowitz, R. and P. Nikander, "Host Identity Protocol
              Architecture", draft-ietf-hip-arch-03 (work in progress),
              August 2005.

   [I-D.ietf-mobike-design]
              Kivinen, T. and H. Tschofenig, "Design of the MOBIKE
              Protocol", draft-ietf-mobike-design-03 (work in progress),
              July 2005.

   [RFC3344]  Perkins, C., "IP Mobility Support for IPv4", RFC 3344,
              August 2002.

   [RFC3775]  Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support
              in IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [RFC3776]  Arkko, J., Devarapalli, V., and F. Dupont, "Using IPsec to
              Protect Mobile IPv6 Signaling Between Mobile Nodes and
              Home Agents", RFC 3776, June 2004.


Authors' Addresses

   Jouni Korhonen
   TeliaSonera Corporation.
   P.O.Box 970
   FIN-00051 Sonera
   FINLAND

   Phone: +358 40 534 4455
   Email: jouni.korhonen@teliasonera.com


   Soohong Daniel Park
   Mobile Platform Laboratory, SAMSUNG Electronics.
   416 Maetan-3dong, Yeongtong-gu
   Suwon, Gyeonggi-do  443-742
   KOREA

   Phone: +82 31 200 4508
   Email: soohong.park@samsung.com








Korhonen, et al.          Expires March 5, 2006                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       Link Characteristic Information      September 2005


   Ji Zhang
   Communications Research Group, University of York.
   Heslington
   York  YO10 5DD
   United Kingdom

   Phone: +44 1904 432310
   Email: jz105@ohm.york.ac.uk











































Korhonen, et al.          Expires March 5, 2006                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       Link Characteristic Information      September 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

   The IETF has been notified of intellectual property rights claimed in
   regard to some or all of the specification contained in this
   document.  For more information consult the online list of claimed
   rights.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.





Korhonen, et al.          Expires March 5, 2006                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       Link Characteristic Information      September 2005


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.















































Korhonen, et al.          Expires March 5, 2006                [Page 14]

