

Geopriv                                                        T. Kanai 
Internet Draft                                     Fujitsu Laboratories 
Document: draft-kanai-geopriv-scenarios-00.txt                          
Category: Informational                                                 
                                                                Y. Kohda 
                                                    Fujitsu Laboratories 
                                                                         
                                                             M. Mitsuoka 
                                         Fujitsu Laboratories of America 
                                                               June 2002 
 
 
                       Geopriv Service Scenarios 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This document describes location-based service scenarios for Geopriv. 
   It is intended to accelerate a discussion on usage model of privacy 
   and security requirements. 
    
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction................................................2 
   2. Location Information Disclosure Services....................2 
    2.1. Location Information Disclosure Services.................2 
    2.2. Variants of the basic scenario...........................3 
   3. Other Service Types.........................................5 
    3.1. Target Information Disclosure Services...................5 
    3.2. Area Information Disclosure Services.....................5 
   4. Security Considerations.....................................6 
   5. References..................................................6 
   6. Author's Addresses..........................................6 
    
  
Kanai, Kohda, Mitsuoka    Expires Dec. 2002                         1 
                      Geopriv Service Scenarios             June 2002 
 
 
    
1. Introduction 
    
   A new type of wireless technologies and services, like Wireless LAN 
   and hotspot services, are spreading home, office and town at 
   remarkable speed. Today, alternative way of positioning, other than 
   GPS or Cell ID, can be practically available. This could change the 
   landscape of carriers where positioning technology no longer belong 
   to them. Furthermore, it will give boost to new ideas based on 
   location information. We believe that the Geopriv WG will help new 
   ideas to launch successful businesses. 
    
   Current discussion in the WG is in the stage of making a requirement 
   model for the open framework. This Internet Draft intends to 
   accelerate the discussion with the help of some reference examples. 
   Especially for discussion about privacy issues, this document 
   introduces a new model of service entities. 
    
    
2. Location Information Disclosure Services 
    
   There could be a different kind of location-based services. The most 
   typical and basic one is a "Location Information Disclosure Service". 
   Here, Location information of a target is obtained from its ID, which 
   in turn utilizes this information for useful applications. An example 
   could be a service, which displays a map around the current location 
   of the target. 
    
   This chapter comes up with a new model of service entities and brings 
   some examples. 
    
    
2.1 Basic scenario for LI disclosure services 
    
   Here is the most primitive scenario: 
    
   'A' requests a service to disclose 'B's location information to 'C'. 
    
   An important point is that 'A' and 'C' are not the same entities. An 
   example of a scenario: 
    
   A delivery company launches a service to notify a customer 'C' about 
   a package 'B' that it is now at the closest hub. 
    
   Following are the players: 
   A = Service Initiator: Entity that initiates the service and submits 
   a request to disclose LI. 
   B = Service Target: Entity where LI to be disclosed. 
   C = Service Recipient: Entity who receives an output from the service. 
    
   Here is a diagram of this scenario: 
    
    
  
Kanai,Kohda,Mitsuoka      Expires Dec. 2002                         2 
                      Geopriv Service Scenarios             June 2002 
 
 
      +----------+   Service Initiate        +----------+ 
    A |Service   | ------------------------> |Location  | 
      |Initiator |     +-------------------- |Service   | 
      +----------+     | Service Output      +----------+ 
                       |                        |   ^ 
                       |                   LReq |   | LI 
                       |                        V   | 
      +----------+     |                     +----------+ 
    C |Service   | <---+                     |Location  | 
      |Recipient |                           |Server    | 
      +----------+                           +----------+ 
                                                |   ^ 
                                           LReq |   | Raw LI 
                                                V   | 
      +----------+                           +----------+ 
    B |Service   |     Location Sight        |Location  | 
      |Target    | <------------------------ |Sighter   | 
      +----------+                           +----------+ 
    
   The  "Location Service" in the above diagram should be an Ultimate 
   Location Recipient. 
    
    
2.2 Variants of the basic scenario 
    
   Following five options discusses scenarios where Service Initiator, 
   Service Target and Service Recipient are same or different entities. 
    
    
   (1) Service Initiator, Service Target, Service Recipient are all 
   different entities 
    
   This is the basic scenario itself. A direct and plain description of 
   this scenario is like this: 
   I initiate a service to let her know where he is. 
   (I = Service Initiator, He = Service Target, She = Service Recipient) 
    
   Example: Taxi dispatch system 
   A customer calls a taxi company for a taxi by his cellular. An 
   operator initiates their taxi dispatch system to find the most 
   appropriate taxi. First, the system obtains customer's current 
   location from a Location Sighter, maybe a cellular carrier. Then it 
   searches the closest and available taxi based on location information. 
   When it finds one, it displays a map around the customer to the taxi 
   driver. 
    
   In this case players' roles are: 
   Operator = Service Initiator 
   Customer = Service Target 
   Taxi or driver = Service Recipient 
    
    

  
Kanai,Kohda,Mitsuoka      Expires Dec. 2002                         3 
                      Geopriv Service Scenarios             June 2002 
 
 
   (2) Service Initiator is same as Service Target, Service Recipient is 
   a different entity. 
    
   This scenario can be like this: 
   I initiate a service to let her know where I am. 
   (I = Service Initiator = Service Target, She = Service Recipient) 
    
   Example: Rendezvous service 
   A user initiates a rendezvous service from his cellular. The system 
   obtains his current location from a Location Sighter, maybe a 
   cellular carrier. The system sends his friend an e-mail to describe 
   how to reach him. 
    
   In this case players' roles are: 
   User = Service Initiator = Service Target 
   Friend = Service Recipient 
    
    
   (3) Service Initiator is same as Service Recipient, Service Target is 
   a different entity. 
    
   This scenario can be like this: 
   I initiate a service to know where he is. 
   (I = Service Initiator = Service Recipient, He = Service Target) 
    
   Example: Pet monitoring service 
   When a dog is lost, its owner initiates a monitoring service to find 
   it. The system obtains dog's current location with a positioning 
   device, which the dog wears. Then it displays a map around the dog to 
   its owner. 
    
   In this case players' roles are: 
   Owner = Service Initiator = Service Recipient 
   Dog = Service Target 
    
    
   (4) Service Initiator is different entity, Service Target is same as 
   Service Recipient 
    
   This scenario can be like this: 
   I initiate a service to let her know where she is. 
   (I = Service Initiator, She = Service Target = Service Recipient) 
    
   Example: Evacuation navigation service 
   In case of an emergency in a hotel, such as fire, an operator 
   initiates a navigation service to tell their customers about the 
   evacuation routes. Each room has a mobile device, like a PDA, with 
   positioning functionality. A customer runs away from his room along 
   with the PDA. The system obtains customer's current location through 
   the PDA and displays the safest evacuation route on it. 
    
   In this case players' roles are: 
   Operator = Service Initiator  
  
Kanai,Kohda,Mitsuoka      Expires Dec. 2002                         4 
                      Geopriv Service Scenarios             June 2002 
 
 
   Customer = Service Target = Service Recipient 
    
    
   (5) Service Initiator, Service Target and Service Recipient are all 
   same entities  
    
   This scenario can be like this: 
   I initiate a service to know where I am. 
   (I = Service Initiator = Service Target = Service Recipient) 
    
   Example: Car navigation service 
   A user is driving a car with a navigation device which can access to 
   the Internet. He initiates an online navigation service from the 
   device to get the fastest route to his destination. The online system 
   obtains his location with the device. Then searches traffic 
   information around him and finds the fastest route. And it shows a 
   direction on his device. 
    
   In this case players' roles are: 
   User = Service Initiator = Service Target = Service Recipient 
    
    
3. Other Service Types 
    
   The following examples might be out of scope currently for Geopriv. 
   Although we think it is still important and worthy to acknowledge 
   that there are quite a few useful and valuable services outside of 
   current Geopriv discussion. In this section, we describe some 
   examples of such services hoping to prepare future expansion of the 
   discussion. 
    
    
3.1 Target Information Disclosure Services 
    
   For the LI disclosure services, an input is a target ID and an output 
   is LI. There could be another way. I mean a service which inputs LI 
   and outputs a target ID (or processed information). 
    
   Example: Taxi dispatch system 
   In the example in the section 2.2 (1), the taxi dispatch system has 
   to somehow find the closest available taxi for the customer. In this 
   case a location server should have a functionality to obtain a target 
   ID by using LI. 
    
    
3.2 Area Information Disclosure Services 
    
   This is a variant of the previous Target Information Disclosure 
   Services. Services which input Area information, instead of Location, 
   and output a target ID (or processed information). 
    
   Example: Traffic jam information 

  
Kanai,Kohda,Mitsuoka      Expires Dec. 2002                         5 
                      Geopriv Service Scenarios             June 2002 
 
 
   A traffic information system inputs area information (e.g. location 
   with range) to a location server. Then the location server returns 
   number of targets which are within the area right now. 
    
    
4. Security Considerations 
 
   This document does not describe security issues directly. However we 
   expect that some points in this document will be useful to think 
   about privacy and security issues on Geopriv. 
    
    
5. References 
    
   [1] Cuellar, Morris and Mulligan: Geopriv requirements, draft-
   cuellar-geopriv-reqs-02.txt, May 2002 
   [2] Cuellar, Ersue and Takahashi: Geopriv Scenarios, draft-cuellar-
   geopriv-scenarios-00.txt, Feb 2002 
   [3] Morris, Mulligan, Mueller, Cantu and Davidson: Framework for 
   Location Computation Scenarios, draft-morris-geopriv-scenarios-01.txt, 
   March 2002 
    
    
6. Author's Addresses 
    
   Tsuyoshi Go Kanai 
   Fujitsu Laboratories, Ltd. 
   64 Nishiwaki, Okubo-cho,  
   Akashi 674-8555, Japan 
   kanai.go@jp.fujitsu.com 
    
   Youji Kohda 
   Fujitsu Laboratories, Ltd. 
   64 Nishiwaki, Okubo-cho,  
   Akashi 674-8555, Japan 
   kohda.youji@jp.fujitsu.com 
    
   Madoka Mitsuoka 
   Fujitsu Laboratories of America, Inc. 
   595 Lawrence Expressway,  
   Sunnyvale, CA 94086-3922, U.S.A. 
   mitsuoka@fla.fujitsu.com 
    
    









  
Kanai,Kohda,Mitsuoka      Expires Dec. 2002                         6 
                      Geopriv Service Scenarios             June 2002 
 
 
    
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved.  
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published and 
   distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, 
   provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, 
   or as required to translate it into languages other than English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
 
    































  
Kanai,Kohda,Mitsuoka      Expires Dec. 2002                         7 
