


Mobile Ad hoc Networking (MANET)                               J. Haerri
Internet-Draft                                                 C. Bonnet
Intended status: Experimental                                  F. Filali
Expires: August 29, 2007                        Institut Eurecom, France
                                                       February 25, 2007


        MANET Position and Mobility Signaling: Problem Statement
            draft-haerri-manet-position-problem-statement-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 29, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).













Haerri, et al.           Expires August 29, 2007                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement    February 2007


Abstract

   This document contains a problem statement and justification for
   position and mobility signaling in MANET protocols.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Use Cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  Wireless Sensor Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.3.  Mobile Wireless Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.1.  Geographical Routing Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.2.  Routes and Links Instability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Approach Rationals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.1.  Geographical Routing Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.2.  Routes and Links Instability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  IANA considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 16























Haerri, et al.           Expires August 29, 2007                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement    February 2007


1.  Introduction

   In recent months, a growing interest has been observed in position
   information for improving routing in mobile ad hoc networks, by
   trying to improve links stability, periodic maintenance, power
   consumption or even security.

   Indeed, by peeking into the recent litterature, we see that between
   2004 and 2006, 3 IEEE transactions and 38 IEEE conference proceedings
   are related to mobility predictions, while ACM published 11 papers.

   The common point of all these new directions is the requirement of
   mobile nodes' mobility information.  Some proposals need nodes
   velocity, others moving directions, or nodes position.  The most
   complex ones require nodes position and velocity in order to extract
   mobility prediction patterns.

   The Intelligent Vehicule Community already understood the benefits
   safety provisionings could obtain from proactive visions as they
   started standardizing the information cars should share.  For
   example, the VII consortium (Vehicle Infrastructure Integration) is
   standardizing the information that should be transmitted between
   vehicles.  As routing protocols and eventually internet will come on
   top of intervehicular communications, a similar and possible
   collaborative approach should be undergone within the IETF.

   However, we do not know yet what kind of information are required to
   be transmitted, and it is quite clear that the community might not
   even all agree on a common framework.

   The aim of this document is to describe new orientations in network
   research that includes localization information and for what purpose
   such information is necessary.  This document also discusses possible
   improvements on regular standardized MANET protocol with the help of
   mobility information, and point out possible application beyond the
   scope of MANETs.















Haerri, et al.           Expires August 29, 2007                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement    February 2007


2.  Terminology

      The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
      NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL"
      in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

      Additionally, this document introduces the following terminology

   GPS -  Global Positioning System.  A geolocalization system
      developped and operated by the US Department of Defense that is
      able to provide accurate worldwide coordinates of devices equiped
      with GPS receivers.  A similar European system is currently under
      developpement under the name of Galileo.  The GPS system does not
      work without a clear access to at least 3 satellites, thus is
      inoperable for indoor positioning.

   GPS-free Positioning -  A set of techniques that has been developped
      in order to provide a mean of localization in situation when a
      clear access to satellites is not possible.  Most of the methods
      use multilateration techniques and require either a formal
      training, or an anchor node that knows its accurate position.

   Time -  The universal GPS time expressed in seconds.

   Longitude -  The longitude describes the location of a place on Earth
      east or west of a north-south line called the Prime Meridian
      located in Greenwich, UK.  Longitude is given as an angular
      measurement ranging from 0 degree at the Prime Meridian to +180
      degree eastward and -180 degree westward.

   Latitude -  The latitude gives the location of a place on Earth north
      or south of the equator.  Latitude is an angular measurement
      ranging from 0 degree at the Equator to 90 degree at the poles.

   Elevation -  The elevation is the altitude of an object from a known
      level or datum.  Common datums are mean sea level and the surface
      of the WGS-84 geoid, used by GPS.

   Azimuth -  Azimuth is the horizontal component of a direction,
      measured around the horizon, from the north toward the east in the
      northern hemisphere, and from the south toward the west in the
      southern hemisphere.

   Mobility -  mobility information related to a specific address, which
      MAY consist of a longitude, latitude and elevation, a velocity, an
      azimuth, or the time this mobility information has been sampled.





Haerri, et al.           Expires August 29, 2007                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement    February 2007


   Stability -  a measure of the similarity between a node's sampled
      (past) mobility parameters and the actual ones.

   VANET -  Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks.  A particular set of MANET where
      cars and road infrastructures are equiped with wireless devices.














































Haerri, et al.           Expires August 29, 2007                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement    February 2007


3.  Use Cases

3.1.  Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks

   A vehicular ad hoc network (VANET) is a specific case of mobile ad
   hoc networks, where vehicules and road infrastructures are equiped
   with wireless devices.  Accordingly, the vehicles are able to
   communicate with each other as well as interacting with the road
   infrastructure.  One straightforward application of VANETs is safety,
   where communications are exchanged in order to improve the driver's
   responsiveness and safety in case of road incidents.

   A Vehicular ad hoc network is set up between cars and between cars
   and road infrastructures.  Due to the increased mobility, basic MANET
   routing protocols are inefficient.  Novel approaches have been
   suggested such as state-less geographical routing, where packets are
   routed without any specific route setup in the direction of the
   maximum progress toward the destination node.  This class of routing
   protocols require the knowedge of, at least, the destination and the
   forwarding node positions.  Most of them use GPS-provided
   coordinates.

   In order to obtain a routing decision, nodes MUST exchange position
   data by means of level 3 messages between cars, road infrastructures,
   and location servers.

3.2.  Wireless Sensor Networks

   A Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) is an extreme form of a MANET in
   terms of the amount of devices and of their highly limited
   capabilities.  Sensors can be low cost, mass produced devices
   operating for years on a pair of AAA batteries.  A sensor dust can be
   spread over a monitored location, and from that moment on, the
   sensors are fixed and operate for the lifetime of their batteries,
   which are their most critical resource.

   Around a Sensor Network, sinks are deployed in order to collect the
   measurements from the sensors and relay the commands from the
   controllers.  Thus, sensors automatically form a structure to forward
   unicast packets from the sensors to the sinks, and to propagate
   broadcast packets across the network from the sinks.

   In order to establish a routing infrastructure and scale to a large
   geographic area, sensors can be deployed to form a tree, a mesh or
   any kind of distributed graph that aims at optimizing communication
   and energy consumption.

   As sensor may only be aware of their own location, in order to



Haerri, et al.           Expires August 29, 2007                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement    February 2007


   improve the creation of a routing topology, position information MAY
   be exchanged between sensors and sinks.  Moreover, as a mean of
   improving the detection and localization of a device moving in a
   monitored area, sensors MAY also have to exchanged location or
   mobility information between each others.

3.3.  Mobile Wireless Networks

   A Mobile Wireless Network is a network where at least a group of
   nodes are mobile.  A Mobile Wireless Network includes infrastructure
   and ad-hoc networks, VANETs, WSN, or Mesh Networks.

   The mobility of routers or clients involved in a Mobile Wireless
   Network is a major source of burden in standard routing protocols,
   including hand-overs, route errors, and reduced capacity.  In order
   to improve this issue, mobility MAY be predicted to some extends,
   which could then be used to improve ressource management techniques
   and Quality of Service.

   In order to predict routers and clients' mobility and thus adapt the
   network topology, nodes MUST exchange at least velocity information,
   but SHOULD also obtain and share some means of positioning
   techniques, either GPS or other GPS-free systems.




























Haerri, et al.           Expires August 29, 2007                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement    February 2007


4.  Requirements

   MANET Position and Mobility Signaling has the following requirements

   R1:  All nodes requirering position information SHOULD be equipped
      with GPS devices.  That will allow the network to have a
      synchronized time as well as position information.

   R2:  Location signaling MUST be compatible with non-location
      signaling format, more specifically, the generalized packet/
      message format [PacketBB]








































Haerri, et al.           Expires August 29, 2007                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement    February 2007


5.  Problem Statement

   All protocols standardized, or currently in the process of being
   standardized, do not make any assumption on a positioning system,
   which could provide a mean of knowing neighboring nodes' coordinates
   and mobility.  A node ID is the major (sometimes the only) source of
   information about other nodes.

   Whereas those protocols have been designed to work perfectly well
   without this kind of strong assumption, a growing popularity appeared
   in the community for location-enhanced protocols.

   The MANET Position and Mobility Signaling Format is possibility
   related to the following working groups:

   o  Existing Routing Protocols (MANET, OSPF)

   o  Network Mobility Support (NEMO)

5.1.  Geographical Routing Protocols

   Moreover, the Manet working group within the IETF decided to
   standardize two well known protocols, AODV and OLSR.  AODV is a
   reactive protocol, which opens a route on the specific request from a
   source node.  On the other hand, OLSR is a proactive, also called
   table-driven protocol, which computes all possible routes from and to
   any reachable destination.  In that perspective, the IETF is
   providing the community with two sets of protocols for different
   applications, possiblity working together in hybrid configurations.

   However, in recent years, a new class of routing protocol appeared.
   Geographical Routing Protocols, also called Geographical Fowarding
   Protocols as no formal routing techniques are considered, choose the
   forwarder based on the "best" progress towards a destination node.
   The "best" progess is not only the maximum progress, but includes a
   set of heuristics that chooses the optimal forwarder based on
   positions, directions, local density, or even interference.  The
   common point in all those techniques is that they guarantee packet
   correct delivery and rely on the knowledge of the destination and the
   potential forwarder's locations.

5.2.  Routes and Links Instability

   In the Mobile Ad Hoc Network community, the major source of
   instability in the provided protocols comes from nodes mobility.
   OLSR uses periodic topology maintenance, and AODV developped local
   route breaches repairing techniques.  Moreover, any kind of
   optimization based on a fixed topology (even related to a large set



Haerri, et al.           Expires August 29, 2007                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement    February 2007


   of nodes), needs to be run again after a couple of seconds when nodes
   are moving.  However, although those techniques may be appropriate
   for low mobility networks, they reach their limit when local mobility
   is sudden or lacks any correlation with the neighboring nodes.  That
   is indeed not a surprise if Geographical Forwarding protocols became
   popular in Vehicular ad hoc networks, where maintaining even a single
   open route (not mentionning a set of routing tables) is often
   impossible.

   In order to solve this issue, a growing popularity came from mobility
   prediction techniques used as means to not only choose the best
   "actual" forwarder, but the best actual AND future forwarder that
   will reduce the maintenance burden.  Similarly to Geographical
   Forwarding Protocols, the common points in all mobility predictions
   techniques is a node's access to its own location and a method to
   spread it to neighoring nodes.  Mobility Predictions has been widely
   successfully studied in the last three years, from reactive to
   proactive approaches even to geographical routing protocols.

































Haerri, et al.           Expires August 29, 2007               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement    February 2007


6.  Approach Rationals

   MANET Position and Mobility Signaling aims at extending Generalized
   MANET Packet/Message Format [PacketBB] to define a standardized
   packet format to exchange position and mobility information, and to
   improve the stability of Manet routing protocols.  This section
   covers the rationale behind this approach.

6.1.  Geographical Routing Protocols

   There is a large source of litterature on Geographic Routing
   Protocols.  The most widely known is the Greedy Perimeter Stateless
   Routing [GPSR] protocol.  The major source of burden in geographical
   forwarding techniques is to avoid falling into local maxima, which is
   when a node cannot find any neighbor providing a better progress than
   itself to the destination.  In that case, one has to define backoff
   techniques, which guarantee to leave the local maximum at a cost of
   local detours.  This is not the purpose of this paper to be
   exhaustive on all geographical routing protocols developped so far.
   The German project Networks on Wheels (NoW) [NoW] has been studying
   and improving this approach on Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks for the last
   3 years and could be a good starting point.

6.2.  Routes and Links Instability

   It has been shown that a simple single order mobility prediction
   model was able to deliver superior routing performances than DSR or
   AODV [AGAR].  A similar study has been extended to location services
   [KUMAR].  The conclusions were quite similar, by noticing that the
   diffusion of predicted future locations of nodes in the network could
   improve the performances of location services.

   On the other side of the routing techniques, different groups
   developped mobility prediction techniques in order to improve
   proactive protocols.  It has been shown that the choice by OLSR of
   nodes moving in similar direction could improve its performance
   [MOLSR].  Moreover, an appropriate choice of Multipoint Relays based
   on actual and the predicted future topology configuration could
   significantly improve the MPR protocol, and accordingly, OLSR [KMPR].












Haerri, et al.           Expires August 29, 2007               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement    February 2007


7.  IANA considerations

   This document does not require any IANA action.
















































Haerri, et al.           Expires August 29, 2007               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement    February 2007


8.  Security considerations

   This document is a problem statement and does not create any security
   threat.  It discusses the concepts of the use of Position and
   Mobility information in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks.














































Haerri, et al.           Expires August 29, 2007               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement    February 2007


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [PacketBB]
              Clausen, T., "Generalized MANET Packet/Message Format", <
              www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/
              draft-ietf-manet-packetbb-03.txt>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

9.2.  Informative References

   [AGAR]     Agarwal, A. and S. Das, "Dead Reckoning in Mobile Ad-Hoc
              Networks", IEEE WCNC 2003, the 2003 IEEE Wireless
              Communications and Networking Conference,  March 2003.

   [GPSR]     Karp, B., "Greedy Perimeter Stateless Routing (GPSR)",
              <http://www.icir.org/bkarp/gpsr/gpsr.html>.

   [KMPR]     Harri, J., Filali, F., and C. Bonnet, "On the application
              of mobility predictions to multipoint relaying in MANETs:
              kinetic multipoint relays", AINTEC 2005, Asian Internet
              Engineering Conference, December 2005.

   [KUMAR]    Kumar, V. and S. Das, "Performance of Dead Reckoning-Based
              Location Service for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks", IEEE
              Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Journal,
               March 2004.

   [MOLSR]    Menouar, H., Leonardi, M., and F. Filali, "A movement
              prediction-based routing protocol for vehicle-to-vehicle
              communications", V2VCOM 2005, 1st International Vehicle-
              to-Vehicle Communications Workshop, July 2005.

   [NoW]      "Networks On Wheels (NoW)",
              <http://www.network-on-wheels.de/documents.html>.













Haerri, et al.           Expires August 29, 2007               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement    February 2007


Authors' Addresses

   Jerome Haerri
   Institut Eurecom, France

   Phone: +33 4 93 00 8176
   Email: haerri@eurecom.fr


   Christian Bonnet
   Institut Eurecom, France

   Phone: +33 4 93 00 8108
   Email: bonnet@eurecom.fr


   Fethi Filali
   Institut Eurecom, France

   Phone: +33 4 93 00 8134
   Email: filali@eurecom.fr






























Haerri, et al.           Expires August 29, 2007               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft    Position Signaling: Problem Statement    February 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Haerri, et al.           Expires August 29, 2007               [Page 16]

