           draft-holla-ospf-update-graceful-restart-01.txt  March 2006 
 
 
   Network Working Group                                                
   Internet Draft                                        Ashok C. Holla 
                                                           Anup Kumar T 
                                                            Sujay Gupta 
                                                                        
   Document: draft-holla-ospf-update-graceful-                   Huawei 
   restart-01.txt                                         Technologies, 
                                                              Bangalore 
   Expires: September 2006                                   March 2006 
    
              Update to OSPF Graceful Restart procedure 
              draft-holla-ospf-update-graceful-restart-01.txt 
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each 
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of 
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of 
   which he or she becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with 
   Section 6 of BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- 
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This document suggests improvements to OSPF v2 Graceful Restart. The 
   basic protocol working remains as specified in [OSPFGR]. 
       
   The draft describes a two pronged approach for improving the current 
   graceful restart mechanism. It improves the restarting router’s 
Internet Draft 
Holla, Kumar & Gupta   Expires - September 2006               [Page 1] 
           draft-holla-ospf-update-graceful-restart-01.txt  March 2006 
 
 
   ability to detect and react to topology changes. It also reduces the 
   conservative behavior of the helper router in reacting to topology 
   changes.  
    
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   In the text "GR" indicates Graceful Restart. 
   The meaning of “Restarting Router” and “Helper Router” are as per 
   [OSPFGR]. 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119. 
    
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. Terminology....................................................3 
      2.1 Topology-Change LSAs.......................................3 
      2.2 Scope of the Topology-Change LSA...........................3 
   3. Enhancements to Graceful Restart mechanism.....................5 
      3.1 Operations of the Helper Router............................5 
      3.2 Operations of the Restarting Router........................7 
      3.3 Explicit feedback mechanism using Exit-Grace TLV...........8 
   4. Security Considerations........................................9 
   5. IANA Considerations............................................9 
   6. Backward Compatibility.........................................9 
   7. Special cases and considerations..............................10 
   8. Appendix......................................................10 
   Normative References.............................................11 
   Informative References...........................................12 
   Acknowledgments..................................................12 
   Authors’ Addresses...............................................12 
   Intellectual Property Statement..................................12 
    
    
1. 
   Introduction 
 
   This document suggests improvements to OSPF v2 Graceful Restart. 
   The basic protocol working remains as specified in [OSPFGR].  
    
   Existing specification for graceful restart in OSPFv2 has scope for 
   optimization in terms of overall convergence time and avoidance of 
   routing inconsistencies. This draft suggests methods to achieve the 
   same.  
    
   This draft provides mechanisms for the restarting router to detect 
   and react to topology changes. It reduces the conservative behavior 
Internet Draft 
Holla, Kumar & Gupta   Expires - September 2006               [Page 2] 
           draft-holla-ospf-update-graceful-restart-01.txt  March 2006 
 
 
   of the helper router in reacting to topology changes. It also 
   introduces an additional TLV for the Grace LSA, which provides an 
   explicit mechanism through which a router can communicate its non 
   participation as a helper router.  
    
   This document is organized as follows: 
    
   Section 2 introduces the concept of ‘Topology-Change LSA’. 
     
   Section 3.1 describes a less conservative approach to be taken by the 
   helper router in reacting to topology changes. 
    
   Section 3.2 describes the additional checks a router under restart 
   should perform to ensure faster detection of a topology change to 
   facilitate an early exit of Graceful Restart. 
    
   Section 3.3 introduces an additional TLV for the Grace LSA, which 
   provides an explicit mechanism that can be used by the helper, to 
   communicate with the restarting router. 
    
   The proposed suggestions are backward compatible with [OSPFGR]. 
    
    
2. 
   Terminology 
 
 
2.1 
    Topology-Change LSAs  
    
   In [OSPFGR], helper routers detect topology changes by examining 
   ‘changed LSAs’ as prescribed in Section 3.3 [OSPFDC]. However, this 
   notion of ‘changed LSA’ is very broad and can be reduced in scope 
   without affecting routing consistency. In this regard, the scope of a 
   ‘Topology-Change LSA’ is defined.  
    
   ‘Topology-Change LSAs’ characterize routing information which entails 
   possible removal or modification of existing route entries in a 
   router, i.e. they are LSAs which when processed, may remove or modify 
   existing route entries. 
   These LSAs should trigger helper routers to exit helper mode 
   immediately. Other LSAs may trigger a router to exit helper mode. 
   This is discussed in Section 3.1. 
    
    
2.2 
    Scope of the Topology-Change LSA  
    
    
   For an LSA to qualify as a ‘Topology-Change LSA’, it must satisfy one 
   of the following two requirements:  
    

Internet Draft 
Holla, Kumar & Gupta   Expires - September 2006               [Page 3] 
           draft-holla-ospf-update-graceful-restart-01.txt  March 2006 
 
 
   (a) A Max-Aged LSA received or originated for which there exists a 
   previous database copy MUST be considered as ‘Topology-Change LSA’ 
    
   (b) A modified LSA received or originated for which there exists a 
   previous database copy MUST be considered as ‘Topology-Change LSA’ 
      
   All other LSAs received or originated MUST NOT be considered as 
   ‘Topology-Change LSA’. Thus, this class excludes periodic refresh 
   LSAs and also new LSAs without a previous database copy. 
    
   In a further attempt to reduce the scope of ‘Topology-Change LSAs’, 
   an implementation MAY choose to interpret non max-aged modified LSAs 
   {case (b) above} as follows: 
    
   If any existing information described in the previous database copy 
   is missing or modified in the new LSA, then the new LSA MUST be 
   considered as a ‘Topology-Change LSA’. 
    
   In this regard, the criteria for an LSA to be considered as 
   ‘Topology-Change LSA’ are: 
    
     1. For Router LSA: 
          a. Change in the options field or any of the V, E or B bits in 
            the LSA. 
          b. Absence of any link piece (link ID, link Data tuple) 
            previously present in the database copy. 
    
     2. For Network LSA: 
          a. Change in the options field of the LSA. 
          b. Change in Network mask. 
          c. Absence of any previously attached router. 
    
     3. For Summary(Type-3 or 4) LSA: 
          a. Change in the options field of the LSA. 
          b. Change in the Network mask. 
          c. Change in the metric to LS-INFINITY [OSPF]. 
      
     4. For External and NSSA LSAs: 
          a. Change in the options field in the LSA. 
          b. Change in the forwarding address. 
          c. Change of the network mask. 
          d. Change in the metric to LS-INFINITY [OSPF]. 
           
   A non max-aged changed LSA which does not exhibit any of the 
   modifications listed above, MAY NOT be considered as a ‘Topology-
   Change LSA’. This implies that if the change in the LSA is the 
   presence of any new information not found in the previous copy (Ex: a 
   new link piece in a Router LSA, a new attached router in a network 
   LSA etc), the LSA MAY NOT be considered as a ‘Topology-Change LSA’. 

Internet Draft 
Holla, Kumar & Gupta   Expires - September 2006               [Page 4] 
           draft-holla-ospf-update-graceful-restart-01.txt  March 2006 
 
 
 
 
3. 
   Enhancements to Graceful Restart mechanism. 
    
     
3.1 
    Operations of the Helper Router 
    
   This section describes some modifications to the helper router 
   behavior. The basic protocol behavior remains as specified in Section 
   3 of [OSPFGR]. 
    
   Whenever a helper router encounters a non-refresh LSA (section 3.2 
   [OSPFGR]) which has to be flooded to a restarting router, it exits 
   helper mode. This results in the restarting router quitting GR. This 
   constraint is overkill, and can be optimized. 
                         
    
3.1.1 
      Entering Helper mode 
 
   One of the criteria for a router to enter helper mode (section 3.1 
   [OSPFGR]) requires that all LSAs on the retransmit list on the helper 
   router for the restarting router, should be periodic refresh LSAs. 
   This criterion is very conservative and can be relaxed.  
   In this draft, this has been achieved through an explicit definition 
   of a ‘Topology-Change LSA’ (Section 2.1). This definition reduces the 
   scope of topology changes that necessitate a router to terminate 
   helper mode. 
    
   In light of this, the checks that a router (say Router Y) should 
   perform (Section 3.1 [OSPFGR]) while entering helper mode for a 
   restarting router (say Router X), are modified as follows: 
   On receiving Grace LSA from X, Y should examine the retransmit list 
   for X. If Y finds any ‘Topology-Change LSA’ on the retransmit list 
   and which are not implied acknowledgements to X, Y MUST NOT enter 
   helper mode. 
     
   Rest of the behavior should be as per section 3.1 [OSPFGR]. 
    
    
3.1.2 
      Refusal to enter Helper mode 
 
   In certain scenarios, a router may refuse to enter helper mode after 
   receiving Grace LSAs from a restarting router. This could be due to a 
   local policy configured on the router which prevents it from entering 
   helper mode for the particular restarting router, or the type of 
   graceful restart (planned/unplanned) or the duration of graceful 
   restart. A router could refuse being a helper also due to the 
   presence of ‘Topology-Change LSAs’ on the retransmit list for the 
   restarting router.  
    
Internet Draft 
Holla, Kumar & Gupta   Expires - September 2006               [Page 5] 
           draft-holla-ospf-update-graceful-restart-01.txt  March 2006 
 
 
   In such cases, the router SHOULD immediately send Grace LSAs with the 
   Exit-Grace TLV to the restarting router indicating its reluctance to 
   enter helper mode. The processing and format of this TLV is explained 
   in Section 3.3. 
    
   This helps the restarting router in making an informed decision on 
   whether to enter or abandon a Graceful Restart. In the absence of 
   this mechanism, the restarting router will enter a Graceful Restart 
   and later during adjacency formation, on examining the neighbor’s 
   router/network LSA, it would exit graceful restart. With this 
   mechanism, the restarting router can immediately abandon graceful 
   restart and flush the grace LSAs originated, thus minimizing any 
   possible routing inconsistencies and improving the overall 
   convergence time. 
    
    
3.1.3 
      Exiting Helper mode 
 
   The existing criteria for exiting helper mode are very conservative. 
   They can be relaxed to ensure that the restarting router is made to 
   exit GR only when it is necessary to prevent routing inconsistencies. 
   This has been achieved through an explicit definition of ‘Topology-
   Change LSA’ in Section 2.1. 
 
   1. Action on receiving or originating a ‘Topology-Change LSA’: 
    
      If a helper router receives or originates a ‘Topology-Change LSA’ 
      and the LSA has to be flooded to a restarting router, the helper 
      router MUST immediately terminate helper mode for the restarting 
      router. 
       
      This ensures that the restarting router’s routing table does not 
      have any invalid routes.  
       
      Other LSAs are to be flooded without the helper router exiting 
      helper mode. This might sometimes lead to routing 
      inconsistencies. The modification to the route calculation as 
      proposed below will correct any such problems. 
       
   2. Action on Route Calculation:  
       
      When a helper runs SPF [OSPF], if a route is added or modified 
      making a restarting router as the next hop, then the helper MUST 
      immediately exit helper mode for that restarting router. 
         
    
3.1.4 
      Operation of the Router on Exiting Helper Mode 
 
   The helper router on exiting helper mode before the grace LSAs are 
   flushed by the restarting router SHOULD, send Grace LSAs with the 
Internet Draft 
Holla, Kumar & Gupta   Expires - September 2006               [Page 6] 
           draft-holla-ospf-update-graceful-restart-01.txt  March 2006 
 
 
   Exit-Grace TLV to the restarting router (See description in Section 
   3.3), in addition to the operations specified in Section 3.1[OSPFGR]. 
                                      
     
3.2 
    Operations of the Restarting Router 
 
   This section describes some modifications to the restarting router 
   behavior. Some responsibility of detecting topology changes has now 
   been placed on the restarting router. The basic protocol behavior 
   remains as specified in Section 3 [OSPFGR]. 
    
    
3.2.1 
      Exit Graceful Restart 
    
   A restarting router SHOULD perform the following actions along with 
   those mentioned in the “Exit Graceful Restart” in Section 2.2 
   [OSPFGR]. 
    
   1. If on the restarting router, the inactivity timer fires for a 
   neighbor, or there is a downward transition from 2-way to 1-way with 
   a neighbor, the router SHOULD exit graceful restart.  
    
   2. The restarting router MAY, by examining its pre-restart Router and 
   Network LSAs, build up a list of pre-restart neighbors. It can then 
   start inactivity timers for these neighbors, except those on NBMA 
   interfaces with DR-priority 0. This proves beneficial in certain 
   scenarios (Refer Section 8: case A). 
    
   3. The restarting router, on receiving grace LSA containing the Exit-
   Grace TLV from a helper, MUST acknowledge the LSA and immediately 
   quit GR. However, the LSA MUST NOT be stored in the database. The 
   format of the TLV is described in Section 3.3. 
    
    
3.2.2 
      Configurable Parameters 
 
   Section 2.1 of [OSPFGR] allows a restarting router to use reliable 
   flooding for its Grace LSAs. Since the reliable flooding mechanism 
   takes indeterminate time, it is better if the restarting router waits 
   for a bounded period of time before entering GR. If at the end of 
   this time period, the reliable flooding is incomplete, the router 
   will still enter Graceful Restart.    
    
   In addition to the optional global parameters defined in Section B 
   [OSPFGR], there MAY be a configurable parameter controlling the 
   duration until which the restarting router must wait after initiating 
   GR and before entering GR.  
    
   'RestartNotifyDuration' 

Internet Draft 
Holla, Kumar & Gupta   Expires - September 2006               [Page 7] 
           draft-holla-ospf-update-graceful-restart-01.txt  March 2006 
 
 
   This parameter symbolizes the duration in seconds for which the 
   restarting router waits before entering Graceful Restart after 
   sending Grace-LSAs. However, if all acknowledgements are received 
   within this period, the router can immediately enter Graceful 
   Restart. 
    
   A suggested method of deriving a default value for this parameter is 
   to keep it as a multiple of the largest retransmit timer for any 
   neighbor. This ensures at least a ‘minimum’ number of retransmissions 
   are sent to a neighbor. 
    
   The grace period in the Grace LSAs MUST be inclusive of this time 
   period, and as specified in [OSPFGR], SHOULD be less than 1800 
   seconds. 
    
    
3.3 
    Explicit feedback mechanism using Exit-Grace TLV. 
    
   The restarting router learns about a router not supporting helper 
   mode by examining router and network LSAs (section 2.2 [OSPFGR]). 
   This mechanism is sub-optimal, and in some scenarios, ineffectual 
   (Section 8: Case B). 
   This draft proposes a method for helper routers to communicate with 
   the restarting router in an explicit manner, thus improving 
   convergence time as well as reducing routing holes.  
    
    
3.3.1 
      Sending Grace LSA with the Exit-Grace TLV. 
  
   The Grace LSA with the Exit-Grace TLV SHOULD be sent as unicast 
   Packets to the restarting router on Broadcast, NBMA and P2MP 
   networks. However, on P2P interfaces, the packet should be sent to 
   AllSPFRouters. [OSPF] 
   When this TLV is included, the mandatory Grace TLV (described in 
   [OSPFGR]) MUST NOT be included in the LSA.  
   The sending of this Exit-Grace TLV MAY be made reliable.  
    
    
3.3.2 
      Receiving Grace LSA with Exit-Grace TLV.  
    
   A router, on receiving grace LSA containing the Exit-grace TLV from a 
   neighbor, MUST acknowledge the LSA. The LSA MUST NOT be stored in the 
   database or flooded. If the receiving router is under graceful-
   restart, it must immediately exit graceful restart. If the receiving 
   router is not under Graceful Restart, the TLV will have no impact on 
   the operations of the router. 
    
    
3.3.3 
      Format of Exit-Grace LSA TLV 
    
Internet Draft 
Holla, Kumar & Gupta   Expires - September 2006               [Page 8] 
           draft-holla-ospf-update-graceful-restart-01.txt  March 2006 
 
 
   The Exit-Grace LSA TLV is enclosed in the Opaque link-local scoped 
   Grace LSA. The format of the Grace LSA is specified in [OSPFGR]. 
    
   The format of the Exit-Grace TLV is described below. 
    
    0                   1                   2                   3 
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    |              Type             |             Length            | 
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    |                            Value                              | 
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    
   The type field of the Exit-Grace TLV is assigned an experimental 
   value of 4. The length field, defining the length of the value field 
   in octets, MUST be 1. For non P2P networks, the value MUST be the IP 
   address of the interface through which the helper sends the Grace 
   LSA. For P2P networks, the value MUST be the Router-ID of the helper 
   router. 
    
   If the above TLV is present in a Grace LSA, it is mandatory for the 
   Grace-Period TLV to be absent. The absence of the Grace-Period TLV 
   ensures the receiving router dropping the LSA, as the Grace-Period 
   TLV is specified as mandatory in [OSPFGR].In particular this ensures 
   that implementations not supporting the Exit-Grace TLV will not 
   process the LSA. 
    
   The format of the Grace LSA other than the addition of the above TLV 
   remains same as that mentioned in [OSPFGR]. 
    
    
4. 
   Security Considerations 
    
   This draft raises no new security considerations other than that 
   covered in [OSPFGR] and [OSPF]. 
    
    
5. 
   IANA Considerations 
    
   This document describes a new TLV for Grace LSAs. The TLV type is to 
   be assigned by IANA. The suggested value is 4. (Refer IANA). 
 
 
6. 
   Backward Compatibility 
 
   The compliance of the feature mentioned here, allows for faster and 
   optimal detection of topology changes and thus faster convergence. If 
   one or more neighbors do not support Exit-Grace LSA TLV and/or other 
   features mentioned above and support only RFC 3623, the protocol 
   behavior specified in [OSPFGR] remains unimpaired.  
Internet Draft 
Holla, Kumar & Gupta   Expires - September 2006               [Page 9] 
           draft-holla-ospf-update-graceful-restart-01.txt  March 2006 
 
 
   However, one anomaly for backward compatibility introduced by this 
   draft is documented in Section 7. 
    
    
7. 
   Special cases and considerations 
    
          
                         Area 0 
   RT1-----------------X-----------------RT2---------RT3 
    
    
   In the above topology RT1, X, RT2 and RT3 are all in area 0  
   X and RT2 are implementations which are based on this draft. However, 
   RT1 is based on [OSPFGR] only. 
   Scenario: 
   X having initiated GR has completed adjacency formation with helper 
   RT1, but, is still in the process of forming adjacency with RT2. At 
   this point, RT3 originates a NEW type-5 LSA. Due to the nature of the 
   modifications proposed in this draft, RT2 will not exit helper mode 
   on receipt of this LSA from RT3 (refer sections 2.1 and 3.1.3). 
   However, since X will flood this LSA to RT1, RT1 will exit helper 
   mode. Since, RT1 and X are full with each other, X cannot detect RT1 
   quitting helper mode. Therefore, X continues with GR WITHOUT adding a 
   route to the destination described by the new LSA, as X does not 
   update its forwarding table during GR. This results in a routing 
   hole. This condition will persist until X exits graceful restart. 
    
    
8. 
   Appendix 
 
   Case A 
   Problem Definition: 
   It may not be possible for the restarting router to detect topology 
   changes and exit graceful restart if a 'stub' neighbor goes down 
   before receiving any hello packet from it. Thus the routing table of 
   the restarting router and other routers will be invalid until grace 
   period expiry. 
    
   Ex: 
    
   {topology}--------X-----Y 
   (All in the same area) 
    
   Where X undergoes a Graceful Restart, originates Grace LSAs to Y 
   ('stub' neighbor). If Y goes down immediately after acknowledging the 
   Grace LSA, there is no way X can detect this topology change event 
   and exit GR, before grace period expiry. 
    
   [Refer Section 2.2 [OSPFGR]] 'When to exit Graceful Restart', the 
   criteria for exiting Graceful restart i.e. reforming adjacency with 
Internet Draft 
Holla, Kumar & Gupta   Expires - September 2006              [Page 10] 
           draft-holla-ospf-update-graceful-restart-01.txt  March 2006 
 
 
   all pre-restart neighbors will not be met, so X can exit only after 
   grace-period expiry. 
    
   Case B 
    
   Since the protocol [OSPFGR] does not provide a method for a helper 
   router to notify the restarting router, its exit of helper mode after 
   the adjacency formation is complete, there are possibilities of 
   routing holes existing for a bounded period of time, grace LSA being 
   flushed or grace period expiry. 
    
   Ex:      
          
                         Area 0 
   RT1-----------------X-----------------RT2---------RT3 
                       | 
               Area 1  | 
                       | 
                      RT4 
    
    
   In the above topology RT1, X, RT2 and RT3 are all in area 0; X and 
   RT4 are in Area 1 which is a stub area. 
     
   Scenario: 
   X having initiated GR has completed adjacency formation with helpers 
   RT1 and RT2 and still in the process of forming adjacency with RT4. 
   At this point, RT3 originates a new type-5 LSA. Due to the nature of 
   the protocol, RT2 and RT1 will exit helper mode on receipt of this 
   LSA from RT3 and X respectively. Since, X will not send this LSA to 
   RT4, RT4 will not exit helper mode. RT1 and RT2 have no mechanism to 
   inform X about their quitting of helper mode (since they are already 
   full with X). Therefore, X continues with GR WITHOUT adding a route 
   to the destination described by the new LSA, as X will not update the 
   forwarding table during GR. This results in a routing hole being 
   created at X. This condition will persist until X exits GR. 
    
 
Normative References 
    
   [OSPFGR] Moy, J.,P. Pillay-Esnault,A. Lindem, "Graceful OSPF 
   Restart", RFC 3623, November 2003. 
    
   [OSPF]  Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", STD 54, RFC 2328, April 1998. 
    
   [OSPFDC] Moy, J., “Extending OSPF to support Demand Circuits”, RFC 
   1793, April 1995. 
 
 

Internet Draft 
Holla, Kumar & Gupta   Expires - September 2006              [Page 11] 
           draft-holla-ospf-update-graceful-restart-01.txt  March 2006 
 
 
Informative References 
 
   [IANA] Kompella.K, “IANA Considerations for OSPF”, draft-ietf-ospf-
   iana-01, work in progress. 
    
    
Acknowledgments 
    
   The authors wish to thank Pradeep Shastry, K.L Srini, Saravanak,  
   Abhay, Satish Hampali, Abhishek and Sandeep for their insightful 
   comments and suggestions. The authors also wish to thank Acee Lindem, 
   Don Goodspeed, Vishwas Manral and Padma Pillay-Esnault for their 
   comments. 
    
    
Authors’ Addresses 
    
   Ashok Chandrashekhar Holla 
   Huawei Technologies 
   Bangalore,India 560008 
   ashok_ch@huawei.com 
    
   Anup Kumar T 
   Huawei Technologies 
   Bangalore,India 560008 
   anupkumart@huawei.com 
    
   Sujay Gupta 
   Huawei Technologies 
   Bangalore,India 560008 
   sujayg@huawei.com 
    
    
Intellectual Property Statement 
 
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
Internet Draft 
Holla, Kumar & Gupta   Expires - September 2006              [Page 12] 
           draft-holla-ospf-update-graceful-restart-01.txt  March 2006 
 
 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org.    
    
 
Disclaimer of Validity 
 
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
 
Copyright Statement      
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject 
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
 
 
Acknowledgment 
 
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 
    



















Internet Draft 
Holla, Kumar & Gupta   Expires - September 2006              [Page 13] 


