

                                                               J. Kempf 
Internet Draft                                               DoCoMo USA 
                                                                   Labs 
Document: draft-kempf-mobileip-arch-00.txt                  P. Nikander 
Expires: August 2003                                           Ericsson 
                                                               Research 
                                                            Nomadic Lab 
                                                         February, 2003 
    
    
        Organizing Mobile IP Along Natural Architectural Boundaries  
                                      
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. This document is an 
   individual submission to the Mobile IP Working Group. 
    
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   A natural architectural split exists in Mobile IP between the 
   mechanisms involved in global routing change and the mechanisms 
   involved in local link routing change. The global mechanisms modify 
   the mapping between a Mobile Node's routing identifier (care of 
   address) and its global node identifier (home address). The local 
   mechanisms allow the Mobile Node to obtain IP connectivity on the 
   subnet and provide measures to locally mitigate routing failure 
   while the global routing change is occurring. This draft makes a 
   case for keeping the mechanisms involved in these two architectural 
   components distinct and separate in Mobile IPv6, and suggests that 
   the Mobile IP group might want to think about a separate working 
   group specifically focused on local link routing changes for 
   mobility in Mobile IPv6.    
 
Table of Contents 
 
    
   Kempf                   Expires August 2003                [Page 1] 
   Internet Draft    Think Globally, Act Locally         February, 2003 
    
   1.0  Introduction.................................................2 
   2.0  Global Architectural Elements in Mobile IP...................2 
   3.0  The Local Routing Problem....................................3 
   4.0  Local Architectural Elements in Mobile IP....................3 
   5.0  Security Considerations......................................6 
   6.0  Focusing on Local Link Mobility..............................8 
   7.0  Recommendation...............................................9 
   8.0  References...................................................9 
   9.0  Author Information..........................................10 
   10.0  Full Copyright Statement...................................10 
    
 1.0   Introduction 
    
   Mobile IP [1][2] was developed as a way to support node mobility for 
   IP nodes that are undergoing continuous and unpredictable changes in 
   their point of attachment to the Internet. Movement involves two 
   basic elements: 
    
   - A change in the global routability of packets due to movement 
     betweens subnets, 
   - A change in local link IP connectivity that requires actions on 
     the local subnets. 
    
   In this document, the natural architectural boundaries separating 
   these two elements are discussed, and some suggestions are made for 
   organizing the local link routing change protocol design around this 
   architecture.  
    
 2.0   Global Architectural Elements in Mobile IP 
    
   Since the initial standardization of Mobile IPv4, the architectural 
   basis of Mobile IP [1][2] has been dictated by the global Internet 
   routing architecture. The Internet routing architecture uses an IP 
   address for two purposes: 
    
   - To provide a globally unique node identifier for use by the 
     transport layer, which is the node identifier, 
   - To direct the routing of packets between one end node and another 
     while packets are in flight, which is the routing identifier. 
    
   This conflation of function leads to the need for a global routing 
   proxy, the Home Agent, to maintain a changeable mapping between the 
   node identifier, or home address, and the routing identifier, or 
   care of address. When a Mobile Node moves, the mapping is updated to 
   reflect the new route to the Mobile Node. In this document, the 
   update of the mapping at the Home Agent is called a global routing 
   change. Packets are routed initially to the home address, and then 
   tunneled by the Home Agent to the Mobile Node. In addition, packets 
   from the Mobile Node are typically also reverse tunneled through the 
   Home Agent, if ingress filtering in the access network is operating. 
    

    
   Kempf                       Expires August 2003             [Page 2] 
   Internet Draft    Think Globally, Act Locally         February, 2003 
    
   An immediate consequence of using a routing proxy is the existence 
   of suboptimal routes between some Correspondent Nodes and the Mobile 
   Node. The routing forms a triangle, with the Home Agent (the routing 
   proxy), Correspondent Node, and Mobile Node at the edges. In normal 
   IP routing, packets take the shortest route directly between the end 
   nodes, in this case, the Correspondent Node and Mobile Node. Early 
   work in Mobile IPv4 (now expired) led, in Mobile IPv6, to route 
   optimization being included in the base Mobile IPv6 protocol [2] 
   with proper security protections. Route optimization allows a Mobile 
   Node to propagate the global change in routing identifier directly 
   to  all  Correspondent  Nodes,  thereby  eliminating  the  suboptimal 
   routes. 
    
   An important point to note is that, since the Internet routing 
   architecture has not changed in IPv6, the global architectural 
   elements of Mobile IP have remained substantially the same between 
   Mobile IPv4 and Mobile IPv6. The few architectural changes between 
   Mobile IPv4 and Mobile IPv6 have been primarily related to Home 
   Agent discovery and, as mentioned, to route optimization. 
    
 3.0   The Local Routing Problem 
    
   Unlike the global routing problem, the local routing problem in 
   Mobile IP has received much less attention, until very recently. The 
   local routing problem consists of two parts: 
    
  1) The need for a mechanism by which the Mobile Node obtains a new 
     care of address on a new link,  
  2) The need for a mechanism to temporarily repair the local routing 
     failure due to a switch in link prior to the change in global 
     routing at the Home Agent (and, in route optimized, Mobile IPv6 
     Correspondent Nodes) taking place. 
    
   The extent to which local routing disruption in 2) is a problem for 
   the Mobile Node depends, to a large extent, on its particular 
   traffic pattern. The typical bursty Web browsing traffic that 
   characterizes most Internet traffic today will be largely unaffected 
   by temporary disruptions during handover, especially if the latency 
   in the access network is high. However, for streaming media or real-
   time traffic, routing disruptions during handover can introduce 
   unacceptable artifacts into the transmission. 
    
 4.0   Local Architectural Elements in Mobile IP 
    
   While the global architectural elements in Mobile IP are dictated by 
   the Internet routing architecture, the local architectural elements 
   addressing 1) above have undergone a quite radical change between 
   Mobile IPv4 and Mobile IPv6.  
    
   In Mobile IPv4, a specialized last hop router, called a Foreign 
   Agent, is responsible for maintaining the endpoint of the 
   bidirectional tunnel with the Home Agent. The Foreign Agent performs 
   decapsulation of tunnelled packets from the Home Agent, and 
   encapsulation of reverse tunneled packets to the Home Agent. In many 
    
   Kempf                       Expires August 2003             [Page 3] 
   Internet Draft    Think Globally, Act Locally         February, 2003 
    
   respects, the Foreign Agent looks like an on-link Home Agent. It 
   maintains a binding between the care of address (typically the 
   global address of the Foreign Agent itself) and the link layer 
   address of the Mobile Node, similar to the binding cache maintained 
   by the Home Agent. The expired route optimization draft for Mobile 
   IPv4 even specified that a Foreign Agent could act as an on-link 
   Home Agent for the previous care of address, to allow a Mobile Node 
   to continue utilizing its old care of address when it moves to the 
   new link. The old Foreign Agent tunnels packets to the new Foreign 
   Agent until the global routing change is effected. Re-enforcing this 
   design, the local signaling for establishing a new care of address 
   at the Foreign Agent or requesting that forwarding be performed to 
   an old one is very similar to the global signaling used to change 
   the mapping between the home address and care of address at the Home 
   Agent, or, respectively, to inform Correspondent Nodes about a 
   change in home address to care of address binding.  
    
   In Mobile IPv6, the utilization of the global architectural elements 
   on the local link for solving the first local routing problem was 
   eliminated. Instead, standard IPv6 mechanisms for establishing local 
   link routability and address configuration (both stateless [5][6] 
   and stateful [7]) were specified to replace the Foreign Agent. An 
   initial draft of the Mobile IPv6 specification did contain a design 
   for an on-link Home Agent that used global Mobile IPv6 signaling to 
   allow forwarding from previous care of address, but this was removed 
   due to security considerations. In the current/final version, the 
   Mobile Node itself handles the bidirectional tunnel to the Home 
   Agent, and route optimization with Correspondent Nodes. The 
   replacement of the Foreign Agent with specific local link mechanisms 
   is one of the primary innovations in the Mobile IPv6 design. 
    
   Neither Mobile IPv4 nor Mobile IPv6 addressed 2) above, namely how 
   to repair the local routing failure until the global routing change 
   is complete. There have been three proposed solutions: 
    
   1) "Localized" mobility management to reduce the time required for 
      changing global routing [8][9][10], 
   2) Preconfiguration on the new subnet to reduce the time required 
      for changing local routing [3][13], 
   3) Fixing the routing failure when the Mobile Node switches links so 
      that routing to and from the Mobile Node is continued until the 
      global routing change is complete [3][13]. 
    
   We discuss these in the following subsections. 
    
   4.1 "Localized" Mobility Management 
    
   "Localized" mobility management involves introducing a regional 
   routing proxy, called a Regional Registration agent or Mobility 
   Anchor Point somewhere in the access network topologically close to 
   the Mobile Node. When the Mobile Node moves from one subnet to 
   another, it changes its care of address at the regional routing 
   proxy rather than at the Home Agent. Because the regional routing 
   proxy is topologically closer, the delay between the Mobile Node 
    
   Kempf                       Expires August 2003             [Page 4] 
   Internet Draft    Think Globally, Act Locally         February, 2003 
    
   obtaining a new care of address and the global routing change is 
   reduced (but not eliminated). The basic mechanism used by the 
   regional routing proxy is the same as that used by the Home Agent, 
   namely a binding between a more global address, in this case the 
   regional care of address, and a more local one, the local care of 
   address. When the Mobile Node ultimately does change from one 
   regional routing proxy to another, the Home Agent must be notified 
   to change the home address to regional care of address mapping, but 
   this occurs much less frequently. 
    
   Localized mobility management does not address reducing the amount 
   of time required for the Mobile Node to detect that is has moved or 
   to obtain a new care of address, nor does it provide a solution for 
   fixing up the routing failure after the link is switched. Because 
   the regional routing proxy is at some distance from the actual link, 
   multiple proxies may be required to tune the performance, and 
   complete elimination of the delay in the routing change may not be 
   possible. At the extreme, a regional routing proxy may be required 
   for every subnet, like a Foreign Agent, or for every aggregation 
   router serving a collection of subnets through a low capacity edge 
   link, like a T1 line.  
    
   Because both the mechanism and expected deployment pattern of the 
   regional routing proxy involve mechanisms more similar to the global 
   Mobile IP architectural elements, "localized" mobility management 
   should more properly be called "regionalized" mobility management, 
   and therefore regional routing proxies are more properly considered 
   part of the global, not local, Mobile IP architecture. 
    
   4.2 Preconfiguration 
    
   Preconfiguration involves two components: 
    
   1) Obtaining   information   on   wireless   connectivity   between 
      geographically adjacent subnets, 
   2) Using this information to preconfigure various components of the 
      local link configuration on the new link, by either contacting a 
      router on the other subnet directly or indirectly through the 
      current default router. 
    
   Step 1) is often called "Candidate Access Router Discovery" [11] 
   because the discovered last hop (or access) routers are candidates 
   for handover.  
    
   In step 2), the kinds of information that can be preconfigured 
   include: 
    
   - Security and authentication information, such as IPsec security 
     associations or AAA contexts, 
   - First hop router in the new subnet, and other router information, 
   - Subnet prefix on the new subnet, 
   - New care of address, 
   - Global routing change (i.e. change in home address to care of 
     address mapping). 
    
   Kempf                       Expires August 2003             [Page 5] 
   Internet Draft    Think Globally, Act Locally         February, 2003 
    
    
   Preconfiguration tightly coupled to link handover and without any 
   local routing repair, i.e. performing the global routing change 
   prior to the actual link switch, tends to perform poorly [17] 
   because the timing of the link switch is probabilistic and the 
   Mobile Node can lose routing while still on the old link if the 
   switch happens too late. Preconfiguration with local route repair 
   performs better, but when the preconfiguration signaling is also 
   tightly coupled with handover, the signaling can occasionally be 
   disrupted by the handover causing the handover to fail over to 
   standard Mobile IP on-link configuration after the Mobile Node has 
   performed the link switch [18]. 
    
   Removing the tight coupling of preconfiguration signaling with 
   handover can potentially eliminate these difficult timing problems. 
   However, any preconfiguration that requires reserving resources on a 
   new router (such as security associations or new care of addresses) 
   generates a resource management problem if the Mobile Node 
   ultimately chooses not to move to that router. Preconfiguring the 
   Mobile Node with router IP addresses of some type or link layer 
   addresses on the new link has no problem because no state is created 
   on the new router and there is no tight timing with handover. 
    
   4.3 Local Route Repair 
    
   Local route repair involves having the old access router forward 
   packets to the new access router during the period in which the 
   Mobile Node is undergoing the link switch and is waiting for the 
   change in global home address to care of address mapping [13][3] to 
   complete. Typically, this process is accomplished by using an IP in 
   IP tunnel or Routing Header between the two routers, but it could 
   also be done using MPLS. The old and new access routers maintain a 
   set of host routes pointing to a bidirectional tunnel between them, 
   allowing the Mobile Node to send and receive packets as if it were 
   on the old subnet. The tunnel is meant to be a temporary measure 
   until the new care of address has been established, but it can be 
   maintained until the Mobile Node requests that it be dropped, if the 
   Mobile Node is moving so quickly that the global routing change 
   fails to complete before another movement. 
    
   The current proposal for Mobile IPv6 [13] requires the Mobile Node 
   to signal the old access router after undergoing a handover to start 
   the tunnel. The use of global Mobile IPv6 signaling to perform this 
   is questionable on architectural grounds, as will be discussed 
   below. In addition, the signaling assumes that the new access 
   router's ingress filter is willing to pass packets with the Mobile 
   Node's previous care of address. From the design, it is entirely 
   unclear why the old access router is privileged with respect to 
   starting the tunnel. The new access router could equally well 
   perform the tunnel initiation, after being prompted to do so by the 
   Mobile Node. 
    
 5.0   Security Considerations 
    
    
   Kempf                       Expires August 2003             [Page 6] 
   Internet Draft    Think Globally, Act Locally         February, 2003 
    
   As with other aspects of Mobile IP, security has a component 
   involving local routing change and a component involving global 
   routing change. The mechanisms to implement these components differ 
   in Mobile IPv4 and Mobile IPv6. 
 
   5.1 Mobile IPv4 
 
   In the base Mobile IPv4 protocol [1], the same mechanism is used for 
   authenticating both local routing change and global routing change, 
   but only the global authentication mechanism is required. These are: 
 
   - For changing the node identifier to routing identifier mapping, an 
     extension to the Mobile IPv4 Registration Request message to the 
     Home Agent is required to contain a message authentication code 
     calculated with keyed MD5. Additionally, the same mechanism may be 
     used to authenticate a pass-through node identifier to routing 
     identifier change from the Foreign Agent to Home Agent. 
     
   - For changing the routing identifier locally, the same mechanism 
     provides for local change authentication between the Mobile Node 
     and Foreign Agent. 
 
   - For local repair of routing during handover, the same mechanism 
     provides for authentication between two Foreign Agents to assure 
     that the Foreign Agents are authorized to initiate routing changes 
     [3]. 
 
   In each case, the security relationship is different (Mobile-Home 
   Agent, Mobile-Foreign Agent, Foreign Agent-Home Agent, or Foreign 
   Agent-Foreign Agent), although the basic mechanism - a message 
   extension with a keyed MD5 MAC - is the same. 
 
   5.2 Mobile IPv6 
 
   As is the case for the general Mobile IPv6 design, the security for 
   the local and global aspects of routing change has been separated. 
   Security for global routing changes consists of the following two 
   mechanisms: 
 
   - A specialized IPsec security association for protecting signaling 
     traffic between the Home Agent and Mobile Node [4], 
    
   - A specialized security algorithm called Return Routability that 
     uses an extension on the Binding Update message to secure route 
     optimization routing changes with the Correspondent Node [1]. 
 
   The security for the local routing repair is not yet completely 
   specified. Aspects of security that involve utilizing RFC 2461 and 
   RFC 2462 [5][6][12] to obtain router information and local care of 
   address if stateless autoconfiguration is used, or DHCP security [7] 
   (currently unspecified), if stateful address autoconfiguration is 
   used, utilize the appropriate security mechanisms for the relevant 
   protocol. However, proposals for repairing local routing failures 
   based on global Mobile IP signaling specify that IPsec should be 
    
   Kempf                       Expires August 2003             [Page 7] 
   Internet Draft    Think Globally, Act Locally         February, 2003 
    
   used without describing in detail how the security association is 
   constructed [13].  
 
   Unlike Mobile IPv4, Mobile IPv6 contains no Mobile IP-specific 
   mechanisms for establishing credentials with the local network. It 
   is assumed that these credentials are established in a manner 
   consistent with that used by any host wishing gain access to the 
   local network. This design is architecturally cleaner, since it 
   separates the authentication mechanism from the mobility protocol 
   and so avoids the need for different authentication mechanisms 
   depending on whether the host is mobile or not. Many link protocols 
   have their own authentication mechanisms, but an IP based 
   alternative for those that don't (PANA [14]) is currently under 
   development in the IETF, and it is a candidate AAA protocol between 
   a Mobile Node and the network.  
 
 6.0   Focusing on Local Link Mobility 
    
   As discussed above, one of the most important innovations of Mobile 
   IPv6 is the elimination of global mechanisms used to solve local 
   routing problems. The reason this innovation is important is because 
   it introduces modularity into the Mobile IP design. On the local 
   side, Mobile IPv6 nodes can utilize standard IPv6 local link route 
   discovery, address configuration, and security mechanisms during 
   initial deployments while the local mechanisms are improved. 
   Correspondingly on the global side, although a change in the 
   Internet routing architecture to better accommodate mobility might 
   seem unlikely now, a modular design would allow such a change to 
   occur without impacting the local link protocol. The local and 
   global mechanisms also exhibit a difference in scalability. The 
   global routing proxies scale like servers, in the sense that 
   reliability depends on multiple expensive, very reliable nodes with 
   highly replicated state so that the unlikely failure of one node 
   requires a hot standby to quickly take over. The local routing 
   scales like routers, in the sense that reliability depends on 
   multiple, cheap nodes with replicated functionality and minimal 
   replicated state so that routing fails over automatically with 
   minimal to no host involvement.  
    
   This suggests that the signaling for mitigating local routing 
   failure should be derivative of the local link signaling in RFC 2461 
   rather than the global signaling used with the Home Agent and 
   Correspondent Node. The function of this signaling includes 
   providing the Mobile Node with prehandover information about 
   wireless connectivity to other subnets for preconfiguration, 
   allowing the Mobile Node to perform preconfiguration, and initiating 
   and terminating the routing tunnel between the old subnet and the 
   new. Changes in RFC 2461 and 2462 to optimize posthandover local 
   link configuration for mobility should also be considered. Some 
   existing proposals along these lines (examples are [15][16]) address 
   reducing latency in duplicate address detection and router 
   discovery.  
    

    
   Kempf                       Expires August 2003             [Page 8] 
   Internet Draft    Think Globally, Act Locally         February, 2003 
    
 7.0   Recommendation 
    
   The interdependence between the various functions performed by the 
   protocols involved in local link mobility suggests that a well-
   integrated design might benefit from having a tightly coupled design 
   effort to minimze duplication. For example, the relative merit of 
   prehandover configuration depends heavily on how long posthandover 
   configuration requires and how long the local routing repair can 
   reasonably be maintained. If local link configuration is fast enough 
   and   acceptable   routing   repair   algorithms   are   in   place, 
   preconfiguration becomes a less attractive choice, for the reasons 
   cited above. As another example, prehandover wireless connectivity 
   information need only be provided by one protocol. The local link 
   mobility protocols should be well designed to provide orthogonal 
   functionality, such as is already the case for RFC 2461 and 2462. In 
   order to properly co-ordinate the design effort, the Mobile IP 
   Working Group might want to consider setting up a separate working 
   group specifically to address local link mobility. This group would 
   encompass the fast handover work currently in the Mobile IP working 
   group, the candidate access router discovery work in the Seamoby 
   working group, and the optimized link configuration work in IPv6 
   working group. Such a working group could focus specifically on 
   designing local routing enhancements for mobility that fit well with 
   RFC 2461 and 2462, and leverage the existing design effort made in 
   local link routing changes for Mobile IPv6, where applicable. 
    
 8.0   References 
    
    [1] Perkins, C., "IP Mobility Support for IPv4", RFC 3220, August, 
        2002. 
    [2] Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and Arkko, J., "Mobility Support in 
        IPv6", draft-ietf-mobileip-ipv6-20.txt, a work in progress. 
    [3] El Malki, K., editor, "Low Latency Handoffs in Mobile IPv4," 
        draft-ietf-mobileip-lowlatency-handoffs-v4-04.txt, a work in 
        progress. 
    [4] Arkko, J., Devarapalli, V., and Dupont, F., "Using IPsec to 
        Protect Mobile IPv6 Signaling between Mobile Nodes and Home 
        Agents", draft-ietf-mobileip-mipv6-ha-ipsec-02.txt, a work in 
        progress. 
    [5] Narten, T., Nordmark, E., and Simpson, W., "Neighbor Discovery 
        for IP Version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 2461, December, 1998. 
    [6] Thomson, S., and Narten, T., "IPv6 Stateless Address 
        Autoconfiguration", RFC 2462, December, 1998. 
    [7] Droms, R., editor, "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for 
        IPv6 (DHCPv6)", draft-ietf-dhc-dhcpv6-28.txt, a work in 
        progress. 
    [8] Williams, C., "Localized Mobility Management Requirements", 
        draft-ietf-mobileip-lmm-requirements-02.txt, a work in 
        progress. 
    [9] Gustafsson, E., et. al., "Mobile IPv4 Regional Registration", 
        draft-ietf-mobileip-reg-tunnel-07.txt, a work in progress. 
    [10] Soliman, H., et. al., " Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 mobility 
        management (HMIPv6)", draft-ietf-mobileip-hmipv6-07.txt, a work 
        in progress. 
    
   Kempf                       Expires August 2003             [Page 9] 
   Internet Draft    Think Globally, Act Locally         February, 2003 
    
    [11] Liebsch, M., and Singh, A., "Candidate Access Router 
        Discovery", draft-ietf-seamoby-card-protocol-00.txt, a work in 
        progress. 
    [12] http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/send-charter.html 
    [13] Koodli, R., editor, "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6," draft-
        ietf-mobileip-fast-mipv6-05.txt, a work in progress. 
    [14] http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/pana-charter.html  
    [15] Moore, N., "Optimistic Duplicate Address Detection", draft-
        moore-ipv6-optimistic-dad-02.txt, a work in progress. 
    [16] Khalil, M., et. al., "IPv6 Fast Router Advertisement", draft-
        mkhalil-ipv6-fastra-03.txt, a work in progress. 
    [17] Kempf, J., et. al., "Link Synchronous Mobile IPv4 Handover 
        Algorithms," submitted to JSAC special issue on All-IP Wireless 
        Networks. 
    [18] Kempf, J., et. al., "Fast Mobile IPv6 Handover Packet Loss 
        Performance," Proceedings of WCNC 2003, March, 2003. 
    
 9.0   Author Information 
    
   James Kempf                  Email: kempf@docomolabs-usa.com 
   DoCoMo USA Labs              Telephone: +1 408 451 4711 
   181 Metro Drive 
   Suite 300 
   San Jose, CA 
   95110 
   USA 
    
   Pekka Nikander                 EMail: pekka.nikander@nomadiclab.com 
   Ericsson Research Nomadic Lab  Phone: +358 9 299 1 
   Jorvas  FIN-02420 
   FINLAND 
    
 10.0  Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.  
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English.  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and 
   will not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or 
   assigns.  This document and the information contained herein is 
   provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE 
   INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
    
   Kempf                       Expires August 2003             [Page 
   10] 
   Internet Draft    Think Globally, Act Locally         February, 2003 
    
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 



















































    
   Kempf                       Expires August 2003             [Page 
   11] 