Internet Draft                                            D. Groth
Intended status: Experimental                            ITUA Inc.
Expires: 8 January 2009                               12 July 2008

                               DNS Encryption
                     draft-groth-dns-encryption-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that
   any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is
   aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she
   becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of
   BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 8 January 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

















Groth, D.              Expires 8 January 2009                   [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              DNS Encryption                     July 2008

Abstract

   This document requests IANA registration of a new DNS OpCode and
   ErrorCode type in facilitating encryption of DNS requests and
   replies and feed back to the client if plain text requests are not
   acceptable. Once this OpCode is seen the DNS server attempts to
   decrypt the request using it's private OpenPGP key. Inside the
   encrypted packet will be an AES key which the client expects to be
   used when the server encrypts a response. A server can advertise
   that it is capable of DNS encryption by advertising OpenPGP pubic
   keys as CERT records against the host names of any NS records.

Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 .

Table of Contents

   1. Introduction.....................................................3
      1.1. The Problem.................................................3
      1.2. Use of OpenPGP Keys.........................................3
      1.3. The Solution................................................4
   2. Using OpenPGP keys to Secure DNS.................................4
      2.1. Structure of OpenPGP Key Information........................4
      2.2. Wild Cards..................................................4
      2.3. Extended Information in User Ids............................4
      2.4. Separation of Fields........................................5
   3. Encrypted DNS Packet Structure...................................5
      3.1. Inside the Encrypted DNS Packet Structure...................6
   4. CERT Glue Records................................................6
   5. Security Considerations..........................................6
      5.1. DNS is inherently insecure..................................6
      5.2. Reducing Information Leaks..................................6
      5.3. OpenPGP Key Trust...........................................7
         5.3.1. Introduction...........................................7
         5.3.2. 6 degrees of separation in a practical sense...........7
         5.3.3. Out of band fingerprint verification...................8
   6. IANA Considerations..............................................8
   7. Conclusions......................................................8
   8. Acknowledgements.................................................9
   9. References.......................................................9








Groth, D.              Expires 8 January 2009                   [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              DNS Encryption                     July 2008

1. Introduction

1.1. The Problem

   DNS (RFC 1034, RFC 1035) is a global system; NAPTR records (RFC 2915,
   RFC 2916), a subset of DNS services, is the first of possibly many
   such DNS services which reveal sensitive information about the
   querying agent when requests are sent, regardless of any replies
   returned. This query information alone is of value to entities in a
   position to monitor network points.

   While there is ongoing work with DNSsec to verify DNS the
   authenticity of replies to enable the detection of tampering, no
   active efforts are focused on protecting the confidentiality of DNS
   requests and replies.

1.2. Use of OpenPGP Keys

   It would be a bad security decision to use X.509 certificates, SMTP-
   TLS has shown that very few commercial certificates have been
   purchased, most people use self-signed or invalid certificates.

   Looking beyond X.509 seems imperative in reaching new and innovative
   security paradigms. It is possible to leverage existing OpenPGP web
   of trust meta information to draw similar security decisions about
   X.509 certificates issued by commercial Certificate Authorities.

   While the focus of this draft is on individuals making their own
   security choices, there is nothing preventing commercial entities
   from offering signing services against host keys. The standard
   practise is for OpenPGP user ids to be signed by multiple entities,
   and this practise could be utilised by multiple commercial entities.

1.3. Extended or No Expiry Keys and Certificates

   With current threats existing for very short periods, typically hours
   to days at most, there is no practical reason for keys to expire in 1
   or even 5 years, the primary reason most certificates expire with
   such frequency is due to monetary reason which is detrimental to
   security.

   OpenPGP keys can be cached which is advantageous in preventing or
   detecting man in the middle attacks. This would make such attacks
   more costly to operate.

   While not directly related to the this topic, internet browsers do
   not warn or otherwise notify the user when a certificate for a
   website has changed, making it virtually impossible to detect a man
   in the middle attack to be discovered, or even notice once it has


Groth, D.              Expires 8 January 2009                   [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              DNS Encryption                     July 2008

   ceased. Constantly changing certificates seem to be a bad security
   practise.

1.4. Requirements for a Solution

   The performance requirements on DNS in general is severe, so a
   solution that both protects DNS and doesn't decrease performance
   significantly is imperative and difficult.

   To achieve a successful outcome we can observe existing protocols
   that achieve similar results by allowing both encrypted and
   unencrypted communications simultaneously. SMTP-TLS is one such
   method that seems to have achieved a reasonable level of success. The
   method to enable encryption with SMTP-TLS cannot be directly used
   with DNS due to the binary based protocol. Instead we can examine the
   OpCode which is contained in the third byte of all DNS requests to
   determine if the DNS request is encrypted, IANA needs to allocate a
   new OpCode for this purpose. Once this OpCode is detected name
   servers supporting this capability will attempt to decrypt from the
   4th byte onwards.

2. Using OpenPGP keys to Secure DNS

2.1. Structure of OpenPGP Key Information

   OpenPGP was designed specifically for text based communication and
   file encryption, so most of the user id sections of keys contain a
   name, an email address and possibly a comment. So computer based
   systems can easily parse the information present in user ids which
   can contain any valid UTF-8 string, this string must use a fixed
   format as computers can not cope with variation as easily as humans
   can. The client will compare the host name of the system it connects
   with to all host names appearing in user ids. All host names MUST BE
   prefixed with 'dns:';

     dns:nameserver.example.com

2.2. Wild Cards

   Wild card host names are allowed, however only one level is allowed,
   so *.example.com would match nameserver.example.com and
   a.example.com but would not match this.nameserver.example.com.
   Multiple wild card characters per host name are not allowed,
   *.*.example.com

2.3. Extended Information in User Ids

   Extended information in OpenPGP user ids such as the information
   that can be contained in X.509 certificates (RFC 3280) is desirable.
   All prefixes must be lower case and the 'dns' prefix is mandatory

Groth, D.              Expires 8 January 2009                   [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               DNS Encryption                    July 2008

   and must always exist in each host user id however all other
   prefixes may be absent or must only appear once per user id, for the
   purposes of this internet draft the only valid prefixes in OpenPGP
   user ids are;

     c: can be used as the prefix for any valid 2 letter ISO country
            code, e.g. c:AU

     st: can be used as the prefix for state, province or territory
            designation, e.g. st:NSW

     l: can be used as the prefix for location, such as town, suburb or
            city name, e.g. l:Sydney

     o: can be used as the prefix for organisation or company name,
            e.g. o:ITUA Inc.

     ou: can be used as the prefix for organisation unit, or department
            in the organisation the information applies to, e.g.
            ou:Server Administration

     uri: can be used as the prefix for valid URIs, e.g.
                  uri:http://www.example.com

2.4. Separation of Fields

   The vertical bar character '|' must be used to separate the different
   sections, this character must not be used as part of the information
   contained within any section. URIs must use hex encoding if the pipe
   character is needed.

   The following is an example of a valid OpenPGP user id for the
   purpose of a DNS name server host name;

     dns:example.com|dns:*.example.com|c:AU|st:NSW|l:Sydney|o:ITUA
               Inc.|ou:Server Administration|uri:http://www.example.com

2.5. Name Servers with Multiple Host Names

   A single name server may be authoritative for multiple host names
   and/or IPs, the 'dns' prefix is the only prefix allowed to exist
   multiple times on the same user id. If the organisation information
   is different you could use multiple user ids, one per entity, or
   multiple OpenPGP keys. The information contained in one user id MUST
   NOT be mixed or used with host name(s) on other user ids of the same
   OpenPGP key. Alternatively multiple OpenPGP keys could be used to
   facilitate this.




Groth, D.               Expires 8 January 2009                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                DNS Encryption                   July 2008

3. Encrypted DNS Packet Structure

      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B C D E F
   +--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
   |           0x00          |         0x00        |
   +--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
   |QR| OpCode |     0x0     |      Encrypted Data |
   +--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+

   where:
            The first 2 bytes must be NULL to prevent confusion
            occurring with the real query ID inside the encrypted
            packet.
   QR       A one bit field for backward compatibility, it must always
            be 0x0 to prevent information from leaking.
   OPCODE   A new OpCode needs to be allocated by IANA for this purpose
            to be compatible with existing DNS infrastructure.
   DATA     RFC 3766 indicates that 2048 bit RSA and 128 bit AES should
            be secure until 2016, at which point 4096 bit RSA and 256
            bit AES MUST BE used however these key sizes may be prior
            to this date as well.

3.1. Inside the Encrypted DNS Packet Structure

   The first 2, 3 or 4 bytes contains the AES key the DNS client is
   expecting the reply to be encrypted with. The packet contains a
   standard DNS request from the 5th byte which should be processed in
   the same manner as any other DNS request except that the reply MUST
   be encrypted using the AES key. The AES key can be 16, 24 or 32
   bytes in length depending if it is a 128, 192 or 256 bit key being
   sent. There MUST be 16 or 8 bytes of null padding if the AES key
   size being used is smaller than 256 bit.

4. CERT Glue Records

   If registries and registrars allowed CERT glue records (RFC 4398) in
   their respective zones and returned these with any IP glue records,
   this would minimise the number of packets required to facilitate
   encryption. Each glue record must be per name server host name, not
   per zone to minimise the disruption caused if IPs for a host name
   change.

5. Security Considerations

5.1. DNS is inherently insecure

   DNS encryption does not introduce any new security issues beyond any
   already present in DNS. This draft attempts to solve some of the
   attacks that can occur with DNS. Its becoming more imperative the
   further DNS is extended beyond its original intent to be able to

Groth, D.                Expires 8 January 2009                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              DNS Encryption                     July 2008

   protect both the query and response, however to be most efficient at
   this there is always a trade off between efficiency and how much
   information is leaked and to whom.

   In an ideal world if the server responds that the request was
   corrupt or unable to decrypt the request should be sent to the next
   name server, once the pool of name servers is exhausted the
   recursive look-up could fall back to plain text mode to ensure best
   effort is met, although all software implementing this internet
   draft must offer the option to not fall back to plain text mode.

5.2. Reducing Information Leaks

   During a normal DNS look-up the full host name is sent to each name
   server, and then either a suitable reply is returned, record not
   found or other error, or a NS to submit a new query to. While this
   method appears to be the most efficient, when switching between
   systems that can handle encrypted look-ups and systems that can't
   this could leak too much information about the information being
   sought after.

   DNS clients and resolvers must split the gTLD or ccTLD zone name
   from the fully qualified host name being requested. The zone
   information must be used to find relevant NS records and only the
   relevant name servers that may have the information must receive the
   full query.

5.3. OpenPGP Key Confidence

5.3.1. Introduction

   The word trust has long been abused by mathematicians and
   cryptographers alike to mean how much confidence you have that the
   key belongs to the people you think it does. No two people use the
   OpenPGP trust options in an identical manner, just like no two
   people would rank a room full of people in the same manner with
   respect to the task of how much confidence they would place in the
   person really having the OpenPGP User ID they purport to own.

   Currently most X.509 certificates are issued in a way that people
   see virtually no difference between certificate authorities, it's
   not until you get into the finer points of their issuing practises
   and policies that you can begin to build a similar confidence in
   each certificate authority and the certificates they issue.

   The confidence system OpenPGP adopted normally has coarse options in
   which you can group individuals, that isn't to say software built
   around OpenPGP keys can't build it's own system in a much more
   refined way, either with individual exceptions or by being able to


Groth, D.              Expires 8 January 2009                   [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              DNS Encryption                     July 2008

   group individuals into groups or classes of users based on the
   confidence you have in those people to introduce other keys to you.

5.3.2. 6 degrees of separation in a practical sense

   The PGP web of trust is in part based on the 6 degrees of separation
   principal, that is everyone in the world knows everyone else through
   6 other people.

   For the purpose of generating a tangible confidence rating that a
   host controls a particular host key we will be using arbitrary
   numbers. Default values of 50 points for fully trusted keys and 30
   points for marginally trusted keys are good base values although any
   arbitrary number should work, but may vary based on individual
   circumstances.

   For anyone we don't know directly we will calculate trust paths
   between keys by decaying points from the second relationship
   outwards. Again these are arbitrary values and they can be
   customised based on individual needs. The general case will use a
   base of 50% for full trust introduction, 25% trust for marginal
   introduction, -25% for untrustworthy and 0% for don't know.

   You follow trust paths between the local key ring and the key of the
   name server you are intending to request information from, branching
   out until you get a points value of 0 or less, or find a direct path
   to the host key. In either case you no longer follow that branch any
   further.

   For the system to be confident about an OpenPGP key you set the
   minimum points required, again this can be any arbitrary number such
   as 100.

5.3.3. Refining Confidence Scores

   The system must have the ability for more finely grained control
   over individual scores, the default method in OpenPGP is too coarse,
   and doesn't easily allow you to distinguish between the capabilities
   of different individuals. For example you trust Bob's judgement when
   verifying other people holding the right keys more than most. You
   add an exception for Bob so that anything he trusts will be assigned
   75 points instead of 50.

   Alice on the other hand is gullible, while you trust Alice, you
   don't trust the verifications she makes, an exception is made for
   Alice so that anything Alice trusts will only be assigned 10 points.

   In this hypothetical example, even with both Alice and Bob trusting
   a key your system still wouldn't hit the 100 points needed, so you
   obviously need to get out and make more friends.

Groth, D.              Expires 8 January 2009                   [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              DNS Encryption                     July 2008

5.3.4. Out of band fingerprint verification

   Just as people already hold key signing parties to verify each
   others OpenPGP user ids, variations on this would start to appear
   depending on the level each party needs or wants to secure their
   resources. It is a reasonable assumption that not all domains need
   strong protection, and it is up to both the administrators of
   domains and those making DNS requests to have the right level of
   security for their needs.

   For example the domain of a bank would be at more at risk and hence
   worth protecting more than a personal domain for someone's blog that
   gets 10 hits a month. Banks already have a relationship with their
   customers and it would be easy for them to provide the fingerprint
   of their user ids on business cards and other stationary items.

   This process is commonly used to verify personal keys but there is
   no reason this concept couldn't be extended so people could also
   sign host keys.

   The worst level of security would be no different to most mail
   servers using self signed certificates for SMTP-TLS.

6. IANA Considerations

   This internet draft requests that IANA delegate a new OpCode so name
   servers can distinguish encrypted DNS requests.

   This internet draft requests that IANA delegate a new ErrorCode so
   name servers can respond to that they only reply to encrypted DNS
   requests when a non-encrypted request is encounted.

7. Conclusions

   As with other protocols, it is becoming imperative to prevent
   disclosure of dialogues between the intended client and server in
   the interest of security and privacy. Even though DNS is a public
   database, the general public is unaware of how DNS works or that
   their requests and replies can be intercepted or altered.
   If a large number of popular name servers were to adopt strong
   cryptography, many attacks on DNS would be rendered useless.

8. Acknowledgements

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot. Although
   it seems to mostly work in Open Office its a shame that ODF wasn't
   specifically supported. This document also used draft-timms-encrypt-
   naptr-00.txt as inspiration. Big thanks to Philipp Guehring and Ian
   G. for letting me bounce initial ideas off them, as well other finer


Groth, D.              Expires 8 January 2009                   [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              DNS Encryption                     July 2008

   points along the way. Suggestions and tips from Paul Vixie, Simon P.
   Ditner, and many others on mailing lists and forums. Finally a great
   big thanks to Denise, without her help none of this would be possible.

9. References

   [RFC1034] Mockapetris, P., "Domain Names - Concepts and Facilities",
             STD 13, RFC 1034, November 1987

   [RFC1035] Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
             specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987

   [RFC2440] Callas, et. al., "OpenPGP Message Format", Network Working
             Group, RFC 2440, November 1998

   [RFC2915] Mealling & Daniel, "The Naming Authority Pointer (NAPTR)
             DNS Resource Record", Network Working Group, RFC 2915,
             September 2000

   [RFC2916] Faltstrom, P., "E.164 number and DNS", Network Working
             Group, RFC 2915, September 2000

   [RFC3280] Housley, et. al., "Internet X.509 Public Key
             Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
             (CRL) Profile", Network Working Group, RFC 3280, April 2002

   [RFC3766] Orman, H., "Determining Strengths For Public Keys Used",
             VPN Consortium, RFC 3766, April 2004

   [RFC4398] Josefsson, S., "Storing Certificates in the Domain Name
             System (DNS)", Network Working Group, RFC 4398, March 2006

Author's Addresses

   Duane Groth
   Internet Telephony Users Association Inc.
   P.O. Box 75
   Banksia NSW 2216
   Australia
   Email: support@e164.org

Groth, D.               Expires 8 January 2009                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              DNS Encryption                     July 2008

Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.














Groth, D.               Expires 8 January 2009                 [Page 11]
