INTERNET-DRAFT                                           George Davey
draft-davey-iialp-00.txt                        Des Moines University
Expires: August 29, 2004                                   Dan Arthur
                                        Freese Notise Global Internet
                                                          Paula Davey
                                                 KIDputer Corporation
                                                  IIALP Working Group
                                                     www.abuselog.org
                                                         Feb 29, 2004
              Iowa Internet Annoyance Logging Protocol
                    (IIALP) pronounced I'-alp              

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 29, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

  This draft describes a system by which Internet Annoyances can be
  logged quickly and automatically using IIALP (Iowa Internet Annoyance
  Logging Protocol).  The annoyance logs on a particular IIALP Server
  are condensed and forwarded up the IIALP hierarchy to central Root
  IIALP Servers for central annoyance queries.  Serial numbers and TTL
  values keep the individual reports organized and dated.  One unique
  complaint per IP per epoch period prevents flooding.  Differences
  in detail and propagation parameters exist between Root and
  Subordinate IIALP Servers to allow for more detail to be kept at the
  originating IIALP Server. Transmission Echoes, Redundant Handshaking,
  and Hierarchy Structure eliminate erroneous reporting.  Routers and 
  software running IIALP can use IIALP to create dynamic black hole
  lists for offending AS numbers that exceed a threshold.  IIALP allows
  for an infinite number of different types of annoyances to exist but
  has concise templates for common annoyances such as SPAM.  IIALP
  is a centralized logging system for Internet annoyance event
  reporting.

Internet-Draft    Iowa Internet Annoyance Logging Protocol


Table of Contents

   0.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   1.  Automated Nuisance Reporting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   1a. ISP Upstream Propagation to Root IIALP Servers . . . . . . . . 4
   2.  Serial Numbers and TTL values at ISP and at Root . . . . . . . 4
   3.  Reversible Interoperability with IIALP log files . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Certificate and IP Access-List Compatibility . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Dynamic points based black hole lists  . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5a. Points System at ISP and Root  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  Anti-Spoofing and Anti-DOS structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   7.  Designed for Integration with SMTP servers . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7a. Links to SMTP and Local Null IIALP logging . . . . . . . . . . 8
   8.  Root IIALP Servers Public vs. Private queries  . . . . . . . . 8
   8a. Root Server links to originating IIALP Server  . . . . . . . . 8
   9.  Logging AS Number, ICANN Registrar Name, Telephone, etc. . . . 9
   9a. A New TLD for logging such as .log  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   10. Upstream IIALP records are condensed Subordinate records. . . 10
   10a.Local vs. Upstream Logs and size reduction techniques . . . . 11
   11. One Unique complaint per IP per epoch period  . . . . . . . . 11
   12. Time synchronization and timestamp accuracy expectations  . . 12
   13. Security and anonymous IIALP annoyance logging  . . . . . . . 12
   






























Davey, et al.            Expires August 29, 2004         [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Iowa Internet Annoyance Logging Protocol

0. Introduction

   Annoyance reporting was not a problem in the early years of the
   Internet.  You simply emailed the ARIN contact for the Autonomous
   System (AS) that was annoying you and the system administrator
   there would cut of the user and launch an investigation into the
   annoyance and provide the abused with an answer on what happened
   and what measures were taken to correct the problem.

   Those were the good old days.  Now ARIN contact email addresses
   are overwhelmed by spam and abuse reporting is more often missed.
   A centralized automated system for annoyance reporting, including
   spam, is needed to help protect the Internet end user that does not
   understand even what an ARIN contact email is.  

   The answer is to design a protocol engineered to bring tranquility
   and accuracy to the chaos of Internet annoyance logging that is
   going on today.  IIALP is that specific protocol.  Designed to fit
   the needs of the current Internet annoyance logging void and
   beyond.
   The following points of function describe specific aspects of IIALP
   and are described as criteria for a successful Internet annoyance
   logging system.

   
1.  Automated Nuisance Reporting.

    IIALP will allow end users and system administrators alike to enter
    annoyance complaint records into a central system for the Internet.
    IIALP is automated.  Both the end user and the system admin
    will enter an IIALP annoyance event records into the IIALP Server
    at their ISP.  This IIALP annoyance event record will be logged in
    full detail at the ISP IIALP Server.   As the annoyance event moves
    up the IIALP hierarchy toward the Root IIALP Server it gets
    condensed into a summary of the event.

    All of this occurs automatically once the event is put into the
    IIALP system.  The IIALP system also automatically attempts to
    notify IIALP Servers that have annoyance records at the Root 
    IIALP Servers.
    If it were an IIALP annoyance record marked with the real-time
    flag set, the Root server would query the Subordinate server in an
    attempt to match the Root IALP record to a null event record at the
    Subordinate IIALP Server at the abusing IP site.
    Events that are not real-time are logged at the Subordinate IIALP
    server by the Root IIALP servers.

    Some IIALP annoyance events are real-time such as an email server
    anti-virus gateway.  Some IIALP annoyance logs are old news and
    are not real time.  Both have TTL that may be the same or different
    depending on the IIALP Server administrator settings for that IIALP
    server.

Davey, et al.            Expires August 29, 2004         [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Iowa Internet Annoyance Logging Protocol


1a. ISP Upstream Propagation to Root IIALP Servers.

    IIALP Servers are links together using a hierarchy.  There are 3
    types of IIALP Servers , Root, Subordinate, and Rogue.

    Rogue IIALP Servers are IIALP Servers that are not associated with
    an AS Number.  These would be operated, for instance, by ISPs that
    do not control the AS number assigned to their IP Space.
    Subordinate IIALP Servers are IIALP Servers hosted on Internet
    Networks that control an AS Number assigned to the IP address 
    space.  Root IIALP servers are IIALP Servers at the top of the
    hierarchy and provide a place for the centralized accumulation 
    of upstream IIALP events and downstream IIALP notifications.

    Rogue IIALP Servers can only communicate upstream to Subordinate
    IIALP Servers and cannot communicate upstream to Root IIALP
    Servers.
    Rogue IIALP Servers communicate downstream to end users and lower
    level ISP entities lacking an AS Number.  

    Subordinate IIALP Servers communicate upstream to the IIALP Root
    servers.  Subordinate IIALP Servers communicate downstream to
    Rogue IIALP Servers and to end users using the IP Space allocated
    to the AS Number associated with that IIALP Server.

    Root IIALP Servers communicate upstream to other Root IIALP Servers
    and downstream only to Subordinate IIALP Servers.  IIALP Root
    servers only contain compacted IIALP records. Subordinate IIALP
    servers can contain full and compacted records.  Rogue IIALP
    servers can only contain full IIALP records.  For every compacted
    record at the Root or Subordinate IIALP Server, there always will
    exist an original full IIALP record at the originating Subordinate
    IIALP Server or at the originating Rogue IIALP Server.
     

2.  Serial Numbers and TTL values at ISP and at Root.

    IIALP event records contain a serial number, TTL, and time stamp.
    The serial number for Root IIALP Servers contains enough data to
    link it back to the matching full record at either the Subordinate
    IIALP Server or the Rogue IIALP Server.  The TTL and time stamp
    determine how long the IIALP event record will remain in the IIALP
    system.  The Root IIALP Servers have a fixed TTL value for each 
    complaint type.  The Subordinate and Rogue IIALP Servers can have
    different TTL values for different IIALP records as long as the TTL
    is equal to or greater that that of the Root IIALP Server for a 
    particular annoyance type.  Once the TTL has expired for an
    IIALP annoyance record it is moved from the live system to an 
    archive folder for backup and eventual removal.  Root IIALP
    servers backup all dead records for a fixed time period to be 
    determined at a later date.


Davey, et al.            Expires August 29, 2004         [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Iowa Internet Annoyance Logging Protocol

3.  Reversible Interoperability with IIALP log files.  

    IIALP Servers may store and retrieve IIALP annoyance event records
    in many different ways.  Some IIALP Servers may store records in
    text files and others in a database.  All IIALP Servers must have
    reverse compatibility with IIALP log files.  IIALP log files are
    ASCI files ending with a .log extension.  The first 5 characters of
    the IIALP log file are "IIALP" followed by the version number of
    IIALP running on the server that created the IIALP log file.  This
    way, no matter what signal and system creates an IIALP Server, the
    ability to import and export IIALP log files ensures they can be 
    transferred to any other IIALP Server.  This is important for
    compatibility cross-platform exchange of IIALP annoyance records.

    The second line of the file contains a control byte to determine
    if the log file is a full or compacted record.  ASCI "0" for full
    and ASCI "1" for compacted.  The control byte is followed by an
    ACSI integer of variable length that determines IIALP annoyance
    type. Type "1" is for bulk unsolicited email or SPAM.

    Following all the control bytes is the actual IIALP record in the
    correct format for that particular type of IIALP annoyance record.
    The record always starts with the (serial number/TTL/time stamp)
    digest followed by the remainder of the record.

    The final format for a condensed IIALP log file for SPAM is on the
    order of 26 bytes in length.  The final format for a full IIALP
    log file for SPAM is on the order of 256 bytes in length.
    The log file is the vehicle for IIALP Server annoyance record
    transfers between IIALP Servers.


4.  Certificate and IP Access-List Compatibility.

    The IIALP must have support for existing public and private
    certificate infrastructure.  The IIALP must also have support for 
    IP access-list type of communication security.  These 2 criteria
    will ensure secure, accurate and reliable reporting of annoyances.
    These properties will also enhance the security of the abused
    party.
    The idea is the protect the abused and expose the abuser.  All
    stages of IIALP implementation and design need to adhere to this
    important constraint.


5.  Dynamic points based black hole lists.

    One of the most important goals of IIALP is to allow ISP entities 
    and entities at large to query IIALP Servers to determine the top
    abusers (IP addresses and AS Numbers) for a particular region or,
    as in the case of the Root IIALP Servers, the entire Internet.


Davey, et al.            Expires August 29, 2004         [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Iowa Internet Annoyance Logging Protocol

    
    The top abusers are determined dynamically and in most cases
    instantly.  This allows for routers and computers running IIALP
    to "black hole" these abuser IP addresses or IP address space.

    The concept of points based comes from the fact that IIALP is a
    system for logging annoyances and allows for a query in a form
    allowing for the query output to be the abusers above a certain
    abuse threshold number.  For instance a query could be for the
    top 1000 abusers, or it could be for the abusers with over 5000
    IIALP SPAM type 1 records the abuser IP Space.  The idea is that
    IIALP keeps track of the abusers and does not in any way block
    anything by itself.  IIALP is used as a tool to generate a
    "points based" dynamic black hole list.
    Rich higher level languages such as XML could interface with
    IIALP and shut down the worlds banking system to an abusing IP
    address all in real-time.
    


5a. Points System at ISP vs. Root.

    The queries at Root, Subordinate and Rogue IIALP Servers with
    respect to top abusers or abusers with a number of abuse records
    above a certain value is very similar.  This allows the IIALP
    system to have Rogue, Subordinate, and Root black hole lists.
    For example, for your computers maybe a system administrator would
    only want to black hole abusers at the Subordinate level, but for
    the enterprise core Internet router the system administrator may 
    want to use the Root IIALP Servers to generate the black hole list.
    Protecting the users from local threats and the routers
    from distant global threats all in real time using IIALP.


6.  Anti-Spoofing and Anti-DOS structure.

    Anti-Spoofing is very important to the integrity of IIALP. A bogus
    report filed on behalf of an unknowing user would be detrimental to
    the accuracy and integrity of IIALP.  For the reason the handshake
    between the client and Rogue or Subordinate IIALP Server must be
    rigorous enough to ensure that the IP address cannot be masked or
    manipulated.  Redundant handshaking ensures the IP address sending
    the annoyance event record is really using that IP and is not
    using spoofing to fake it.  This communication safeguard is in
    addition to the certificate and access-list support in IIALP.

    Denial of Service (DOS) could also affect the accuracy and
    availability of IIALP.  For this reason the handshake needs to
    be such that it can quickly ignore multiple attempts to send
    records by IP addresses that are not permitted to send multiple
    records.  Also duplicate annoyance records from the same IP
    address will need to be ignored to prevent a person from
    artificially re-voicing their complaints by mass producing them.

Davey, et al.            Expires August 29, 2004         [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Iowa Internet Annoyance Logging Protocol
   
    In case an email virus, for instance, causes the generation
    millions of bogus complaints against an AS Number that is not 
    involved with writing the virus, there needs to be a way to 
    nullify the records using manual inspection.  This is done to
    avoid damage to the IIALP system not to try and figure out
    which complaints are DOS and which ones are real.
  
    There will need to be 2 types, blind clearing and visible clearing.
    Blind clearing means the records are deleted and the Subordinate
    IIALP Servers are alerted to delete as well.  Replacing all the 
    IIALP annoyance records for that AS Number with a single blind 
    record that stops the accumulation for a set time interval.
    That AS number is ignored for a fixed interval determined by the
    TTL of the blind record.  The TTL for a blind record my be
    different at the local IIALP Server than it is at the Root IIALP
    server.

    Visible clearing means the IALP servers keep track of the bogus
    records as if they were viable, but the IIALP Servers when giving
    query results will identify the record with a visible clearing
    flag so that it is counted for statistical reasons, but is not
    used in any points calculations relating to black hole lists
    derived using IIALP queries.

    There is a setting in IIALP called the Circuit Breaker
    setting (CB). a CB value of 1 = 1 Query/Second  
    The CB Value determines the  maximum rate at which an IIALP
    server can accept requests.  The rate varies depending on
    whether the request is public or private.

    Another setting called Byte Echo (BE) setting.
    A BE value of 1 = 1 byte required. This setting can be applied in
    the send, receive or both by a flag set by the IIALP Server.
    Only IIALP Servers can require these setting.  The remote IIALP
    client must accept these and other constraints in order to keep
    the IIALP conversation going with that IIALP Server.

    The handshake can be made to be costly to the remote IIALP
    client in terms of bandwidth.  Servers that have DOS attacks
    frequently can implement BE to cause the requests to require
    lengthy and complex headers to the remote side.  The remote
    side IIALP client may be required to receive these complex
    headers as well.  This keeps lower bandwidth DOS attacks
    down.  Private IIALP sessions would not have BE unless specified
    by the local IIALP Server administrator.
   
  

7.  Designed for Integration with SMTP servers.

    IIALP needs to be made compatible with the various SMTP 
    implementations whenever possible.


Davey, et al.            Expires August 29, 2004         [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Iowa Internet Annoyance Logging Protocol


7a. Links to SMTP and Local Null IIALP logging
  
    SMTP servers can log a null IIALP annoyance record at the 
    IIALP Server to mark email send events.  Sending email 
    is an event on the SMTP server that is very likely to 
    generate an annoyance report.  It is for this reason the 
    IIALP allows for any server implementing IIALP to create
    a null record at the IIALP Server marking the email send 
    event.  If a real-time IIALP annoyance record was created
    for a SPAM email received somewhere else by a Firewall 
    device, it may be possible to match up many of the sending
    events, with the complaint events.  This is very helpful
    for locating open mail Relays, etc.  Or creating real-time
    black hole lists.
    Null records are extremely small and usually carry very long 
    TTL values.  Other types of null events such as at the
    type of null event that might occur, for instance, on a
    firewall or router device may have a shorter TTL.
    Many other protocols other than SMTP could also use null IIALP
    event records to mark events that have potential to generate
    annoyance.


8.  Root IIALP Servers Public vs. Private queries

    Root IIALP Servers can be queried by the public just like the
    who-is servers are today.  Public queries are a special class 
    that requires specific security criteria set by Root IIALP 
    administrator and the CB value.

    Public domain and commercial software might use IIALP to 
    query the Root servers for top threats upon start up.
    Email client software plug-ins using IIALP could allow users
    to very quickly send an IIALP annoyance report to their local
    Rogue or Subordinate IIALP Server.
    Subordinate IIALP Servers are setup by the IIALP admin to 
    query Root IIALP Servers at higher rates than public queries.
    Law enforcement branches such as the FBI could 
    operate a Subordinate IIALP Server and compile data from
    the Root servers to help them find large abusers on the
    Internet.


8a. Root Server links to originating IIALP Server

    Root IIALP Server records are always linked to Subordinate
    records which may in tern be linked to Rogue IIALP Server
    records.  The idea is that by querying the Root servers
    you can find the problem, then by following the links and
    querying the Subordinate servers you can get the detailed
    record which may show more data such as optional data fields
    in a particular IIALP full record.

Davey, et al.            Expires August 29, 2004         [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Iowa Internet Annoyance Logging Protocol

    The Root IIALP Servers always have only condensed records.
    When a query is made, only the condensed record is output.
    It is with the serial number that the link is established to
    the Subordinate IIALP Server.  The serial number points to 
    which Subordinate server it came from.  The serial number on
    the Subordinate IIALP Server record may in turn point to the
    originating full record on the Rogue IIALP Server.
    
    During an investigation the FBI could use IIALP to help
    identify networks or phone systems where abuse is more common
    there by narrowing the search helping them save resources.
    For historical reasons the TTL dead Root IIALP records can
    be archived forever and can be made available to the public
    or private by some means.  Subordinate and Root IIALP Server
    operators would also be encouraged to archive the records to
    DVD-R or some media of choice.  Investigators and historians
    could use the archived data to see what the hot spots may 
    have been at another time.
   
    While the live data is very useful in stopping attacks and
    annoyances, the archived data could offered as historical 
    annoyance trends.


9.  Logging AS Number, ICANN Registrar Name, Telephone, etc.

    What to keep at the Root server condensed records?  This will
    need to have some flexibility as new technologies emerge.
    Initially the Root servers will keep the timestamp digest,
    which links to the Subordinate IIALP Servers.  The digest
    also identifies the record type, TTL, etc.
    The Root IIALP Servers will primarily also keep the following
    identity types when applicable with each record:

    IP Address and assigned AS Number
    FQDN and ICAAN registrar
    PSTN phone number and PSTN Number operator for that number

    When a complaint finally makes it to the Root IIALP
    server, the Root server will try and contact the identities
    controlling the identifying assets such as IP addresses,
    domain names, and PSTN phone numbers causing the abuse.

    A Root server getting a SPAM abuse report originating from an
    SMTP server IP will send a record of the report to the 
    Subordinate IIALP Server for that IP AS Number.

    To find asset holders identified in IIALP records a DNS 
    naming convention will need to be established.

    To locate IIALP servers for a particular AS Number an IIALP 
    service record is placed at the DNS servers serving that
    AS Number.

Davey, et al.            Expires August 29, 2004         [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Iowa Internet Annoyance Logging Protocol

    The PSTN companies would have an IIALP Server for
    taking records from digital abuse where a phone number is
    associated with it.  SPAM with a 1-800 number is an example.
    Another example would be IP telephony abuse.

    For the domain naming system IIALP Servers could be established
    at a particular URL such as IIALP.domain.TLD

    Whatever the naming convention, it will be important so that
    Root servers receiving annoyance logs from somewhere on the
    Internet can let the Subordinate servers know there is a new
    record that has been added for their asset space or AS Number.


9a. A New TLD for IIALP logging namespace such as .log

    Establish a new TDN such as .log and the naming convention
    becomes very simple. For example, AS Number 2252 would have
    an IIALP Server listening at
    IIALP://2252.log

    The PSTN number 515-221-2500 would be listening at
    IIALP://5152212500.log

    The FQDN microsoft.com would be listening at
    IIALP://microsoftcom.log

    This allows for a simplified method for identifying the asset
    holders used in Internet abuse acts.  A company like Microsoft
    may have a Subordinate server identified as microsoftcom.log and
    if it holds an AS Number 56156116165 and so could also have
    56156116165.log point to the same Subordinate server.  Although
    It could have 1 Subordinate server for its AS Number and another
    Subordinate server for its namespace.
    In the case of PSTN primary circuit holders, an IIALP Server
    for the PSTN number block might be a separate IIALP Server.
    The key is to use DNS, either as service records, or
    a new TLD.  Whatever the naming convention, the DNS records
    will be populated from existing ARIN, PSTN and Domain Registrar
    Databases information.
    

10. Upstream IIALP records are condensed Subordinate records.

    There are 2 basic record templates for each complaint type 
    a full record and a condensed record.
    The full records are held at the Rogue and Subordinate 
    IIALP Servers and contain more detail of the annoyance.
    When the full record is passed up to the Root it is exported 
    for transport as a condensed record.
    The condensed record mostly would contain only the identifying
    and timing attributes of the full record.

Davey, et al.            Expires August 29, 2004         [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Iowa Internet Annoyance Logging Protocol

10a.Local vs. Upstream Logs and size reduction techniques.

    For some record types the condensed records might be compressed
    in a supported compression format for that template set.
    A template set is a specification set for a template format for
    a full and a condensed record pair.
    Supported compression types will likely be added as new 
    technologies arise.

    Encoding is necessary for SPAM reporting to keep the reports
    small.  For instance a an IP address is expressed in ASCI as
    a 15 byte word.  The IP address, converted to a binary number,
    encoded to base 36, is represented by 6 ASCI characters. 
    Encoding types will need to be added over time as newer
    technologies arise.


11. One Unique complaint per IP per epoch period.

    IIALP would be worthless if IIALP clients were not limited in 
    the number of IIALP annoyance reports made.  Each IIALP client
    can only create 1 complaint per IP, per epoch period.  The epoch
    period is determined by the local and Root IIALP Server 
    administrators.  The Root IIALP Servers epoch period is set by
    the Root IIALP Server administrators to keep the number of
    records at a manageable level.  The Subordinate and Rogue
    IIALP Servers epoch period is set by the Root IIALP Server 
    administrators to keep the number of records at a manageable
    value.  In the case where the epoch period is longer at the Root
    than at the Subordinate, the Subordinate will need to retry the
    upload of the compressed record to the Root IIALP Server.  Once
    the epoch period expires the next retry will complete.
    The idea is that no one person can make a big impact to the Root
    IIALP Servers but a million people all annoyed by the same SPAM
    can make a huge impact.
    An particular IP address can only complain about each IP
    address only 1 time during each epoch period.


12. Time synchronization and timestamp accuracy expectations.

    All Root, Subordinate and Rogue IIALP Servers must be Stratum
    1 NTP synchronized.  Accuracy for reporting is expected to be
    within milliseconds of actual GMT.  Timing is very critical
    for the proper function of IIALP.  This is especially true with
    IIALP records that have the real-time flag set.  The hopes of
    finding a matching null record if one exists become quite 
    a bit more difficult if the time is off for IIALP Servers.






Davey, et al.            Expires August 29, 2004         [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    Iowa Internet Annoyance Logging Protocol

13. Security and anonymous IIALP annoyance logging.
    As stated earlier the abused are protected by their AS Number 
    holder or asset holding institution.  The IP of the
    annoyed may be unknown to all but the Subordinate IIALP Server.
    It may be such that only private queries can get that IP
    number back.  The IP address may be in the record but may 
    not be offered to the public if the abused so desires.


14. IPV6 Considerations.

    There will certainly need to be record templates made for IPV6
    Internet abuse as well.  It is too early to tell whether these 
    templates would be a subset of the IPv4 templates or whether
    IPV6 record templates would be all new.  In some cases it may be
    that both subsets and all new templates both exist.  There will
    be a need to evaluate which scenario make the most sense.

end
Iowa Internet Annoyance Logging Protocol
Comments are desired for contact info see http://www.abuselog.org
draft-davey-iialp-00.txt
Expires: August 29, 2004
































Davey, et al.            Expires August 29, 2004         [Page 12]