


Internet Architecture Board,                              G. Huston, Ed.
Internet Engineering Steering                                      APNIC
Group                                                     B. Wijnen, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                      IESG
Expires: March 4, 2006                                   August 31, 2005


         Process for the IAB and IESG selection of IAOC members
                  draft-iab-iesg-iaoc-selection-02.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 4, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This memo outlines the process by which the IAB and the IESG makes
   selections of members of the IETF Administrative Oversight Committee.

Document Revision Notes

   [RFC Editor: Please remove this section prior to publication.]




Huston & Wijnen           Expires March 4, 2006                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     IAB/IESG Selection of IAOC Members        August 2005


   The following changes have been made to the draft:


   draft-iab-iesg-iaoc-selection-02:


      Section 1 Introduction
         Added a comment that the Nominations Committee shall use the
         qualifications and section criteria described in this document,
         and that the ISOC Board of Trustees may also make use of these
         criteria and qualifications.

      Section 2 Qualifications and Selection Criteria
         Added a comment that the Nominations Committee-selected member
         is accountable to the entire IETF (as per IESG and IAB-selected
         members).


   draft-iab-iesg-iaoc-selection-01:


      Section 3.1 Nominations and Eligibility
         Reworded a potential ambiguity over recusal in selection.


   draft-iab-iesg-iaoc-selection-00:


      Merged drafts
         This document is a merge of the IAB and IESG drafts on IAOC
         selection.


   draft-iab-iaoc-selection-01:


      Confirmation of selected Candidate
         On the basis that this is an IAB selection as distinct from an
         IETF selection, the step of confirmation of the selected
         candidate by the IESG has been removed.

      Section 3.4 Timeframe
         Extended the time frame to allow for a total time of between 5
         to 7 weeks for this process.







Huston & Wijnen           Expires March 4, 2006                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     IAB/IESG Selection of IAOC Members        August 2005


1.  Introduction

   The IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA) provides the
   administrative structure required to support the IETF standards
   process and to support the IETF's technical activities.  Within this
   activity is the office of an Internet Administrative Director (IAD)
   and the Internet Administrative Oversight Committee (IAOC).  In
   addition to the ex-officio roles of the IETF Chair and IAB Chair on
   this committee, the IAB and IESG are each responsible for the
   appointment of one voting member of this committee.

   This memo outlines the process by which the IAB and IESG make their
   selections.  This process will also be used in the event of mid-term
   vacancies that may arise with these positions.

   The document also provides guidance to the IETF Nominations Committee
   regarding desireable qualifications and selection criteria for IAOC
   candidates.

   The same guidance may be used by the ISOC Board of Trustees within
   their process of IAOC member appointment.

1.1  Overview of IAOC

   The IASA is described in [RFC4071].  It is headed by a full-time
   Internet Society (ISOC) employee, the IETF Administrative Director
   (IAD), an officer empowered to act on behalf of the IASA at the
   direction of the IAOC.

   The IAOC's role is to provide appropriate direction to the IAD, to
   review the IAD's regular reports, and to oversee the IASA functions
   to ensure that the administrative needs of the IETF community are
   being properly met.  The IAOC's mission is not to be engaged in the
   day-to-day administrative work of IASA, but rather to provide
   appropriate direction, oversight and approval.

   As described in [RFC4071], the IAOC's responsibilities are:

   o  To select the IAD and provide high-level review and direction for
      his or her work.  This task should be handled by a sub-committee,
      as described in [RFC4071].

   o  To review the IAD's plans and contracts to ensure that they will
      meet the administrative needs of the IETF.

   o  To track whether the IASA functions are meeting the IETF
      community's administrative needs, and to work with the IAD to
      determine a plan for corrective action if they are not.



Huston & Wijnen           Expires March 4, 2006                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     IAB/IESG Selection of IAOC Members        August 2005


   o  To review the IAD's budget proposals to ensure that they will meet
      the IETF's needs, and review the IAD's regular financial reports.

   o  To ensure that the IASA is run in a transparent and accountable
      manner.  While the day-to-day work should be delegated to the IAD
      and others, the IAOC is responsible for ensuring that IASA
      finances and operational status are tracked appropriately, and
      that monthly, quarterly, and annual financial and operational
      reports are published to the IETF community.

   o  To designate, in consultation with the IAB and the IESG, the
      person or people who carry out the tasks which other IETF process
      documents say are carried out by the IETF Executive Director.

   The IAOC's role is to direct and review, not perform, the work of the
   IAD and IASA.  The IAOC holds periodic teleconferences and face-to-
   face meetings as needed to carry out the IAOC's duties efficiently
   and effectively.

1.2  Overview of Selection Process

   In brief, this document describes the time frame and procedures for
   the IAB and IESG to solicit public input and make a selection for the
   position.

2.  Desirable Qualifications and Selection Criteria for IETF Nominated
    IAOC members

   The qualifications and selection criteria described in this section
   shall be used by the IAB and IESG in selecting a suitably qualified
   candidate for the IAOC position.  As described in [RFC4071] the IETF
   Nominations Committee also has the responsibility to select IAOC
   members, and the Nominations Committee shall also use these
   desireable qualifications and selection criteria to guide their
   selection process.  The same guidance may be used by the ISOC Board
   of Trustees within their process of IAOC member appointment.

   Candidates for these IAOC positions should have knowledge of the
   IETF, knowledge of contracts and financial procedures, and
   familiarity with the administrative support needs of the IAB, the
   IESG, and the IETF standards process.

   The candidates are also expected to be able to understand the
   respective roles and responsibilities of the IETF and ISOC in this
   activity, and be able to articulate these roles within the IETF
   community.

   The candidates will also be expected to exercise all the duties of an



Huston & Wijnen           Expires March 4, 2006                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     IAB/IESG Selection of IAOC Members        August 2005


   IAOC member, including being prepared to undertake any associated
   responsibilities, including the setting of administrative support
   policies, oversight of the administrative operations of the IETF,
   representing the interests of the IETF to the IAOC, and be able to
   undertake full participation in all Committee meetings and Committee
   activities.

   In the case of the IAB-selected member of the IAOC, this individual
   does not directly represent the IAB.  Similarly for the IESG-selected
   member of the IAOC, this individual does not directly represent the
   IESG.  The IAB and IESG selected members are accountable directly to
   the IETF community.

   In the case of IAOC members selected by the IETF Nominations
   Committee, such members do not represent any particular sub-grouping
   of IETF participants.  IETF Nominations Committee selected IAOC
   members are accountable directly to the entire IETF community.

3.  IAB and IESG Selection Process of an IAOC member

3.1  Nominations and Eligibility

   The IAB and IESG will alternate year by year in making a public call
   for nominations on the ietf-announce@ietf.org mailing list.  The
   public call will specify the manner by which nominations will be
   accepted and the means by which the list of nominees will be
   published.

   Self-nominations are permitted.  Along with the name and contact
   information for each candidate, details about the candidate's
   background and qualifications for the position should be attached to
   the nomination.  All IETF participants, including working group
   chairs, IETF Nominating Committee members, IAB and IESG members are
   eligible for nomination.

   IAB members who accept a nomination for an IAB-selected position will
   recuse themselves from IAB selection discussions.  Similarly, IESG
   members who accept a nomination for an IESG-selected position will
   recuse themselves from IESG selection discussions.

3.2  Selection

   The selecting body will publish the list of nominated persons prior
   to making a decision, allowing time for the community to pass any
   relevant comments to that body.

   The selecting body will review the nomination material, any submitted
   comments, and make their selection.



Huston & Wijnen           Expires March 4, 2006                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     IAB/IESG Selection of IAOC Members        August 2005


3.3  Care of Personal Information

   The following procedures will be used by the IAB and IESG in managing
   candidates' personal information:

   o  The candidate's name will be published, with all other candidate
      names, at the close of the nominations period.

   o  Except as noted above, all information provided to the IAB or IESG
      during this process will be kept as confidential to that body.

3.4  Term of Office and Selection Timeframe

   The IAB and IESG expect to seat their selected committee member at
   the first IETF meeting of every second year, for a two year term of
   office.  The IAB and IESG will alternate each year in undertaking a
   selection, except for the initial selection.  For the first year the
   IAB and IESG will operate their selection process concurrently.  Also
   for the first year the IESG-selected candidate will serve on the
   committee for an initial term ending with the first IETF meeting of
   the following year, and the IAB-selected candidate will serve for a
   term one year longer than the IESG-selected candidate.  Thereafter
   the candidates will be seated for two year terms.

   Basic time frame requirements for the selection process are as
   follows:

   o  2 - 3 weeks for solicitation of nominations.

   o  3 - 4 weeks for review of nominees, deliberation and selection.

   In November of every year, the selecting body of that year will
   announce the specific dates for the selection process for that year,
   following the guidelines above.

3.5  Mid-term Vacancies

   This document describes the process for the general appointment of
   IAB-selected and IESG-selected IAOC members.  However, if the
   appointed member is unable to serve the full two year term, the
   selecting body may, at its discretion, immediately select a
   replacement to serve the remainder of the term using the interim
   process defined in Section 3.5.1.  If the selecting body does not
   invoke the interim process, the next biannual selection process will
   fill the vacancy.






Huston & Wijnen           Expires March 4, 2006                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     IAB/IESG Selection of IAOC Members        August 2005


3.5.1  Interim Appointment Process

   If the selecting body elects to fill the mid-term vacancy before the
   next biannual selection, a separate time line will be announced and
   the remainder of the process described in this document will be
   followed.

4.  Acknowledgements

   This document is based extensively on RFC 3677 [RFC3677].  It has
   benefited from helpful review comments from Harald Alvestrand, Brian
   Carpenter, Leslie Daigle, Rob Evans, Michael Patton, and Margaret
   Wasserman.

5.  Informative References

   [RFC3677]  Daigle, L. and Internet Architecture Board, "IETF ISOC
              Board of Trustee Appointment Procedures", BCP 77,
              RFC 3677, December 2003.

   [RFC4071]  Austein, R. and B. Wijnen, "Structure of the IETF
              Administrative Support Activity (IASA)", BCP 101,
              RFC 4071, April 2005.


Authors' Addresses

   Geoff Huston (editor)
   APNIC

   Email: gih@apnic.net


   Bert Wijnen (editor)
   Internet Engineering Steering Group

   Email: bwijnen@lucent.com

Appendix A.  IAB Members

   Internet Architecture Board members at the time this document was
   drafted were:


      Bernard Aboba
      Loa Andersson
      Brian Carpenter
      Leslie Daigle



Huston & Wijnen           Expires March 4, 2006                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     IAB/IESG Selection of IAOC Members        August 2005


      Patrik Faltstrom
      Bob Hinden
      Kurtis Lindqvist
      David Meyer
      Pekka Nikander
      Eric Rescorla
      Pete Resnick
      Janathan Rosenberg
      Lixia Zhang

Appendix B.  IESG Members

   Internet Engineering Steering Group members at the time this document
   was drafted were:


      Brian Carpenter
      Bill Fenner
      Ted Hardie
      Sam Hartman
      Scott Hollenbeck
      Russell Housley
      David Kessens
      Allison Mankin
      Mark Townsley
      Jon Peterson
      Margaret Wasserman
      Bert Wijnen
      Alex Zinin






















Huston & Wijnen           Expires March 4, 2006                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     IAB/IESG Selection of IAOC Members        August 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Huston & Wijnen           Expires March 4, 2006                 [Page 9]

