


   Context and Micro-mobility Routing Working Group      J. Kempf, 
                                                         Editor 
   Internet Draft                                         
   draft-ietf-seamoby-context-transfer-problem-stat-      
   03.txt 
   Expires: April, 2002                                   
    
    
       Problem Description: Reasons For Performing Context Transfers 
                   Between Nodes in an IP Access Network 
             
Status of This Memo 
     
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. Internet-Drafts are working 
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, 
   and its working groups. Note that other groups may also distribute 
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
     
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.  
    
   Copyright Notice  
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001). All Rights Reserved.  





















     
   Kempf, editor Informational - Expires April 2002         [Page 1] 
                  Context Transfer Problem Statement      October 2001 
    
Abstract  
    
   In IP access networks that support host mobility, the routing paths 
   between the host and the network may change frequently and rapidly. 
   In some cases, the host may establish certain routing-related 
   services on subnets that are left behind when the host moves. 
   Examples of such services are AAA, header compression, and QoS. In 
   order for the host to obtain those services on the new subnet, the 
   host must explicitly re-establish the service by performing the 
   necessary signaling flows from scratch. In some cases, this process 
   would considerably slow the process of establishing the mobile host 
   on the new subnet. An alternative is to transfer information on the 
   existing state associated with these services, or context, to the 
   new subnet, a process called "context transfer". This document 
   discusses the desirability of context transfer for facilitating 
   seamless IP mobility. 
    
Table of Contents 
      
   1.0  Introduction.................................................2 
   2.0  Reference Definitions........................................3 
   3.0  Scope of the Context Transfer Problem........................4 
   4.0  The Need for Context Transfer................................4 
     4.1 Fast Routing-Related Service Re-establishment...............4 
        4.1.1 Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA)....4 
        4.1.2 Header Compression.....................................5 
        4.1.3 Quality of Service (QoS)...............................5 
     4.2 Interoperability............................................6 
   5.0  Limitations on Context Transfer..............................6 
     5.1 Router Compatibility........................................6 
     5.2 Requirement to Re-initialize Service from Scratch...........7 
     5.3 Suitability for the Particular Service......................7 
     5.4 Layer 2 Solutions Better....................................7 
   6.0  Performance Considerations...................................7 
   7.0  Security Considerations......................................7 
   8.0  Recommendations..............................................8 
   9.0  Acknowledgements.............................................8 
   10.0  References..................................................8 
   11.0  Complete List of Authors' Addresses.........................9 
   12.0  Full Copyright Statement...................................11 
   13.0  Funding Acknowledgement....................................12 
            
1.0     Introduction  
    
   In networks where the hosts are mobile, the routing path through the 
   network must often be changed in order to deliver the host's IP 
   traffic to the new point of access. Changing the basic routing path 
   is the job of a IP mobility protocol, such as Mobile IPv4 [1] and 
   Mobile IPv6 [2]. But the success of real time services such as VoIP 
   telephony, video, etc., in a mobile environment depends heavily upon 
   the minimization of the impact of this traffic redirection. In the 
     
   Kempf, editor    Informational - Expires April 2002      [Page 2] 
                  Context Transfer Problem Statement      October 2001 
    
   process of establishing the new routing path, the nodes along the 
   new path must be prepared to provide similar routing treatment to 
   the IP packets as was provided along the old routing path. 
      
   In many cases, the routing treatment of IP packets within a network 
   may be regulated by a collection of routing-related services that 
   influence how packets for the host are treated. For example, whether 
   a particular host has the right to obtain any routing at all out of 
   the local subnet may depend on whether the host negotiated a 
   successful AAA exchange with a network access server at some point 
   in the past. Establishing these services initially results in a 
   certain amount of related state within the network and requires a 
   perhaps considerable amount of time for the protocol exchanges. If 
   the host is required to re-establish those services by the same 
   process as it uses to initially establish them, delay-sensitive real 
   time traffic may be seriously impacted. 
    
   An alternative is to transfer enough information on the routing-
   related service state, or context, to the new subnet so that the 
   services can be re-established quickly, rather than require the 
   mobile host to establish them from scratch. The transfer of routing-
   related service context may be advantageous in minimizing the impact 
   of host mobility on, for example, AAA, header compression, QoS, 
   policy, and possibly sub-IP protocols and services such as PPP. 
   Context transfer at a minimum can be used to replicate the 
   configuration information needed to establish the respective 
   protocols and services. In addition, it may also provide the 
   capability to replicate state information, allowing stateful 
   protocols and services at the new node to be activated along the new 
   path with less delay and less signaling overhead.  
    
   In this document, a case is made for why the Seamoby Working Group 
   should investigate context transfer. 
             
2.0     Reference Definitions  
             
   Context  
    
      The information on the current state of a routing-related service 
      required to re-establish the routing-related service on a new 
      subnet without having to perform the entire protocol exchange 
      with the mobile host from scratch. 
    
   Context Transfer 
    
      The movement of context from one router or other network entity 
      to another as a means of re-establishing routing related services 
      on a new subnet or collection of subnets. 
    
   Routing-related Service 
    
      A modification to the default routing treatment of packets to and 
      from the mobile host. Initially establishing routing-related 
      services usually requires a protocol exchange with the mobile 
     
   Kempf, editor    Informational - Expires April 2002      [Page 3] 
                  Context Transfer Problem Statement      October 2001 
    
      host. An example of a routing-related service is header 
      compression. The service may also be indirectly related to 
      routing, for example, security. Security may not affect the 
      forwarding decision of all intermediate routers, but a packet may 
      be dropped if it fails a security check (can't be encrypted, 
      authentication failed, etc.). Dropping the packet is basically a 
      routing decision. 
    
3.0     Scope of the Context Transfer Problem 
   
   The context transfer problem examined in this document is restricted 
   to re-establishing routing-related services for a mobile host. It is 
   not concerned with re-establishing routing itself. Routing changes 
   due to mobility are the domain of the IP mobility protocol. In 
   addition, transfer of context related to application-level services, 
   such as those associated with the mobile host's HTTP proxy, is also 
   not considered in this document, although a generic context transfer 
   protocol for transferring routing-related services may also function 
   for application-level services as well.  
    
4.0     The Need for Context Transfer  
    
   There are two basic motivations for context transfer: 
    
      1) The primary motivation, as mentioned in the introduction, is 
         the need to quickly re-establish routing-related services 
         without requiring the mobile host to explicitly perform all 
         protocol flows for those services from scratch.  
       
      2) An additional motivation is to provide an interoperable 
         solution that works for any Layer 2 radio access technology. 
    
   These points are discussed in more detail in the following 
   subsections. 
    
4.1 Fast Routing-Related Service Re-establishment 
 
   As mentioned in the introduction, there are a variety of routing-
   related services that could utilize a context transfer solution. In 
   this section, three representative services are examined. The 
   consequences of not having a context transfer solution are examined 
   as a means of motivating the need for such a solution. 
 
4.1.1 Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA) 
 
   One of the more compelling applications of context transfer is 
   facilitating the re-authentication of the mobile host and re-
   establishment of the mobile host's authorization for network access 
   in a new subnet by transferring the AAA context from the mobile 
   host's previous AAA server to another. This would allow the mobile 
   host to continue access in the new subnet without having to redo an 
   AAA exchange with the new subnet's AAA server. Naturally, a security 
   association between the AAA servers is necessary so that the mobile 

     
   Kempf, editor    Informational - Expires April 2002      [Page 4] 
                  Context Transfer Problem Statement      October 2001 
    
   host's sensitive authentication information can be securely 
   transferred.  
    
   In the absence of context transfer, there are two ways that can 
   currently be used for AAA: 
    
      1) Layer 2 mechanisms, such as EAP [3] in PPP [4] or 802.1x [5] 
         can be used to redo the initial protocol exchange, or possibly 
         to update it. Currently, there is no general Layer 3 mechanism 
         for conducting an AAA exchange between a host and an AAA 
         server in the network. 
       
      2) If the mobile host is using Mobile IPv4 (but not Mobile IPv6 
         currently), the host can use the AAA registration keys [6] 
         extension for Mobile IPv4 to establish a security association 
         with the new Foreign Agent. 
 
   Since 2) is piggybacked on the Mobile IPv4 signaling, the 
   performance is less likely to be an issue, but 2) is not a general 
   solution. The performance of 1) is likely to be considerably less 
   than is necessary for maintaining good real time stream performance. 
    
4.1.2 Header Compression 
 
   In [7], protocols are described for efficient compression of IP 
   headers to avoid sending large headers over low bandwidth radio 
   network links. Establishing header compression generally requires 
   from 1 to 4 exchanges between the last hop router and the mobile 
   host with full or partially compressed headers before full 
   compression is available. During this period, the mobile host will 
   experience an effective reduction in the application-available 
   bandwidth equivalent to the uncompressed header information sent 
   over the air. Limiting the uncompressed traffic required to 
   establish full header compression on a new last hop router 
   facilitates maintaining adequate application-available bandwidth for 
   real time streams, especially for IPv6 where the headers are larger. 
    
   Context transfer can help in this case by allowing the network 
   entity performing header compression, usually the last hop router, 
   to transfer the header compression context to the new router. The 
   timing of context transfer must be arranged so that the header 
   context is transferred from the old router as soon as the mobile 
   host is no longer receiving packets through the old router, and 
   installed on the new router before any packets are delivered to or 
   forwarded from the mobile host.  
    
4.1.3 Quality of Service (QoS) 
 
   Significant QoS protocol exchanges between the mobile host and 
   routers in the network may be required in order to establish the 
   initial QoS treatment for a mobile host's packets. The exact 
   mechanism whereby QoS for a mobile host should be established is 
   currently an active topic of investigation in the IETF. For existing 
   QoS approaches (Diffsrv and Intsrv) preliminary studies have 
     
   Kempf, editor    Informational - Expires April 2002      [Page 5] 
                  Context Transfer Problem Statement      October 2001 
    
   indicated that the protocol flows necessary to re-establish QoS in a 
   new subnet from scratch can be very time consuming for Mobile IP, 
   and other mobility protocols may suffer as well. 
    
   A method of transferring the mobile host's QoS context from the old 
   network to the new could facilitate faster re-establishment of the 
   mobile host's QoS treatment on the new subnet. However, for QoS 
   mechanisms that are end-to-end, transferring context at the last hop 
   router may be insufficient to completely re-initialize the mobile 
   host's QoS treatment, since some number of additional routers in the 
   path between the mobile host and corresponding node may also need to 
   be involved. 
    
4.2 Interoperability 
    
   A particular concern for seamless handover is that different Layer 2 
   radio protocols may define their own solutions for context transfer. 
   There are ongoing efforts within 3GPP [8] and IEEE [9] to define 
   such solutions. These solutions are primarily designed to facilitate 
   the transfer of Layer 2-related context over a wired IP network 
   between two radio access networks or two radio access points. 
   However, the designs can include extensibility features that would 
   allow Layer 3 context to be transferred. Such is the case with [10], 
   for example.  
    
   If Layer 2 protocols were to be widely adopted as an optimization 
   measure for Layer 3 context transfer, seamless mobility of a mobile 
   host having Layer 2 network interfaces that support multiple radio 
   protocols would be difficult to achieve. Essentially, a gateway or 
   translator between Layer 2 protocols would be required, or the 
   mobile host would be required to perform a full re-initialization of 
   its routing-related services on the new radio network, if no 
   translator were available, in order to hand over a mobile host 
   between two access technologies. 
    
   A general Layer 3 context transfer solution may also be useful for 
   Layer 2 protocols that do not define their own context transfer 
   protocol. Consideration of this issue is outside the scope of the 
   Seamoby Working Group, however, since it depends on the details of 
   the particular Layer 2 protocol. 
                         
5.0     Limitations on Context Transfer 
    
   Context transfer may not always be the best solution for re-
   establishing routing-related services on a new subnet. There are 
   certain limitations on when context transfer may be useful. These 
   limitations are discussed in the following subsections. 
    
5.1 Router Compatibility  
    
   Context transfer between two routers is possible only if the 
   receiving router supports the same routing-related services as the 
   sending router. This does not mean that the two nodes are identical 
   in their implementation, nor does it even imply that they must have 
     
   Kempf, editor    Informational - Expires April 2002      [Page 6] 
                  Context Transfer Problem Statement      October 2001 
    
   identical capabilities. A router that cannot make use of received 
   context should refuse the transfer. This results in a situation no 
   different than a mobile host handover without context transfer, and 
   should not be considered an error or failure situation. 
             
5.2 Requirement to Re-initialize Service from Scratch 
    
   The primary motivation for context transfer assumes that quickly re-
   establishing the same level of routing-related service on the new 
   subnet is desirable. And yet, there may be situations where either 
   the device or the access network would prefer to re-establish or re-
   negotiate the level of service. For example, if the mobile host 
   crosses administrative domains where the operational policies 
   change, negotiation of a different level of service may be required. 
     
5.3 Suitability for the Particular Service 
    
   Context transfer assumes that it is faster to establish the service 
   by context transfer rather than from scratch. This may not be true 
   for certain types of service, for example, multicast, "push" 
   information services.  
    
5.4 Layer 2 Solutions Better 
 
   Context transfer is an enhancement to improve upon the performance 
   of a handover for Layer 3 routing-related services. Many networks 
   provide support for handover at Layer 2, within and between subnets. 
   Layer 3 context transfer may not provide a significant improvement 
   over Layer 2 solutions, even for Layer 3 context, if the handover is 
   occurring between two subnets supporting the same Layer 2 radio 
   access technology. 
             
6.0     Performance Considerations  
    
   The purpose of context transfer is to sustain the routing-related 
   services being provided to a mobile host's traffic during handover. 
   It is essentially an enhancement to IP mobility that ultimately must 
   result in an improvement in handover performance. A context transfer 
   solution must provide performance that is equal to or better than 
   re-initializing the routing-related service between the mobile host 
   and the network from scratch. Otherwise, context transfer is of no 
   benefit.  
             
7.0     Security Considerations  
    
   Any context transfer standard must provide mechanism for adequately 
   securely the context transfer process, and a recommendation to 
   deploy security, as is typically the case for Internet standards. 
   Some general considerations for context transfer security include:      
             
      - Information privacy: the context may contain information which 
         the end user or network operator would prefer to keep hidden 
         from unauthorized viewers. 
        
     
   Kempf, editor    Informational - Expires April 2002      [Page 7] 
                  Context Transfer Problem Statement      October 2001 
    
      - Transfer legitimacy: a false or purposely corrupted context 
         transfer could have a severe impact upon the operation of the 
         receiving router, and therefore could potentially affect the 
         operation of the access network itself. The potential threats 
         include denial of service and theft of service attacks. 
       
      - Security preservation: part of the context transfer may include 
         information pertinent to a security association established 
         between the mobile host and another entity on the network. For 
         this security association to be preserved during handover, the 
         transfer of the security context must include the appropriate 
         security measures.  
    
   It is expected that the measures used to secure the transport of 
   information between peers (e.g. IPSEC [10]) in an IP network should 
   be sufficient for context transfer. However, given the above 
   considerations, there may be reason to provide for additional 
   security measures beyond the available IETF solutions.  
     
   The context transfer investigation must identify any novel security 
   measures required for context transfer that exceed the capabilities 
   of the existing or emerging IETF solutions.  
             
8.0     Recommendations  
    
   The following steps are recommended for Seamoby: 
     
      - Investigation into candidate router-related services for 
         context and an analysis of the transfer requirements for each 
         candidate; 
         
      - The development of a framework and protocol(s) that will 
         support the transfer of context between the routing nodes of 
         an IP network.  
    
   The context transfer solution must inter-work with existing and 
   emerging IP protocols, in particular, those protocols supporting 
   mobility in an IP network. 
    
9.0     Acknowledgements 
    
   The editor would like to thank the Seamoby CT design team (listed at 
   the end of the draft as co-authors), who were largely responsible 
   for the initial content of this draft, for their hard work, and 
   especially Gary Kenward, who shepherded the draft through its 
   initial versions. 
     
             
10.0    References  
           
   [1] Perkins, C., editor, "IP Mobility Support," RFC 2002, October, 
      1996. 
    
     
   Kempf, editor    Informational - Expires April 2002      [Page 8] 
                  Context Transfer Problem Statement      October 2001 
    
   [2] Johnson, D., and Perkins, C., "Mobility Support in IPv6," draft-
      ietf-mobileip-ipv6-14.txt, a work in progress. 
    
   [3] Blunk, L., and Vollbrecht, J., "PPP Extensible Authentication 
      Protocol (EAP)," RFC 2284, March, 1998.  
    
   [4] Simpson, W., editor, "The Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP)," STD 
      51, July, 1994. 
    
   [5] IEEE Std. P802.1X/D11, "Standard for Port based Network Access 
      Control," March, 2001. 
    
   [6] Perkins, C., and Calhoun, P., "AAA Registration Keys for Mobile 
      IP", draft-ietf-mobileip-aaa-key-08.txt, a work in progress. 
    
   [7] Borman, C., editor, "RObust Header Compression (ROHC): Framework 
      and four profiles: RTP, UDP, ESP, and uncompressed," RFC 3095, 
      July, 2001. 
    
   [8] 3GPP TR 25.936 V4.0.0, "Handovers for Real Time Services from PS 
      Domain," 3GPP, March, 2001. 
    
    
   [9] IEEE Std. 802.11f/D2.0, "Draft Recommended Practice for Multi-
      Vendor Access Point Interoperability via an Inter-Access Point 
      Protocol Across Distribution Systems Supporting IEEE 802.11 
      Operation," July, 2001.  
    
   [10] Kent, S. and Atkinson, R., "Security Architecture for the 
      Internet Protocol", RFC 2401, November, 1998. 
     
11.0    Complete List of Authors' Addresses 
     
   O. Henrik Levkowetz  
   A Brand New World  
   Osterogatan 1  
   S-164 28 Kista    
   SWEDEN  
             
   Phone: +46 8 477 9942  
   EMail: henrik@levkowetz.com  
             
             
   Pat R. Calhoun  
   Black Storm Networks 
   250 Cambridge Ave.  
   Palo Alto  CA 94306  
   USA  
             
   Phone: +1 650-617-2932  
   EMail: pcalhoun@bstormnetworks.com  
             
   James Kempf 
   NTT DoCoMo USA Laboratories 
     
   Kempf, editor    Informational - Expires April 2002      [Page 9] 
                  Context Transfer Problem Statement      October 2001 
    
   181 Metro Drive, Suite 300 
   San Jose, CA 95110 
   USA 
    
   Phone: 408-451-4711 
   EMail: kempf@docomolabs-usa.com         
    
   Gary Kenward  
   Nortel Networks  
   3500 Carling Avenue  
   Nepean, Ontario  K2G 6J8  
   CANADA  
             
   Phone: +1 613-765-1437  
   EMail: gkenward@nortelnetworks.com  
             
   Hamid Syed  
   Nortel Networks  
   100 Constellation Crescent  
   Nepean  Ontario K2G 6J8  
   CANADA  
             
   Phone: +1 613 763-6553  
   EMail: hmsyed@nortelnetworks.com  
             
   Jukka Manner  
   Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki  
   P.O. Box 26 (Teollisuuskatu 23)  
   FIN-00014 Helsinki  
   FINLAND      
             
   Phone: +358-9-191-44210  
   EMail: jmanner@cs.helsinki.fi  
             
             
   Madjid Nakhjiri  
   Motorola  
   1501 West Shure Drive  
   Arlington Heights  IL 60004  
   USA  
             
   Phone: +1 847-632-5030  
   EMail: madjid.nakhjiri@motorola.com  
             
   Govind Krishnamurthi  
   Communications Systems Laboratory, Nokia Research Center  
   5 Wayside Road  
   Burlington  MA 01803  
   USA  
             
   Phone: +1 781 993 3627  
   EMail: govind.krishnamurthi@nokia.com  
             
   Rajeev Koodli  
     
   Kempf, editor    Informational - Expires April 2002     [Page 10] 
                  Context Transfer Problem Statement      October 2001 
    
   Communications Systems Lab, Nokia Research Center  
   313 Fairchild Drive  
   Mountain View  CA 94043  
   USA  
             
   Phone: +1 650 625 2359  
   EMail: rajeev.koodli@nokia.com  
             
             
   Kulwinder S. Atwal  
   Zucotto Wireless Inc.  
   Ottawa  Ontario K1P 6E2  
   CANADA  
             
   Phone: +1 613 789 0090  
   EMail: kulwinder.atwal@zucotto.com  
             
   Michael Thomas  
   Cisco Systems  
   375 E Tasman Rd  
   San Jose  CA 95134  
   USA  
             
   Phone: +1 408 525 5386  
   EMail: mat@cisco.com  
             
   Mat Horan  
   COM DEV Wireless Group  
   San Luis Obispo  CA 93401  
   USA  
             
   Phone: +1 805 544 1089  
   EMail: mat.horan@comdev.cc  
             
             
   Phillip Neumiller  
   3Com Corporation  
   1800 W. Central Road  
   Mount Prospect  IL 60056  
   USA  
             
   EMail: phil_neumiller@3com.com  
             
12.0    Full Copyright Statement 
     
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001). All Rights Reserved. 
     
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
     
   Kempf, editor    Informational - Expires April 2002     [Page 11] 
                  Context Transfer Problem Statement      October 2001 
    
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English.  
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. This 
   document and the information contained herein is provided on an "AS 
   IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK 
   FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT 
   NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN 
   WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
    
13.0    Funding Acknowledgement  
                
   Funding for the RFC editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society.  
    

































     
   Kempf, editor    Informational - Expires April 2002     [Page 12] 