Dynamic Call Screening Using a WAP Interface                    [Page 1]



Internet Draft 
SPIRITS Working Droup                                            J.Reddy                                                                                         
July 2000                                                         J.Reid
Expires January 2001                              

              Dynamic Call Screening Using a WAP Interface
  Caller ID Delivery and Call Disposition by Interworking SIP and the
                     Wireless Application Protocol

                        draft-reid-wapdcs-00.txt

   Status of this Memo 
   
   This  document  is  an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  
   
   Internet-Drafts are working documents  of  the  Internet  Engineering
   Task Force  (IETF),  its  areas,  and  its working groups.  Note that
   other   groups   may   also   distribute   working    documents    as
   Internet-Drafts.  
   
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and  may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It  is  inappropriate  to  use  Internet-Drafts  as  reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."   
   
   The   list   of   current   Internet-Drafts   can   be   accessed  at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
   
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow  Directories  can  be  accessed  at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.   
   
Abstract 
   
   This document describes a service concept implementation of a Dynamic 
   Call Screening  Service  (DCS) made available to WAP endpoints.  This
   work builds on an existing Internet Call Waiting (ICW)  [1]  platform
   to  provide  enhanced call screening and control capabilities via the
   WAP interface to wireless handsets.  This extends the current ICW [1] 
   service to provide  a  "WAP  Proxy"  which  supports  call  screening
   notification and automatic disposition capabilities.  In this way the 
   service  evolves  from  an Internet Call Waiting service for wireline
   subscribers to a  network-based  user  agent  with  which  users  can
   register  to  direct  incoming  call n otifications to any of several
   endpoint device types depending  on  their  current  preferences  and
   availability.  
   
   On  the  PSTN  side,  this  service  concept  systematically uses the
   Intelligent Network (IN) solutions, which have  been  industry-proven
   to  be  reliable,  scalable,  and  compatible  with the existing PSTN


<draft-reid-wapdcs-00.txt>                                     July 2000

Dynamic Call Screening Using a WAP Interface                    [Page 2]


   infrastructure and services, yet easily  adaptable  to  the  Internet
   requirements.   Other  essential elements of the platform include the
   use of Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [2] messaging  services  and
   the Wireless Application Protocol (WAP) [3].  
   
   It  has  been  demonstrated  that  a  WAP DCS service can be achieved
   through a  straightforward  extension  of  a  wireline  ICW  service.
   Furthermore,  this  can  be  enhanced to provide a network-based call
   profile that can be accessed by many end devices and networks.    The
   authors  believe  that  besides being a simple SPIRITS implementation
   this service concept can be the basis of  several  new  presence  and
   availability services in the future.  
   
1. Introduction 
   
   This  document  describes  the  extensions  of the services in Lucent
   Technologies' Online Call Center (OCC) platform to provide  real-time
   call  disposition and call screening capabilities via a WAP interface
   to WAP-enabled wireless handsets.  
   
   The Wireless Application Protocol (WAP) is a  standard  for  allowing
   access to  the  internet  from  wireless  devices.  WAP addresses the
   unique needs of wireless devices (e.g.  small  footprint,  low  power
   consumption,  etc)  while  leveraging  economies of scale by adopting
   existing internet standards where-ever possible.  WAP is  defined  by
   the WAP Forum, accessible at: http://www.wapforum.org 
   
2. Extension to the OCC Service to Support a WAP Interface 
   
   The  ability  to  extend  the  OCC  service to support call screening
   capabilities demonstrates the power of this service in evolving  from
   managing  calls  to  a fixed endpoint to managing calls to a user who
   may access the service from multiple access networks and devices.  In 
   this way the service evolves from an Internet  Call  Waiting  service
   for  wireline  subscribers  to  a network-based user agent with which
   users can register to direct incoming call notifications  to  any  of
   several endpoint device types depending o n their current preferences 
   and availability.  
   
   In the case of WAP devices it is possible to use the WAP interface to 
   allow  users  to  determine how an incoming call should be handled by
   the network.  Note that this is desirable  even  if  the  user's  WAP
   phone  is  currently  idle - unlike the OCC service provided to users
   logged in on a PC, those with WAP phones can take  advantage  of  the
   WAP  interface  for  real-time  call-disposition  even if they're not
   "logged on".  With the advent  of  new  wireless  technologies  (e.g.
   GPRS, 3G) and future versions of the WAP s pecifications it will also 
   possible  to  provide these notification messages while users have an
   active data session via their WAP interface in which case the service 
   will be analogous to the wireline Dynamic Call Screening capabilities 
   of OCC.  With the support of network-based  profiles  end  users  are


<draft-reid-wapdcs-00.txt>                                     July 2000

Dynamic Call Screening Using a WAP Interface                    [Page 3]


   able  to access their call screening preferences as they move between
   environments by registering with the  network  from  their  currently
   accessible device.    In  this  way  a  user only needs to maintain a
   single profile that is "portable"  as  they  move  between  endpoints
   (e.g. wireline internet connections and wireless WAP phones).  
   
3. Service Concept Implementation 
   
   The  primary  components  of  this service include the DCS Web Server
   (implemented on a Netscape Enterprise  Server,  v3.6),  a  DCS  Proxy
   Server,  the  OCC server and the IN elements involved in handling the
   PSTN call - the CSN and SCP. It is  notable  that  this  service  was
   provided  without  modification  to  the  OCC  server  used  for  the
   (wireline) OCC service described in [1].  In  order  to  support  WAP
   devices  the  DCS  Proxy Server was added to support WAP interactions
   with wireless devices and the existing set of SIP me  ssages  already
   supported by  the  OCC  server.  While the initial development of the
   DCS Proxy Server was done specifically to support WAP  devices,  this
   change  forms the basis for supporting a single, network-based client
   profile for call screening management  so  that  intelligent  profile
   information can be migrated from the PC-based clients in the original 
   OCC service into the network.  It should also be noted that it may be 
   desirable to integrate the DCS Proxy Server with the OCC Server for a 
   production version  of  this  service.    However,  for  this service
   concept the DCS Proxy Server was implemented in order  to  reuse  the
   existing OCC Server (and IN-resident OCC service logic on the CSN and 
   SCP) without modification.  
   
   The  OCC  Server  run-time  environment  effectively  consists of two
   multi-threaded processes responsible for Call Registration  and  Call
   Notification services, respectively.  
   
   WAP  DCS  Call registration services are initiated from an end-user's
   WAP handset via the DCS Web Server. A subscriber  registers  for  the
   notification services  from  his  or her WAP handset.  This mechanism
   allows the notification service to be portable  to  multiple  devices
   and networks that are accessible from the internet.  
   
   DCS  call  notification is PSTN-initiated. This consists of informing
   the user of the incoming telephone call via the  Internet.    In  the
   case  of  the  WAP  DCS service concept implementation the user's WAP
   device is set up to use a client  "pull"  mechanism  to  periodically
   check the  DCS  Web  Server  to see if a new call has arrived.  It is
   expected that with the availability of  the  general  PUSH  mechanism
   defined  in the WAP 1.2 specifications that the notification could be
   asynchronously delivered to the handset via the Push Access  Protocol
   [4] from the DCS Web Server.  
   
   When  a call comes in, the user is presented with a pop-up dialog box
   on  their  WAP  handset,  which  displays  the  caller's  number  (if
   available), and name (again, if available).  If the called party does 


<draft-reid-wapdcs-00.txt>                                     July 2000

Dynamic Call Screening Using a WAP Interface                    [Page 4]


   not  initiate an action within a specified period of time the call is
   handled according to the user's profile preferences  (e.g.  they  may
   wish  to  have calls automatically routed to their voice mail if they
   don't manually respond to the incoming call notification).  
   
   Once informed of the incoming call, the end-user  has  the  following
   options (indicated via their WAP interface) as far as the disposition 
   of the call: 
   
   - Accept the call 
   
   - Reject the call 
   
   - Forward the call to voice mail 
   
   - Forward the call to another number 
   
   -  Add  the caller to the subscriber's screening list with one of the
   following  options:  o  Accept  (accept   the   current   call,   and
   automatically accept any subsequent calls from this calling number) o 
   Reject  (reject  the  current  call,  and  automatically  reject  any
   subsequent calls from this calling number) o Forward  to  voice  mail
   (forward the current call to voice mail and automatically forward any 
   subsequent calls from this calling number to voice mail) o Forward to 
   another number (forward the current call to a number specified by the 
   user,  and  automatically  forward  any  subsequent  calls  from this
   calling number to the specified forwarding number) 
   
   In addition the following features have been implemented: 
   
   - Intelligent Profiles: provides the subscriber with  the  capability
   to  determine  dispositions automatically, based on the calling party
   numbers.   Using  their  WAP  interface  subscribers  can  select   a
   particular  automatic  screening  disposition  for  specific  calling
   numbers.  This screening information is then stored in  the  WAP  ICW
   Proxy  Server  which  then  checks  this  information  and  sends the
   appropriate response to the server without presenting the call to the 
   called party when an automatic disposition h as been selected.    The
   subscriber  can  determine the outcome of these calls from the caller
   log (described below).  
   
   - Caller Log: provides the WAP DCS Subscriber with a detailed log  of
   incoming calls.  The caller log contains the following fields: 
   
     1) incoming call date and time 
   
     2) incoming calling party number (whenever available) 
   
     3) incoming calling party name (whenever available) and 
   
     4) call disposition.  


<draft-reid-wapdcs-00.txt>                                     July 2000

Dynamic Call Screening Using a WAP Interface                    [Page 5]


   
   The  caller  log  is  accessible from the WAP interface on the user's
   handset which establishes a connection with the DCS Proxy  Server  to
   access this  information.   Note that by storing this log information
   in the network the user will be able to access information  regarding
   calls  received even when their handset may be out of range or turned
   off.  
   
4. Architecture 
   
   Figure 1 of the Appendix depicts  the  joint  PSTN/Internet  physical
   architecture relevant  to  WAP DCS operation.  The primary components
   used with this architecture include: 
   
   - WAP Client (Wireless Hand Set): 
   The WAP client may be  any  WAP  enabled  device  that  has  Internet
   access.  The minibrowser in the device presents textual and graphical 
   information and, based on the user choices, communicates with the Web 
   based applications to perform interactions with the PSTN.  
   
   - WAP Gateway: 
   The  WAP gateway provides access between wireless WAP clients and the
   Internet. In the current generation  of  the  WAP  standard  the  WAP
   gateway  terminates  the  WAP  protocols used to efficiently transfer
   data to and from wireless devices and  connects  them  with  standard
   internet protocols  (e.g.  HTTP)  for  accessing the internet.  It is
   worth  noting  that  the  WAP  standards  have  been  defined  to  be
   independent    of    the   wireless   bearer   channels   such   that
   WML[5]/WMLscript[6] content accessible on the internet can be    made
   available over multiple air interface standards including CDMA, CDPD, 
   GSM,  iDEN,  PDC, PHS and TDMA. Note that for a production version of
   the WAP DCS service to be feasible  it  is  important  that  the  WAP
   gateway support the PUSH mechanism defined in WAP 1.2.  
   
   - DCS Web Server: 
   The  DCS  Web Server serves primarily as a content-providing framework
   that has the ability to supply WML pages to WAP clients  that  access
   it  over  the Internet. Also, it acts as a pseudo gateway between the
   Internet and the DCS Proxy Server to  transmit  client  REGISTER  and
   call  notification  (INVITE)  messages between the WAP client and the
   WAP DCS Proxy Server. The DCS Web Server can be any Web  Server  that
   allows   cgi-bin  scripting  and  has  the  ability  to  support  the
   mime-types necessary to serve WML content 
   
   - DCS Proxy Server 
   The DCS Proxy  Server  is  a  standalone  multi-threaded  server  that
   implements  the  SIP  interfaces to the OCC Server. The WAP DCS Proxy
   Server listens on a specific port to take the request in the form  of
   SIP  messages  and  forwards them between the WAP Client (via the DCS
   Web Server) and the OCC Server that runs on  the  CSN.  User-specific
   intelligent  profiles  are  also stored on the DCS Proxy Server. They


<draft-reid-wapdcs-00.txt>                                     July 2000

Dynamic Call Screening Using a WAP Interface                    [Page 6]


   are used to determine whether  automatic  call  treatment  is  to  be
   applied  when  new  SIP  INVITE  messages ar e received, based on the
   calling party number.  
   
   - OCC Server: The OCC Server is a collection of Java servers  on  the
   CSN whose responsibilities include: 
   -  listening for incoming Call Notification (TCP/IP) messages from the
   CSN SPA.  
   - relaying messages between the DCS Proxy Server and the CSN SPA.  
   - listening for and authentication of ICW Client requests for  service
   registration.  
   -  handling  encryption/decryption  of messages exchanged with the WAP
   ICW     Proxy     Server,     and     generating     session-specific
   encryption/decryption keys.  
   
   The  OCC  server did not require any modifications to support the WAP
   ICW service concept implementation - i.e., the production version  of
   the OCC server used in Lucent's OCC Service offering was used as is.  
   
   - PSTN elements: 
   The   CSN   and  SCP  are  Lucent  implementations  of  the  ITU-T  IN
   Recommendations (in particular, the Recommendation Q.1205 where these 
   entities are defined) augmented by  the  requirements  of  Bellcore's
   Advanced  Intelligent  Network  (AIN)  Release  1.0 and equipped with
   other features.  The Central Office may be any switch supporting  the
   Integrated  Services  Digital  Network  (ISDN) Primary Rate Interface
   (PRI) and  the  call  forwarding  feature  that  would  allow  it  to
   interwork  with  the  CSN.  Alternatively, in order to interwork with
   the SCP, it needs to be an IN Service Switching Point (SSP)  (defined
   in  the  ITU-T  IN  Recommendation  Q.1205).  In the latter case, the
   central office is connected to the SCP via signaling system No. 7 and 
   Intelligent  Network  Application  Part  Protocol   (INAP)   at   the
   application layer.    In  particular,  for IN support of WAP DCS, the
   Central Office must be directed to  generate  a  terminating  attempt
   query  to the subsystem number corresponding to the OCC SCP SPA based
   on th e Termination Attempt Trigger (TAT).  
   
   TCP/IP communication between  the  SCP  and  CSN  is  used  to  relay
   subscriber registration/deregistration messages to the SCP which uses 
   this information to respond to terminating attempt triggers.  
   
   When  someone  attempts  to  call  the subscriber, the central office
   serving that subscriber interrupts normal termination processing  and
   notifies  the  SCP  which, in turn, can check whether that subscriber
   has registered that he/she would like to handle the call via the  WAP
   DCS service.  If so, then the call is directed to the CSN for further 
   processing.  
   
   The  intelligent  network  entities,  the  SCP  and  CSN, do have OCC
   related software.  The OCC server is  implemented  on  the  CSN.  One
   service package application (SPA) is installed on the Service Control 


<draft-reid-wapdcs-00.txt>                                     July 2000

Dynamic Call Screening Using a WAP Interface                    [Page 7]


   Point  (SCP)  and  another  is  installed on the Compact Service Node
   (CSN). Note that the OCC versions of the SCP and  CSN  SPAs  did  not
   require  modification  in  producing  the  WAP  DCS  service  concept
   implementation.  
   
5. Protocol and Operations Considerations 
   
   The DCS Proxy Server uses a distinct TCP/IP port to receive  the  SIP
   REGISTER  message from the WAP Client and the SIP INVITE from the OCC
   Server: 
   
     1) During Call  Registration,  it  forwards  the  SIP  REGISTRATION
   request  from the DCS Web Server (initiated by the WAP client) to the
   OCC Server.  
   
     2) During Call Notification, it determines whether  automatic  call
   screening is  to  be  applied  based on the calling party number.  If
   not, the DCS Proxy Server forwards the SIP INVITE  message  from  the
   OCC Server to the DCS Web Server.  
   
   The OCC Server uses distinct TCP/IP ports configured on the CSN to: 
   
     1)  Listen  for  incoming  SIP  REGISTER  messages  (in  support of
   registration service) sent from the DCS Proxy Server.  
   
     2) Listen for incoming SIP INVITE  messages  (in  support  of  call
   notification service) sent from the CSN.  
   
   The  CSN SPA and OCC Server exchange SIP messages over TCP/IP using a
   "nailed-up" connection.  This connection is initiated at the time the 
   CSN SPA receives the very first SIP REGISTER  request  from  the  OCC
   Server.  
   
   The OCC    Server   supports   multithreading.      For   each   Call
   Notification/Call Disposition event, a separate  thread  is  used  to
   handle the  call.    This  model  supports  multi-threading on a "per
   message" basis where every start message (SIP INVITE)  received  from
   the  CSN  SPA  uses  a separate thread of control to handle the call.
   Subsequent messages  containing  the  same  session  Call-ID  as  the
   original  start message are routed to the same thread that previously
   handled the respective initiating message.    In  addition,  the  OCC
   Server  dynamically  opens a new TCP/IP socket with the WAP ICW Proxy
   Server for  each  Call  Notification/Call  Disposition  session  This
   socket  connection  uses the IP address and a pre-configured port for
   the DCS Proxy Server.  
   
   For session registration, the OCC  Server  dynamically  opens  TCP/IP
   sessions  with  the  CSN SPA. The CSN SPA listens at a pre-configured
   port to incoming SIP REGISTER messages sent by ICW  Clients  via  the
   OCC  Server.  To  exchange SIP REGISTER messages with the OCC Server,
   the DCS Proxy Server dynamically opens  a  TCP/IP  socket  connection


<draft-reid-wapdcs-00.txt>                                     July 2000

Dynamic Call Screening Using a WAP Interface                    [Page 8]


   with the OCC Server using a pre-configured port number on the CSN and 
   the CSN's IP address.  
   
7. WAP DCS scenarios 
   
   A typical registration scenario works as follows: 
   
      1)  The  WAP  Subscriber  opens  the  Internet  connection  in the
   Wireless  handset  and  connects  to  the  ICW  Registration  cgi-bin
   application on DCS Web Server by accessing a pre-defined URL.  
   
      2)  The ICW Registration cgi-bin application authenticates the end
   user using the username and password.   
   
      3) For a valid Subscriber the DCS Web Server sends a SIP  REGISTER
   message to the DCS Proxy Server.  
   
      4)  The  DCS  Proxy  Server  forwards  the registration request by
   opening a transient TCP/IP connection with the  Registration  service
   of the OCC Server.  
   
      5)  The subscriber DN is entered into the Subscriber record in the
   OCC SPA and the OCC Server sends back a "SIP 200 OK" message  to  the
   DCS Proxy Server after the registration process is complete.  
   
      6)  The  DCS Proxy Server forwards the "SIP 200 OK" message to the
   ICW Web Server that originated the SIP REGISTRATION request.  
   
      7) DCS Web Server then provides a WML page back to the WAP  client
   indicating the OCC Registration is complete.   
   
      8)  At  this  point,  the  WAP client starts the client pull (i.e.
   polling the DCS Web Server periodically) to  check  if  there  is  an
   incoming call.    In other words, a timer is set on the browser to go
   to a URL that accesses the call notification application periodically 
   to check if there is a call to the Subscriber.  
   
   ICW Call Disposition proceeds as follows: 
   
      1) A terminating attempt trigger is forwarded to the  OCC  SPA  on
   the SCP. The OCC SPA verifies that the subscriber has activated their 
   service and routes the call to the CSN.  
   
      2)  The CSN receives the call for the registered Subscriber (which
   is routed to the OCC SPA).  
   
      3) The CSN OCC SPA sends an INVITE message to the OCC Server  over
   the nailed-up socket connection.  
   
      3)  The  OCC  Server  opens  a  TCP/IP connection to the DCS Proxy
   Server and sends the SIP INVITE message.  


<draft-reid-wapdcs-00.txt>                                     July 2000

Dynamic Call Screening Using a WAP Interface                    [Page 9]


   
      4) The DCS Proxy Server first checks to see if an  automatic  call
   disposition option  has  been  set  for this calling number.  If not,
   then it forwards the SIP INVITE message to DCS Web Server and  blocks
   while waiting for the user's response.  However, if an automatic call 
   disposition option has been selected for the caller, then the WAP ICW 
   Proxy  Server returns the appropriate message to the OCC Server (e.g.
   if automatic call rejection is enabled a "SIP 603 DECLINE" message is 
   returned).  
   
      5) The DCS Web Server can then display a WML page with the calling 
   party information and the menu of call options.  
   
      6) When the subscriber's WAP phone next does  a  client  pull,  it
   will notify the subscriber of the incoming call.  
   
      7)  The subscriber chooses the accept option which is sent back to
   the DCS Web Server. At this point, the client  in  the  handset  will
   drop  the  data connection to allow for the incoming voice call to be
   subsequently delivered to the user.  
   
      8) The Subscriber's acceptance is sent to the DCS Proxy Server  as
   a "SIP 200 OK" message from the DCS Web Server.  
   
      9)  The DCS Proxy Server forwards this "SIP 200 OK" message to the
   OCC Server which relays it on to the CSN OCC SPA.  
   
      10) The OCC  SPA  on  the  CSN  will  transfer  the  call  to  the
   subscriber's wireless phone.  
   
      11)  The  terminating  trigger will be delivered to the OCC SPA on
   the SCP for the forwarded call.  The OCC SPA will determine that  the
   call  is  originating from the CSN and allow the call to be delivered
   to the subscriber's wireless handset.  
   
6. Security Considerations 
   
   As the WAP DCS service has  been  developed  as  a  service  concept,
   additional  consideration will be required to assure that appropriate
   security can be assured before it can be deployed in the field  (i.e.
   as a  production-grade  service).   Furthermore, this type of service
   will require a multi-party security model spanning the wireless data, 
   internet, and telephony domains.  
   
   Areas to be addressed include: 
   
   1) Providing appropriate security between the WAP  gateway,  DCS  Web
   Server,  and  the  DCS Proxy Server. It may be necessary to establish
   these connections over  a  service  provider's  secure  intranet  or,
   possibly, to provide appropriate mechanisms (e.g. firewalls) to allow 
   for  the connection between the WAP gateway and the DCS Web Server to


<draft-reid-wapdcs-00.txt>                                     July 2000

Dynamic Call Screening Using a WAP Interface                    [Page 10]


   go over the Internet.  
   
   2) Providing end to end security from the wireless handset.  
       In the next generation of the WAP  standards  ("WAP  2.0")  being
   able  to  provide  end to end security is a high priority and the WAP
   Forum is considering the  use  of  end-to-end  SSL  in  its  WAP  2.0
   specifications.  
   
   3) Insuring  secure communication with the IN elements.  One possible
   solution would be  to  provide  a  secure  intranet  for  connections
   between the OCC Server and the CSN, and between the CSN and the SCP.  
   
8. Acknowledgements 
   
   We  would  like  to  thank  Vijay  Gurbani, John Stanaway, Ram Batni,
   Chinmei Lee, and Lynn Sinclair for providing incisive comments on the 
   draft.  
   
9. References 
   
   [1] <draft-ietf-spirits-lucentocc-00.txt>  I.  Faynberg,  H.  Lu,  J.
   Voelker,  M.  Weissman, W. Zhang, "On a pre-SPIRITS Implementation in
   the Lucent Technologies Online Communication Center," February 2000.  
   
   [2] Handley, H., H., Schulzrinne, E. Schooler, and J. Rosenberg. SIP: 
   Session Initiation Protocol. RFC 2543. March, 1999 
   
   [3] "Wireless Application Protocol Architecture  Specification",  The
   WAP Forum, April, 1998, http://www.wapforum.org 
   
   [4]  "WAP  Push  Access  Protocol",  The  WAP  Forum, November, 1999,
   http://www.wapforum.org 
   
   [5]  "Wireless  Markup  Language  Specification",  The   WAP   Forum,
   November, 1999, http://www.wapforum.org 
   
   [6]   "WMLScript  Specification",  The  WAP  Forum,  November,  1999,
   http://www.wapforum.org 
   
   [7] J. Postel, RFC 1543, "Instruction to RFC Authors". October 1993  
   
   [8] S.Bradner, "The Internet Standards Process", RFC2026  
   
   10. Abbreviations 
   
   CSN - Lucent Technologies' Compact Service Node 
   DCS - Dynamic Call Screening 
   ICW - Internet Call Waiting 
   ISDN - Integrated Services Digital Network 
   OCC - Lucent Technologies' Online Communication Center Offering 
   PC - Personal Computer 


<draft-reid-wapdcs-00.txt>                                     July 2000

Dynamic Call Screening Using a WAP Interface                    [Page 11]


   PAP - Push Access Protocol 
   PRI - Primary Rate Interface (ISDN) 
   PSTN - Public Switched Telephone Network 
   TAT - Terminating attempt trigger 
   SCP - Service Control Point 
   SIP - Session Initiation Protocol 
   SSL - Secure Sockets Layer protocol 
   SPA  -  Service  Package   Application   (entity   which   implements
           applications on Lucent Technologies' SCP and CSN products) 
   WAP - Wireless Application Protocol 
   WML - WAP Markup Language 
   WMLscript - WAP Markup Language Scripting language 
   
   
   11. Authors' Addresses 
   
   Jaya Reddy 
   Lucent Technologies 
   Room 1A-422 
   263 Shuman Blvd PO Box 3050 
   Naperville, IL 60566-7050 
   E-mail: jreddy@lucent.com 
   Telephone: +1 630 713 8331 
   
   John Reid 
   Lucent Technologies 
   Room 1B-438 
   263 Shuman Blvd PO Box 3050 
   Naperville, IL 60566-7050 
   E-mail: jbreid@lucent.com 
   Telephone: +1 630 713 7912 
   
Full Copyright Statement 
   
   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. This 
   document  and  translations  of  it  may  be  copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain  it
   or  assist  in  its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in  part,  without  restriction  of  any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on  all  such  copies  and  derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as  by  removing
   the  copyright  notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet  organizations,  except  as  needed  for  the   purpose   of
   developing  Internet  standards  in  which  case  the  procedures for
   copyrights  defined  in  the  Internet  Standards  process  must   be
   followed,  or  as  required  to  translate  it  into  followed, or as
   required to translate it into languages other than English.  
   
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will  not  be


<draft-reid-wapdcs-00.txt>                                     July 2000

Dynamic Call Screening Using a WAP Interface                    [Page 12]


   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.  
   
   This  document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE  INTERNET  ENGINEERING
   TASK  FORCE  DISCLAIMS  ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY  THAT  THE  USE  OF  THE  INFORMATION
   HEREIN  WILL  NOT  INFRINGE  ANY  RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
   












































<draft-reid-wapdcs-00.txt>                                     July 2000

Dynamic Call Screening Using a WAP Interface                    [Page 13]


12. Appendix 
   
       -------------
       |WAP Client | (DCS Client)
       -------------
        |
        | <- WAP protocol stack overless wireless bearer channel
        |
        |   --------------
        +---| WAP Gateway |
            --------------
                 |
                 | <---------WML over HTTP
                 |                     |
                 |                     v
            --------------             
            | Internet   |-------------------+ 
            --------------                   |
                                       ------------------
                                       | DNS Web Server |   
                                       ------------------
                     ------------------------|    |    
                     | DCS Proxy Server      | +---    ^ 
                     ------------------------|         |
       ----------------       |                        |
       |+ Compact     |       |  <--------------------SIP
       |  Service     |+-------                        |
       |  Node (CSN)  |                                |
       |              |                                |
       |+ OCC Server  |                                |
       |              |                                v
       |+ OCC CSN SPA |                                
       |______________|-------[ IP INTRANET ]----------------------+
              |                                                    |
              |[ISDN PRI]                                          |
              |			                                   |
              |                                 		   |
              |                                                    |
              |    ---------                                    --------
              +----|Central|----------[SS7]--------------------|+Service|
                   |Office |                                   | Control|
                   ---------                                   | Point  |
                                                               | (SCP)  |
                                                               |        |
                                                               |+OCC SCP|
                                                               |  SPA   |
                                                               -----------
   Figure 1: WAP DCS Physical Architecture





<draft-reid-wapdcs-00.txt>                                     July 2000

