Operations Area Working Group                                C. Sheth
Internet Draft                                                      TCSL
Intended status: Informational                                 R.Thakker
Expires: May 2016                                                   VGEC
                                                      November 10, 2015



    Dynamic Routed Network for Interconnection of Firewalls at Multiple
                           Geographic Locations
               draft-shet-opsawg-firewalls-interconn-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. This document may not be modified,
   and derivative works of it may not be created, and it may not be
   published except as an Internet-Draft.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 10, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents



Sheth & Thakker         Expires May 10, 2016                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Network to Interconnect Firewalls       November 2015


   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.

Abstract

   Firewall performs resource intensive filtering of traffic based on
   set of rules. A single firewall becomes a traffic bottleneck
   depending on network expansion, number of connections and the
   throughput required. This document describes a method of
   interconnecting the firewalls at multiple geographic locations
   through standalone network. It will enable firewall to dedicate its
   full processing capacity to perform task of packet filtering. The
   tasks of encryption, dynamic routing and anti-spoofing of traffic are
   taken care outside firewall function. The placement of firewall and
   routing device along with protocols to be used will form the proposed
   system to improve overall network security and scalability.

Table of Contents


   1. Introduction ................................................ 2
   2. Conventions used in this document                                            ............................ 3
   3. Firewall Placement .......................................... 3
      3.1. The Core Network                                ........................................ 5
      3.2. Routing ................................................ 5
      3.3. Proposed rules for inter site metrics ................... 6
   4. High Capacity Site .......................................... 7
   5. Dynamic Network Extension                                    .................................... 7
   6. Security Considerations                                  ...................................... 8
   7. IANA Considerations ......................................... 9
   8. Conclusions ................................................. 9
   9. References .................................................. 9
      9.1. Normative References                                    .................................... 9
      9.2. Informative References                                      .................................. 9
   10. Acknowledgments ........................................... 10

1. Introduction

   A firewall protects one or more inside networks, connects inside
   protected network to the internet and also connects to other internal
   geographically separated firewalls for access to the rest of the
   network. Today, with growth and expansion, most companies are
   geographically spread all over the world. There is a need for
   increased network security when connecting one inside protected
   network with another inside protected network in different


Sheth & Thakker         Expires May 10, 2016                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Network to Interconnect Firewalls       November 2015


   geographical location, specifically over internet. One of the known
   approach to avoid sending data in plain text over internet is to
   establish site to site virtual private network (VPN) using firewall
   at both locations. VPN will ensure data security by encrypting the
   traffic. However, major challenge with site to site VPN is that it
   provides static network routing. In case of multiple sites, each site
   needs dedicated site to site VPN connectivity with all other sites.
   This increases network complexity and bottleneck in case of any site
   or link failure. Considerable amount of work has been done to study
   encryption algorithm on site-to-site IP Security (IPsec) VPN, Border
   Gateway Protocol (BGP) and Multi-Protocol Label Switching (MPLS)
   performance comparisons and setup of virtual cluster cloud for inter-
   site connectivity. This document describes system design of
   interconnection of firewalls to achieve dynamic routing. Apart from
   increased security, it also helps in improving scalability.

2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

3. Firewall Placement

   The document is for global or wide area network that interconnects
   all sites at different geographical location and also interconnects
   all the networks within the same site. The way connectivity is
   achieved between the sites is irrelevant to the site firewalls.
   Firewalls only need dedicated network interfaces to connect to
   different networks as shown in Figure 1.


















Sheth & Thakker         Expires May 10, 2016                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Network to Interconnect Firewalls       November 2015



                                           ---------
                                          /          \
                                          | Internet |_
                                          |          |
                                          \_________/
                                           ---------
                                 ^
                                 |
                                     |
                                 V
    ---------        +-----------+        +-----------+
   /          \      |           |        |           |
   |   Core   |__    | Routing   |        |  Firewall |
   | Network  |<---> |  Device   | <--->  |   Device  |
   \_________/       |           |        |           |
    ---------        +-----------+        +-----------+

                                 ^
                                 |
                                     |
                                 V
                                           ---------
                                          /          \
                                          |Protected |_
                                          | Network  |
                                          \_________/
                                           ---------

                        Figure 1 Single Site Setup

   Direct communication between devices at separate sites requires a
   network that connects the sites without translating addresses. The
   network provides connectivity between internal networks. It does not
   provide internet connectivity. For internet connectivity, firewall
   will use dedicated internet interface to route all internet traffic.
   Depending on performance needs, same firewall could also act as
   routing device, if there are no high performance requirements.










Sheth & Thakker         Expires May 10, 2016                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Network to Interconnect Firewalls       November 2015


   A standard firewall has the following setup.
   1. Internet interface for connecting to internet.
   2. Interface for connecting to routing device of proposed network.
   3. Inside interface(s) for connecting to protected network.

   All communication to internal networks that is not behind the local
   firewall is routed via the core network interface. It does not matter
   how the remote internal network is connected. It could be in the same
   datacenter in nearby rack, on the other side of the internet, behind
   a multiprotocol label switching (MPLS) virtual private network (VPN)
   or connected via a squad of synchronized yodelers. Remote network
   connectivity is irrelevant to the firewalls as that part is handled
   by the core network. Scaling the network becomes a simple process of
   connecting new devices to the proposed network.


3.1. The Core Network

   The core network does not perform any detailed filtering of traffic.
   It performs below.

   1. Encrypt all traffic between sites

   2. Anti-spoof all traffic entering the proposed network

   The standalone network consists of the device used for routing and
   the links connecting them. For inter-site connectivity the links
   between routing devices will use internet protocol security (IPsec)
   encapsulated generic routing encapsulation (GRE) tunnels. Within a
   site, it will be direct links or VLAN sub-interfaces. Inter-site
   traffic is always encrypted, no matter if the carrier is the internet
   or a dedicated data service. Inside the core network there is no
   filtering of traffic. It is a dynamically routed network that uses
   Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) for routing. Also, the network is split
   up into multiple autonomous systems (AS) to stabilize the routing.
   Stabilization of traffic will help preventing BGP breakdown. It uses
   one backbone AS and multiple leaf AS. The leaf AS connects the
   backbone AS for connectivity to the rest of the network.

3.2. Routing

   The backbone Autonomous System (AS) advertises all prefixes to leaf
   AS. A leaf AS only advertises its own prefixes on peering with other
   AS. A leaf AS may have peering with other leaf AS, but it does not
   provide transit between AS. All traffic between AS in the network
   will go either via the backbone AS or via a direct peering between
   the AS.


Sheth & Thakker         Expires May 10, 2016                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Network to Interconnect Firewalls       November 2015


   Inside each AS a BGP-only setup is used, with the Multi Exit
   Discriminator (MED) attribute used for path selection. The MED
   provides a dynamic way to influence another AS in the way to reach a
   certain route when there are multiple entry points for that AS. Below
   are some of the characteristics of core network for path selection.

   1. All routing device should have internal BGP (iBGP) peering with
      only directly connected peers.

   2. All routing device iBGP peers are configured as route-reflectors.

   3. All routing device will re-write next-hop in iBGP peering so it is
      reachable via connected routes.

   4. All routing device increment MED on received prefixes. The value
      used to increment MED should be the same on both sides of a
      peering.

3.3. Proposed rules for inter site metrics

   Some of the proposed rules for adapting inter-site metrics are as
   below.

   1. Traffic between directly connected backbone sites should be routed
      via the direct connections.

   2. Traffic from leaf AS to directly connected backbone sites should
      be routed via the direct connection.

   3. Inter-site metrics should never be lower than +1k.

   4. Within a site, metrics should either be +100 or +127, depending on
      if it is a primary or standby path. The general idea is that the
      cost within a site always should be lower than that between sites.

   5. Each non-backbone site is configured as a leaf AS and connects to
      the backbone AS in two or more locations.

   6. The backbone AS sites are high-speed, high availability sites.

   The firewall or firewall cluster connects to the routing device
   through dedicated edge interface. Two separate firewall edge devices
   should not be installed on the same subnet. Communication between
   firewalls devices always traverses the proposed network. All traffic
   entering the proposed network is subjected to anti-spoofing, using
   strict reverse path forwarding (RPF). The routing between routing
   device and firewall device can be either dynamic routing or static


Sheth & Thakker         Expires May 10, 2016                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Network to Interconnect Firewalls       November 2015


   routing depending on what the edge device supports. Static routing
   has management overhead as the devices may need to be manually
   updated as prefixes are added and removed from the network. When
   dynamic routing is used, route-filters are applied to only permit
   specific networks to be accepted into the routing protocol. The
   firewall edge device is only responsible for protecting the networks
   behind it. It is allowed to have a rule set that permits any from its
   inside networks to the proposed network. Traffic routed via the
   proposed network should not use network address translation (NAT). If
   it does, it will be subjected to the network policy for the firewall
   device range.



4. High Capacity Site

   A standard site contains routing device which connects all the
   firewall edge devices and other routing devices. It also connect to
   other sites using IPsec encapsulated GRE tunnels. At backbone sites
   the routing devices also need to process traffic between remote
   sites. The IPsec processing is a lot more CPU intensive than just
   forwarding. When the device needs to handle IPsec traffic, local
   forwarding performance is greatly reduced. To increase the capacity
   of the site, a new type of device is proposed. This device is
   dedicated to routing traffic inside a site. It takes over the task of
   interconnecting all the network core and edge devices at a site from
   the routing device. With this new device installed, the routing
   devices are no longer need to process traffic between local devices,
   they only need to handle VPN traffic. As a result, VPN capacity will
   be increased by adding additional routing devices to the site. The
   new devices will take care of the routing between all devices. As a
   bi-product, the capability to add additional routing devices at a
   site also provides a way to overcome the issues with link handling.
   If a site with firewall edge devices that require static routing and
   the site layout cannot support routing device with a single physical
   VLAN trunk interface, additional site routing devices could be added
   to the site to handle such firewalls.

5. Dynamic Network Extension

   This section specifies how to connect the core network to other
   networks using dynamically routed interconnections. This allows
   interconnections in multiple locations to achieve redundancy and also
   improve routing between the networks. It supports both local and VPN
   connectivity between networks. It will also enable routing device to
   have dynamically routed interconnections with other networks. The
   Interconnection is possible over below.


Sheth & Thakker         Expires May 10, 2016                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Network to Interconnect Firewalls       November 2015


   1. Direct physical interconnect

   2. Encrypted VPN over Internet or other third party network.

   The Interconnections support source address verification. The
   Interconnections also support filtering of prefixes in the routing
   protocol.

   To handle the interconnections, interconnect routing device is used.
   It is dedicated to the task of interconnecting with other networks.
   This setup is used when we need to connect the network to other
   networks in more than one location using dynamic routing. It also
   means that any form of address translation is not supported. Internal
   networks use the same address space, as a result, interconnecting
   them always requires some form of address translation. Most networks
   have a VPN interconnect design to address these issues. BGP is the
   routing protocol supported for network interconnections. There are
   two types of Interconnects.

   1. LAN Interconnect - It is used in the cases where both networks
      exist at the same location, like the same data center.

   2. VPN Interconnect. It is used in the cases where we want to have an
      interconnect between the networks using Internet or another third
      party network as carrier.

   From a routing perspective there is no difference between a LAN and a
   VPN Interconnect. Under normal conditions, the proposed network will
   advertise the same networks at all interconnect locations and the
   other network is expected to do the same towards proposed network.
   Interconnect routing device connects to the routing device for
   connectivity to the proposed network. The interfaces used are core
   interfaces and filtering of traffic is not done on either device.

   The physical connectivity of the Interconnect routing device depends
   on the situation. Direct physical connection to peer network is done
   on dedicated physical interface. For routing, each side advertise all
   their prefixes at all locations with the same metrics and BGP
   attributes.

6. Security Considerations

   No additional security risk is introduced by using the mechanisms
   proposed in this document.





Sheth & Thakker         Expires May 10, 2016                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Network to Interconnect Firewalls       November 2015


7. IANA Considerations

   No requirements for IANA.

8. Conclusions

   This document proposes system and method comprising a network for
   interconnection of firewalls at multiple geographical locations
   connected through wide area network and also interconnection of all
   the networks within the same site. It applies to all communication to
   internal networks that is not behind the local firewall. All such
   communication will be routed through proposed network which is
   connected to firewall via dedicated interface. Network design for
   sites which needs higher capacity as compared with other network
   sites is also proposed. Extension of the design is also proposed in
   order to connect the proposed network to other external networks
   using dynamically routed interconnections.

9. References

9.1. Normative References

   [RFC793] Postel, B., Bradner, S., "Transmission Control Protocol",
             STD 7, RFC 793, September 1981.

   [RFC4026] Andersson, L., "Provider Provisioned Virtual Private
             Network (VPN) Terminology", RFC 4026, March, 2005.

   [RFC4364] Rosen, E., Rekhter, Y., "BGP/MPLS IP Virtual Private
             Networks", RFC 4364, February, 2006.

9.2. Informative References

   [Att2006] Attebury, G., Ramamurthy, B., "Router and Firewall
             Redundancy with OpenBSD and CARP". IEEE ICC, 146 - 151,
             2006

   [OpenBSD-PF]OpenBSD, "pf(4) manual page: pf -- packet filter", 2015,
             <http://www.openbsd.org/cgi-bin/man.cgi/OpenBSD-
             current/man4/pf.4&query=pf>.

   [RFC3511] Hickman, B., Newman, D., Tadjudin, S., Martin, T.,
             "Benchmarking Methodology for Firewall Performance", RFC
             3511, April 2003.

   [RFC2979] Freed, N.,"Behavior of and Requirements for Internet
             Firewalls", RFC 2979, October 2000.


Sheth & Thakker         Expires May 10, 2016                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Network to Interconnect Firewalls       November 2015


   [RFC4924] Aboba, B. and E. Davies, "Reflections on Internet
             Transparency", RFC 4924, July 2007.

   [RFC6887] Wing, D., Cheshire, S., Boucadair, M., Penno, R., and
             P.Selkirk, "Port Control Protocol (PCP)", RFC 6887, April
             2013.

10. Acknowledgments

   TBC






































Sheth & Thakker         Expires May 10, 2016                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Network to Interconnect Firewalls       November 2015


Authors' Addresses

   Chirag Sheth
   TCSL
   Garima Park, Gandhinagar - 382421, India

   Email: chirag.sheth@tcs.com


   Rajesh Thakker
   VGEC
   Motera, Chandkheda, Ahmedabad, India

   Email: rathakker2008@gmail.com


































Sheth & Thakker         Expires May 10, 2016                 [Page 11]

