Network Working Group                                            Dan Li 
Internet Draft                                               Qiliang Yi 
                                                                 Huawei 
 
                                                          Julien Meuric 
                                                         France Telecom 
                                                                       
                                                             Lyndon Ong 
                                                                  Ciena 
Category: Informational 
                                                                       
Expires: August 2007                                    February, 2007 
 
                                      
    Analysis of the Enhanced Mode in Layer One Virtual Private Networks 
                                 (L1VPNs) 
               draft-li-l1vpn-enhanced-mode-analysis-01.txt 


Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that       
   any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is       
   aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she       
   becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of       
   BCP 79. 

    

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

    

Abstract 

   This document presents detailed information with respect to the four 
   sub-models of the Layer One Virtual Private Network (L1VPN) enhanced 
 
 
 
Li                      Expires August 2007                  [Page 1] 

draft-li-l1vpn-enhanced-mode-analysis-01.txt              February 2007 
    

   mode. Each sub-model is evaluated from different points of view, such 
   as Topology Confidentiality, scalability, and reliability. The 
   requirements on GMPLS to support each sub-model of the L1VPN enhanced 
   mode are also discussed in this document. 

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Introduction................................................3 
   2. Enhanced Mode Overview.......................................3 
   3. Analysis of the Sub-models...................................4 
      3.1. Overlay Extension Service Sub-Model.....................4 
         3.1.1. Topology Confidentiality...........................4 
         3.1.2. Scalability........................................5 
         3.1.3. Reliability........................................5 
         3.1.4. Other Issues.......................................5 
      3.2. Virtual Node Service Sub-Model..........................6 
         3.2.1. Topology Confidentiality...........................6 
         3.2.2. Scalability........................................6 
         3.2.3. Reliability........................................6 
         3.2.4. Other Issues.......................................7 
      3.3. Virtual Link Service Sub-Model..........................7 
         3.3.1. Topology Confidentiality...........................7 
         3.3.2. Scalability........................................8 
         3.3.3. Reliability........................................8 
         3.3.4. Other Issues.......................................8 
      3.4. Per-VPN Peer Service Sub-Model..........................9 
         3.4.1. Topology Confidentiality...........................9 
         3.4.2. Scalability........................................9 
         3.4.3. Reliability........................................9 
         3.4.4. Other Issues......................................10 
   4. Requirements for GMPLS......................................10 
      4.1. Overlay Extension Service Sub-Model....................10 
      4.2. Virtual Node Service Sub-Model.........................11 
      4.3. Virtual Link Service Sub-Model.........................11 
      4.4. Per-VPN Peer Service Sub-Model.........................12 
   5. Security Considerations.....................................13 
   6. Acknowledgments............................................13 
   7. References.................................................13 
      7.1. Normative References...................................13 
      7.2. Informative References.................................13 
   8. Author's Addresses.........................................14 
   9. Full Copyright Statement....................................15 
   10. Intellectual Property Statement............................15 
    


 
 
Li                      Expires August 2007                  [Page 2] 

draft-li-l1vpn-enhanced-mode-analysis-01.txt              February 2007 
    

1. Introduction 

   In [L1VPN-FRMWK] and [L1VPN-APPL], the signaling and routing service 
   model (Enhanced Mode) is introduced for Layer One Virtual Private 
   Networks (L1VPNs). In this service model, the interface between 
   Provider Edge and Customer Edge nodes (the PE-CE interface) exchanges 
   not only signaling information as in the Basic Mode, but also some 
   limited routing information. Four sub-models are described to 
   represent the network depending on how customers perceive the 
   provider network through signaling and routing.  

   The four sub-models of the signaling and routing service model are 
   the Overlay Extension service model, the Virtual Node service model, 
   the Virtual Link service model, and the Per-VPN Peer service model. 
   It would be costly for a device to support all four sub-models, so it 
   is desirable to limit the choice of which sub-model should be 
   supported by an implementation. The motivation of this document is to 
   discuss these sub-models, and make it easy to make the decision.  

   Each sub-model is evaluated from different points of view, such as 
   Topology Confidentiality, scalability, and reliability. The 
   requirements on GMPLS to support each sub-model of L1VPN enhanced 
   mode are also discussed. 

2. Enhanced Mode Overview 

   As defined in [L1VPN-FRMWK], the Enhanced Mode has four sub-models 
   which are the Overlay Extension service model, the Virtual Node 
   service model, the Virtual Link service model, the Per-VPN Peer 
   service model.  

   In the Overlay Extension service model, the routing information a CE 
   can receive from a PE is limited to information about the list of CE-
   PE TE link addresses, and may also include additional information 
   concerning these TE links. The information includes Customer Port 
   Identifier (CPI) and the per-VPN Provider Port Identifier (VPN-PPI) 
   of the remote CE-PE TE links in a VPN, and may contain TE attributes 
   such as the switching type and encoding type of these TE links. 

   In the Virtual Node service model, the VPN backbone is represented as 
   a virtual node, and the customer perceives the VPN backbone as one 
   single node which can be entered and exited by LSPs over CE-PE links 
   in a specific VPN. A CE receives routing information about remote CE-
   PE links and the customer network (i.e., remote customer sites which 
   may include TE attribute in customer network). 


 
 
Li                      Expires August 2007                  [Page 3] 

draft-li-l1vpn-enhanced-mode-analysis-01.txt              February 2007 
    

   In the Virtual Link service model, more routing information is leaked 
   from PE to CE compared with the Virtual Node service mode. This 
   information includes CE-PE links and remote customer sites as in the 
   Virtual Node service model. In addition, the routing information also 
   includes virtual TE links interconnecting PEs in a specific VPN. 

   The Per-VPN Peer service model is the most complicated of the four 
   sub-models, due to the routing information exchanged between CE and 
   PE. Besides the routing information of CE-PE links and remote 
   customer sites, the PE advertises routing information about the 
   partitioned portions of the provider network to the CEs. Such 
   information contains at least one virtual P node which represents one 
   real P-node or a set of P-nodes, and virtual links connecting PEs to 
   the virtual P-nodes. 

3. Analysis of the Sub-models 

   Each sub-model is evaluated from the following three aspects: 
   Topology Confidentiality, scalability, and reliability. An additional 
   section presents any other considerations such as manageability and 
   optimality. 

   Topology Confidentiality means whether a sub-model is secure from the 
   service provider's point of view. Namely, the more details of the 
   provider network are exposed to customer the more dangerous (not 
   secure) it will be.  

   Scalability means whether the solution for one sub-model in the 
   single domain scenario can be applied to multi-domain/AS scenario 
   without any changes or with few changes. The size of the routing 
   information is another scaling issue which also should be considered 
   in each sub-model. 

   Reliability represents how each sub-model can improve the 
   availability of the L1VPN service by using the routing information 
   which CE receives from PE. 

3.1. Overlay Extension Service Sub-Model 

3.1.1. Topology Confidentiality 

   The Overlay Extension service sub-model is the simplest of the four 
   sub-models. The provider network is a black box to the CE, and the CE 
   only receives CE-PE link information from the PE. From the service 
   provider's perspective, this model is the most secure model of the 
   four sub-models because only the VPN-PPI of the PE port associated 
   with each CE in a VPN is disclosed to the customer. Thanks to the 
 
 
Li                      Expires August 2007                  [Page 4] 

draft-li-l1vpn-enhanced-mode-analysis-01.txt              February 2007 
    

   character of the VPN-PPI, the CE really knows nothing about provider 
   network. The routing information of provider network is not disclosed 
   to CE. 

3.1.2. Scalability 

   In the Overlay Extension service model, because no provider network 
   routing information is leaked to the customer, whether the VPN 
   backbone is composed of a single area, multiple areas, or multiple 
   ASs has no impact on the protocol solutions. Consider this aspect, 
   the scalability of this service sub-model is the best of the four 
   sub-models. 

   In this service model, no provider network routing information is 
   leaked to CEs, only CE-PE TE link routing information is carried 
   through the backbone. The size of such routing information is 
   relatively small, but if the customers needed to form routing 
   adjacency between CEs over CE-CE connections in order to exchange 
   customer site routing information, it may cause up to N-square 
   routing adjacencies between CEs (if a full mesh was aimed at). So in 
   this situation, scalability may become an issue. 

3.1.3. Reliability 

   The remote CE-PE TE link information available in this sub-model can 
   help the ingress CE judge whether the remote CE-PE link has enough 
   resources or whether the encoding type matches the local CE-PE link, 
   etc. Also, this information can help in making the choice of route 
   when the remote CE can be reached through more than one remote PE. 

   On the other hand, because the routing information about the customer 
   sites is not exchanged between CEs, the LSPs between two customer 
   devices must be established as in inter-domain context. Thus, in the 
   event of the failure of an LSP connecting two customer devices, the 
   failed LSP sould be rerouted as in case of inter-domain recovery. 

3.1.4. Other Issues 

   This service sub-model allows carriers to keep a tight control over 
   their network and to give to the client the minimum amount of 
   information they need to take benefit from the L1VPN service. 
   Consequently, clients do not have a detailed view on the way the 
   backbone routing is done, as it is completely devoted to carriers and 
   is part of the service provided.  



 
 
Li                      Expires August 2007                  [Page 5] 

draft-li-l1vpn-enhanced-mode-analysis-01.txt              February 2007 
    

3.2. Virtual Node Service Sub-Model 

3.2.1. Topology Confidentiality 

   As for the Virtual Node service sub-model, the provider network is 
   represented to the CE as a single node. This kind of abstraction 
   makes the provider network relatively secure, because the address of 
   the virtual node disclosed to CE can be set to a value having no 
   relationship to the address space of the provider network. 

   Virtual Node is also sometimes referred to as Abstract Node.  In the 
   Virtual Node sub-model, Border Nodes are not visible, being 
   aggregated into a single node. In this case, mapping must be 
   supported between Border Node links/ports and Abstract Node 
   links/ports. As a result the Virtual Node service sub-model provides 
   minimal topology information but requires mapping of abstract node 
   port identifiers to real port identifiers in the general case to 
   avoid duplication of port identifiers at the abstract node. 

3.2.2. Scalability 

   How the VPN backbone routing information is represented in a single 
   domain/AS and in multi-domain/AS network may impact the solution 
   details. Thus, in terms of scalability, under this circumstance the 
   Virtual Node service sub-model may not be as good as the Overlay 
   Extension service sub-model. 

   Besides the CE-PE TE link information, the remote customer sites 
   routing information is carried across the backbone. Considering large 
   quantity of remote customer sites information, scalability may become 
   an issue in this service model, and solution should be carefully 
   considered to avoid overload of the core routing protocol. In this 
   service model, the N-square routing adjacency problem mentioned in 
   Overlay Extension sub-model can be avoided because CE receives remote 
   customer sites routing information from PE. 

3.2.3. Reliability 

   Compared with the Overlay Extension service sub-model, the benefit of 
   using the Virtual Node service sub-model is that C-to-C LSPs can be 
   established from the head-end C because the customer sites' routing 
   information is available to all CEs in a specific VPN. Hence, in the 
   event of the failure of an LSP connecting two C-nodes, the failed LSP 
   can be rerouted automatically from the C-node in an easier way than 
   in the overlay model, where inter-domain recovery is required to 
   handle failure in any location. 

 
 
Li                      Expires August 2007                  [Page 6] 

draft-li-l1vpn-enhanced-mode-analysis-01.txt              February 2007 
    

3.2.4. Other Issues 

   If a dedicated data plane within the core network is used for a VPN, 
   the Virtual Node service sub-model does not give a detailed view on 
   the actual topology because the whole VPN backbone is represented as 
   a virtual node. When the controller on a C-node or a CE performs a 
   path computation, it will treat the abstract Virtual Node just as any 
   other vertex in the VPN TE topology. This makes such requirement as 
   monitoring alarm and performance of the dedicated resources hard. 
   Further, like in the Overlay Extension sub-model, the customer 
   network cannot exert any influence over the path of the VPN 
   connection through the core network. 

   On the other hand, in a virtual node abstraction, the path computing 
   engine will take it for granted the virtual node can provide an 
   internal path of the required quality between any pair of access 
   ports. But this is not always true since the abstraction may hide 
   limited connectivity within the network. Hence, in a virtual node 
   abstraction it may be necessary to supply additional routing 
   information in the form of the constraints of internal connectivity 
   between any pair access ports. 

   In the context of the Virtual Node service sub-model, the customer 
   assumes connectivity between any pair of PE ports in a specific VPN. 
   This connectivity may not exist, and routing information in the form 
   of the constraints of internal connectivity, between any pair of PE-
   CE links in the context of a VPN could be provided to solve this 
   problem. Note, however, that the Virtual Node service sub-model has 
   narrower applicability than the general virtual node abstraction. The 
   customer sites are typically connected by a single VPN service 
   provider and each has access to a limited set of PEs. Further, the 
   provider usually contracts to provide VPN connectivity so the 
   customer may be right to assume the connectivity of the virtual node. 

3.3. Virtual Link Service Sub-Model 

3.3.1. Topology Confidentiality 

   As described in section 2, in the Virtual Link service sub-model, the 
   provider network's routing information is provided to the customer, 
   as a set of virtual links. In order to disclose such information to a 
   CE, a PE needs to advertise the virtual links connecting it with 
   other PEs, thus the addresses of the virtual links must be visible to 
   customer. From the provider's point of view, exposing the real 
   addresses of PEs connected by virtual link reveals some information 
   about the provider's network. In this situation, technique such as 
   address translation may be needed, to keep the provider network 
 
 
Li                      Expires August 2007                  [Page 7] 

draft-li-l1vpn-enhanced-mode-analysis-01.txt              February 2007 
    

   secret, but this definitely depends on the trust relationship between 
   a customer and a provider. 

   Virtual Link is also referred to as Abstract link. The virtual links 
   represent "potential" connectivity rather than any specific link in 
   the domain. Various means could be used to determine the associated 
   cost and bandwidth, and typically they would always be in an 
   available state.  

3.3.2. Scalability 

   Scalability may become an issue, in the Virtual Link service sub-
   model. Consider the situation where the VPN backbone is composed of 
   multiple domains or ASes; in this case, the abstraction of topology 
   into a virtual link may differ from the abstraction in a single 
   domain. This may require different routing and signaling protocol 
   solutions. 

   The scalability of the backbone routing protocol should be carefully 
   considered as described in the Virtual Node sub-model. An additional 
   scalability issue introduced by the Virtual Link sub-model is that 
   when the topology of a specific VPN is full-mesh, in the data plane 
   of this VPN, a logical full-mesh topology comprised by virtual links 
   among the corresponding PEs is needed. Thus, the so called N-square 
   problem may arise when PE advertises provider network routing 
   information to Ces, i.e., the number of link advertisements increases 
   by order N-square, where N is the number of PE nodes in the VPN. 

3.3.3. Reliability 

   Same as the Virtual Node service sub-model, in Virtual Link service 
   sub-model the reliability of the C-to-C LSP can be improved because 
   the customer knows some routing information of the provider network.  

3.3.4. Other Issues 

   The Virtual Link service sub-model is suitable for a dedicated data 
   plane. Depending on the virtual link TE information received, the CE 
   might control in some way how the L1VPN connection traverses the VPN 
   backbone. Also, the customer may monitor the status of the virtual 
   links in this service sub-model. In this service sub-model each PE is 
   viewed by a CE as a separate node when computing path, so the problem 
   that the internal connectivity constraint of the Virtual Node service 
   sub-model is invisible to CEs (discussed above for Virtual Node 
   service model) is more limited in the Virtual Link service sub-model. 
   Nevertheless, some constraints remain when resources towards 
   different PEs are shared. 
 
 
Li                      Expires August 2007                  [Page 8] 

draft-li-l1vpn-enhanced-mode-analysis-01.txt              February 2007 
    

3.4. Per-VPN Peer Service Sub-Model 

3.4.1. Topology Confidentiality 

   From the provider's perspective, this service sub-model is the most 
   open of the four sub-models because the largest amount of routing 
   information is advertised to the customer. To keep this service model 
   in a secure mode (i.e., to keep the real addresses of PE and P-nodes 
   invisible to the CE), techniques such as address translation may be 
   required so that the addresses of virtual P-nodes and PEs disclosed 
   to customer have no relationship with the provider network address 
   realm. Again, this definitely depends on the trust relationship 
   between a customer and a provider. 

   Per-VPN Peer is also referred to as a Pseudonode model, due to the 
   potential use of virtual P-nodes in the advertised topology. The Per-
   VPN Peer sub-model potentially scales better with the number of 
   border nodes (and clients!) although abstraction is more complex. 

3.4.2. Scalability 

   Scalability must be carefully considered if this service sub-model is 
   deployed. Because the routing information represented in a single 
   domain may differ from that in multi-domain/AS networks, different 
   solution details may be required. 

   In this service model, the scalability of the backbone routing 
   protocol should be carefully considered as described in the Virtual 
   Node sub-model. As far as the service provider network routing 
   information is concerned, the N-square issue discussed in Virtual 
   Link service model may be avoided in this service model, since PE-
   nodes may connect through a small number of virtual P nodes rather 
   than a full mesh of virtual links between PE-nodes, but the virtual P 
   nodes should be carefully designed so that the routing information 
   propagated to CEs would be more scalable. 

3.4.3. Reliability 

   Depending on the provider network routing information received from a 
   PE, customers can have a relatively strong influence on the resources 
   dedicated to them. For example, a customer can set up diverse paths 
   which traverse different P-nodes, so that there will be less chance 
   of both paths failing at the same time. 




 
 
Li                      Expires August 2007                  [Page 9] 

draft-li-l1vpn-enhanced-mode-analysis-01.txt              February 2007 
    

3.4.4. Other Issues 

   The Per-VPN Peer service sub-model is suitable for a dedicated data 
   plane just as is the Virtual Link service sub-model. But compared 
   with the Virtual Link service sub-model, the provider network exposes 
   more routing information to the customer. By using the routing 
   information about the VPN backbone, customers can have finer control 
   of the resources dedicated to them and can have more visibility of 
   the network resources in cases such as alarm monitoring, performance 
   collection, and path computation, etc.  

4. Requirements for GMPLS 

   The functional requirements such as auto-discovery, signaling, and 
   resource management play important roles in the implementation of 
   L1VPN. [L1VPN-BM] describes the possible methods which may be used to 
   implement these functional requirements in the Basic Mode. This 
   section analyzes the application of the functional requirements in 
   each signaling and routing service sub-models, and analyzes the 
   impact may have on a GMPLS-enabled network. 

4.1. Overlay Extension Service Sub-Model 

   This service sub-model is like the Overlay service model (Basic Mode), 
   but routing information about CE-PE TE link attributes is also 
   exchanged between CE and PE. Routing protocol-based auto-discovery 
   mechanisms are described in [L1VPN-BGP] and [L1VPN-OSPF], and other 
   mechanisms such as Directory Server based auto-discovery have also 
   been discussed. In the Overlay Extension service sub-model, routing 
   extensions are required to describe the CE-PE TE link information, 
   and the mechanisms described for auto-discovery can easily be used to 
   satisfy the routing requirements of this sub-model. 

   In Overlay Extension service sub-model, any routing protocols can be 
   chosen between CEs. 

   As far as signaling is concerned, the Overlay Extension service sub-
   model is identical to the Basic Mode Overlay service model, and 
   Shuffling or Nesting/Stitching described in [L1VPN-BM] can be used. 

   The Overlay Extension service model is suitable for a shared or 
   dedicated data plane. With a shared data plane a resource management 
   function is not necessary, but with a dedicated data plane a resource 
   management function is required to allocate provider network link 
   resources to a specific VPN or to a specific set of VPNs. The method 
   of allocation of link resources may be through manual configuration 
   or signaling. From the provider's point of view, manual configuration 
 
 
Li                      Expires August 2007                 [Page 10] 

draft-li-l1vpn-enhanced-mode-analysis-01.txt              February 2007 
    

   may be time consuming, error-prone, and means high operational 
   expenditure. So if the link resources can be allocated in an 
   automatic way (for example, using signaling), it may help providers 
   to reduce their operational costs. 

4.2. Virtual Node Service Sub-Model 

   In the Virtual Node service sub-model the provider network is 
   presented as a virtual node to the customer. The routing information 
   about CE-PE TE link attributes and customer site routing information 
   is advertised from PE to CE. Routing protocols can be extended to 
   support CE-PE TE link information advertisement. 

   Because the customer site routing information is exchanged between CE 
   and PE, the CE-PE routing protocol is restricted to the one that the 
   provider network supports. 

   The above mentioned core routing techniques can be extended to 
   exchange customer site routing information, but considering the large 
   quantity of customer site information the core routing protocols may 
   be overloaded especially when the TE routing information of customer 
   sites is also exchanged. Under such circumstances an LSP (which may 
   be an LSP established on Layer 3) may be established between PE sites 
   to carry the customer site TE routing protocol information exchanges 
   across the provider network. Such LSPs can be automatically 
   established as part of the auto-dsicovery process and can be used to 
   provide control plane connectivity between CEs. This approach may 
   also be applied to the Virtual Link and Per-VPN Peer service sub-
   models. 

   A shared or dedicated data plane can be deployed in the Virtual Node 
   service sub-model. At the same time, manual or automatic resource 
   management methods described in section 4.1 can be used to achieve 
   the requirement. 

   Shuffling or Nesting/Stitching described in [L1VPN-BM] can be used to 
   achieve the Virtual Node service sub-model. 

4.3. Virtual Link Service Sub-Model 

   In the Virtual Link service sub-model, virtual links are constructed 
   between PEs, and the CE receives information about the CE-PE TE links, 
   customer site routing information, and information about the virtual 
   links between PEs. 

   Same as the Virtual Node service sub-model, the CE-PE routing 
   protocol is restricted to the one that the provider network supports. 
 
 
Li                      Expires August 2007                 [Page 11] 

draft-li-l1vpn-enhanced-mode-analysis-01.txt              February 2007 
    

   To keep the provider network secure, the virtual links disclosed to 
   the CE should not contain the real address within the provider 
   network, so a technique to hide them is needed in this case. To be 
   more precise, when advertising virtual link information to the CE, 
   the addresses of PEs interconnected by the virtual links may be 
   translated into private addresses or the virtualization process 
   should be able to turn a set of actual addresses to a (possibly 
   smaller) set of virtual address.  

4.4. Per-VPN Peer Service Sub-Model 

   The Per-VPN Peer service sub-model is more complex than the Virtual 
   Link service sub-model. Besides receiving information about CE-PE TE 
   links and customer site routing information, the CE receives abstract 
   VPN backbone routing information advertised from PE. The abstract VPN 
   backbone routing information is the partitioned subset of the 
   provider network that contains at least one virtual P-node and 
   virtual links connecting virtual P-nodes and PEs. 

   Same as the Virtual Node service sub-model, the CE-PE routing 
   protocol is restricted to the one that the provider network supports. 

   How to represent the virtual provider network topology becomes an 
   issue when advertising the abstract routing information to the CE,. 
   To keep the provider network secure, address masking may be needed in 
   this service sub-model. Before advertising the virtual topology to 
   the CEs using routing protocols, it is required to build this virtual 
   view including the routing information about virtual P-nodes and 
   virtual links interconnecting the virtual P-nodes and PEs. 

   In the Per-VPN Peer service sub-model, the application of resource 
   management is the same as in the Virtual Link service sub-model. 
   Manual or automatic resource allocation methods can be applied to 
   this service sub-model. 

   Depending on the abstract routing information the CE may designate an 
   Explicit Route object (ERO) with an abstract route through the VPN 
   backbone and use this to signal the L1VPN connection LSP. When the PE 
   receives this ERO it must translate the abstract route into a real 
   route through the provider network. In this case, a 
   "devirtualization" mechanism to expand and translate the ERO may be 
   required. On the other hand, when a Record Route object (RRO) is 
   requested, the RRO passed to the CE must be re-translated into an 
   abstract route. So new applicability to current signaling protocol 
   may be needed. 


 
 
Li                      Expires August 2007                 [Page 12] 

draft-li-l1vpn-enhanced-mode-analysis-01.txt              February 2007 
    

5. IANA Considerations 

   None. 

6. Security Considerations 

   Security issue for the four Extended Mode sub-models which we mostly 
   focus on is Topology Confidentiality, that is described in separate 
   sub-sections of Section 3. 

7. Acknowledgments 

   We would like to thank Adrian Farrel for his useful comments. 

8. References 

8.1. Normative References 

[L1VPN-FRMWK] Tomonori Takeda, et al., "Framework and Requirements for 
           Layer 1 Virtual Private Networks", draft-ietf-l1vpn-
           framework-04.txt, September 2006. 

[L1VPN-APPL] Tomonori Takeda "Applicability analysis of Generalized 
           Multiprotocol Label Switching (GMPLS) protocols to Layer 1 
           Virtual Private Networks", draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-
           01.txt, March 2006. 

8.2. Informative References 

[L1VPN-BM] Fedyk, D., Rekhter, Y. (Eds.), "Layer 1 VPN Basic Mode", 
           draft-ietf-l1vpn-basic-mode-00.txt, May 2006. 

[L1VPN-BGP] Ould-Brahim H., Fedyk D., Rekhter, Y., "BGP-based Auto- 
           Discovery for L1VPNs ", draft-ietf-l1vpn-bgp-auto-discovery-
           00.txt, May 2006. 

[L1VPN-OSPF] Igor Bryskin, Lou Berger, "OSPF Based L1VPN Auto-Discovery", 
           draft-ietf-l1vpn-ospf-auto-discovery-00.txt, May 2006. 








 
 
Li                      Expires August 2007                 [Page 13] 

draft-li-l1vpn-enhanced-mode-analysis-01.txt              February 2007 
    

9. Author's Addresses 

   Qiliang Yi 
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd. 
   F3-5-B R&D Center, Huawei Base, 
   Bantian, Longgang District 
   Shenzhen 518129 P.R.China 
    
   Phone: +86-755-28972913 
   Email: yiqiliang@huawei.com 
    
    
   Jianhua Gao 
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd. 
   F3-5-B R&D Center, Huawei Base, 
   Bantian, Longgang District 
   Shenzhen 518129 P.R.China 
    
   Phone: +86-755-28972902 
   Email: gjhhit@huawei.com 
    
    
   Dan Li 
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd. 
   F3-5-B R&D Center, Huawei Base, 
   Bantian, Longgang District 
   Shenzhen 518129 P.R.China 
    
   Phone: +86-755-28972910 
   Email: danli@huawei.com 
    
    
   Julien Meuric 
   France Telecom 
   2, avenue Pierre Marzin 
   22307 Lannion Cedex 
   France 
    
   Phone: +33 2 96 05 28 28 
   Email: julien.meuric@orange-ftgroup.com 
    
    
   Lyndon Ong   
   Ciena  
   PO Box 308   
   Cupertino, CA 95015  
   United States of America  
 
 
Li                      Expires August 2007                 [Page 14] 

draft-li-l1vpn-enhanced-mode-analysis-01.txt              February 2007 
    

        
   Phone: +1 408 962 4929  
   Email: lyong@ciena.com 
    
10. Full Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS 
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

11. Intellectual Property Statement 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- Drafts. 
 
 
Li                      Expires August 2007                 [Page 15] 

draft-li-l1vpn-enhanced-mode-analysis-01.txt              February 2007 
    

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum  of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress". 

    








































 
 
Li                      Expires August 2007                 [Page 16] 

