

Internet Architecture Board                               G. Huston, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                       IAB
Expires: February 8, 2005                                  I. Leuca, Ed.
                                                                     OMA
                                                         August 10, 2004


                 OMA-IETF Standardization Collaboration
                      draft-iab-oma-liaison-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed,
   and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 8, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document describes the standardization collaboration between the
   Open Mobile Alliance and the Internet Engineering Task Force.

1.  Introduction

   This document contains a set of principles and guidelines that serves
   as the basis for establishing a cooperation framework between the
   Open Mobile Alliance (OMA) and Internet Engineering Task Force



Huston & Leuca          Expires February 8, 2005                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                OMA Liaison                    August 2004


   (IETF), with the objective of securing timely development of
   technical specification that facilitate maximum interoperability with
   existing (fixed and mobile) Internet systems, devices, and protocols.

   Within the OMA, specific activities are undertaken through OMA
   Working Groups, each with their area of responsibilities.  These
   activities are authorized, and their output is approved by, the OMA
   Technical Plenary.  The list of OMA Working Groups, OMA
   Specifications for public comment, the OMA work program and publicly
   available working group drafts can be found at the OMA web site,
   <http://www.openmobilealliance.org>.

   Within the IETF activities are undertaken within a framework of
   Areas, with specific activities being undertaken by Working Groups
   that are chartered within each Area.  Working Group outputs are
   reviewed by the Internet Engineering Steering Group and published by
   the RFC-Editor.  IETF activities are based on a principle of open
   contribution and participation by any interested party.  Information
   on IETF Working Groups, current work item drafts, meeting schedules,
   and mailing lists are published on the IETF web site,
   <http://www.ietf.org>.

   The IETF and the OMA are cooperating with a mutual desire to support
   the integrity of specifications and standards developed by each body.
   The preferred approach is that the OMA uses the Internet standards
   unchanged, if feasible, and communicate requirements for change into
   IETF as needed.  The parties intend to work together in an effort to
   avoid duplication of work.

   Each organization will operate according to their own rules and
   procedures including rules governing Intellectual Property Rights
   (IPR), specification elaboration, approval and maintenance.

   This cooperation framework is intended to guide collaborative efforts
   between the IETF and the OMA, and should be put into use in as much
   as it is applicable to the collaborative efforts.  In the event that
   either party finds this framework inapplicable, then they may notify
   the other party so that this framework may be modified or withdrawn,
   as appropriate.

2.  Basis of Collaboration

   In the further development of OMA specifications, the benefit of
   adopting Internet specifications has been identified.

   While this document recognizes the importance of interoperability of
   OMA specifications with the existing Internet and hence the use of
   IETF standards, the OMA recognizes that additions or modifications



Huston & Leuca          Expires February 8, 2005                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                OMA Liaison                    August 2004


   might be needed in order to make the IETF Internet specifications
   fulfill the needs of the OMA.  In such cases the OMA will take its
   concerns directly to the appropriate IETF working groups for
   resolution.  Where no appropriate working group can be found, or when
   it is not known where to direct the communication, or in the case of
   resolution of consequent matters, the matter will be raised through
   the OMA's designated liaison to the IETF.

   The IETF may also need to ask questions of OMA in order to refine its
   understanding of OMA requirements, or may wish to offer guidance to
   OMA on the effective use of Internet specifications.  Where possible
   these communications will occur in the context of a discussion
   between OMA and an IETF working group.  In the event that a working
   group level discussion is deemed inappropriate for the desired
   communication, the matter will be raised through the IETF's
   designated liaison to the OMA.

3.  Document Sharing

   Both OMA and the IETF encourage the sharing of draft documents that
   are of mutual interest.

   All IETF documents are publicly available from the IETF web site, and
   discussion of documents is hosted on open mailing lists.

   OMA documents intended for public consumption, including working
   drafts, are published for open access on the OMA web site,
   <http://www.openmobilealliance.org/>.  Technical contributions to the
   OMA work by its members are also encouraged to be publicly available.

   The OMA and the IETF will work to update and exchange on a regular
   basis a list of dependencies between each organization's
   specifications and work in progress.

4.  Participation in the IETF Process

   Participation in the IETF process is completely open.  This allows
   OMA delegates to participate as the OMA considers appropriate in IETF
   meetings and mailing list discussions to assist the IETF in refining
   its understanding of OMA requirements and in meeting such
   requirements as the IETF deems appropriate.  This close working
   relationship also offers an excellent opportunity for OMA delegates
   to receive informal guidance from IETF on OMA's use of Internet
   specifications.

   The vast majority of the technical discussions and decision making
   within the IETF is undertaken using open mailing lists.  It is
   recommended that interested individuals subscribe to and participate



Huston & Leuca          Expires February 8, 2005                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                OMA Liaison                    August 2004


   on these lists.

   Notification to the OMA of new work to be undertaken by the IETF is
   to be via a nominated IETF liaison notification mechanism.

5.  Designated Liaisons

   Where the informal working group level of interaction is
   insufficient, matters can be raised through a liaison channel.  The
   OMA and the IETF shall each establish liaison functions for
   communication with the other organization and shall appoint one or
   more individuals to those functions.

5.1  IETF Liaison to OMA

   The preferred way for organizations to work with IETF is through the
   working groups.  However, IETF has a limited number of individual
   liaison roles with other organizations when conditions warrant the
   appointment of a specific person.

   The Internet Architecture Board (IAB) shall appoint a specific person
   to serve as the OMA Liaison.  The role of the IETF's OMA Liaison is
   to act as an initial contact point in IETF for administrative aspects
   of this collaboration that cannot easily be handled in other ways
   (e.g., at a technical level by interactions with IETF Working Groups
   or Area Directors).  It is agreed that the role does not carry the
   expectation of attendance at OMA meetings or participation in OMA
   administrative processes and it is anticipated that all liaison
   efforts assigned to this individual will be carried out by electronic
   mail.  It is understood that the liaison does not have the ability to
   make exceptions to, or special provisions for, IETF policies and
   procedures.

   It is expected that the individual appointed to this role would:
   o  be informed by the OMA of OMA activities on behalf of the IETF,
      including new work proposals, and be able to report those using
      appropriate channels within the IETF,
   o  convey liaisons statements from the OMA to the IETF, and be
      responsible for shepherding the OMA communication to the relevant
      parts of the IETF,
   o  report to the OMA on progress with IETF consideration of OMA
      liaison statements, and
   o  have direct access to the OMA technical leadership as well as
      direct access to the IAB and IETF Area Directors, as required.

   OMA meetings are normally open only to delegates from OMA member
   organizations.  In order to assist the information flow between the
   organizations, the IETF may, by prior written invitation from the OMA



Huston & Leuca          Expires February 8, 2005                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                OMA Liaison                    August 2004


   on per-case basis, send a representative to participate in and
   represent the IETF at an OMA Technical Plenary and Working Group
   meeting under conditions set forth by the OMA.  The representative
   could be the IETF liaison, or in the event that the liaison cannot
   attend, some other designated individual.

5.2  OMA Liaison to IETF

   The OMA Technical Plenary shall establish an IETF liaison to be the
   initial contact point in OMA for matters pertaining to the OMA-IETF
   cooperation.  The OMA-IETF liaison function, therefore, is expected
   to work with the concerned IETF and OMA working groups and support
   the interaction between OMA and IETF.

6.  Formal Liaison Statements

   Whenever possible, and as the preferred primary method of
   communication and coordination of activity, communication at working
   group level is strongly encouraged.

   When deemed necessary, formal communication between OMA and IETF is
   also permitted.  Such communications are to be recorded in the form
   of Liaison Statements, and the IETF will use the OMA liaison role to
   convey such statements between the IETF and the OMA.  All liaison
   statements made by the IETF or directed to the IETF, shall be
   published by the IETF as public documents.  All liaison statements
   made by the IETF will comply with the IETF IPR policy as documented
   in RFC 3667 [1] and RFC 3668 [2].

7.  Contributions

   Contributions may be made to the IETF by members of the OMA in their
   capacity as IETF participants, under the IETF's IPR policy as
   documented in RFC 3667 [1] and RFC3668 [2].

   Contributions may be made to the OMA by IETF participants who are
   also members of the OMA only in their capacity as OMA members under
   the OMA membership rules, including its IPR policy.

   OMA mailing lists are not open to the general public.  It is
   recommended that work of mutual interest be discussed on the relevant
   IETF mailing lists.

   The OMA may make normative references to the IETF Proposed Standard,
   Draft Standard, Standard, Best Common Practice and Informational
   specifications that are published as part of the "Request for
   Comments" (RFC) document series.




Huston & Leuca          Expires February 8, 2005                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                OMA Liaison                    August 2004


8.  Co-Development of Documents

   The IETF and the OMA will not co-develop any documents or material.

9.  Terms of Agreement

9.1  Limitation of Liability

   Neither the IETF or the OMA make any representations with respect to
   and does not warrant the accuracy of any information or any document.
   Without limiting the foregoing, each party agrees to accept the terms
   of and reproduce any warranty disclaimers or limitations of liability
   which are included in any reproduction of published material made
   available to it under this cooperation framework.

9.2  General

   a.  Neither the OMA or the IETF acquires any intellectual or
       industrial property rights under this cooperation framework or
       through any disclosure.  No license to any patent, trade mark,
       copyright or other proprietary right is granted here.
   b.  There is no obligation on either the OMA or the IETF to
       incorporate the materials presented by the other party.
   c.  This cooperation framework and the relationship between the IETF
       and the OMA does not constitute a partnership, joint venture,
       agency, or contract of employment between the IETF and the OMA.

10.  Acknowledgements

   The editors acknowledge the extensive efforts of Jorge Contreras,
   Leslie Daigle, Ted Hardie, Ileana Leuca, Allison Mankin, Thomas
   Narten, Isabelle Valet-Harper and Dean Willis in contributing to this
   document.

   This memo took guidance from and borrowed text from RFC 3113 [3] and
   RFC 3131 [4].

11.  References

11.1  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "IETF Rights in Contributions", BCP 78, RFC 3667,
        February 2004.

   [2]  Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF Technology",
        BCP 79, RFC 3668, February 2004.





Huston & Leuca          Expires February 8, 2005                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                OMA Liaison                    August 2004


11.2  Informative References

   [3]  Rosenbrock, K., Sanmugam, R., Bradner, S. and J. Klensin,
        "3GPP-IETF Standardization Collaboration", RFC 3113, June 2001.

   [4]  Bradner, S., Calhoun, P., Cuschieri, H., Dennett, S., Flynn, G.,
        Lipford, M. and M. McPheters, "3GPP2-IETF Standardization
        Collaboration", RFC 3131, June 2001.


Authors' Addresses

   Geoff Huston (editor)
   Internet Architecture Board

   EMail: execd@iab.org
   URI:   http://www.iab.org


   Ileana Leuca (editor)
   Open Mobile Alliance

   EMail: ileana.leuca@attws.com
   URI:   http://www.openmobilealliance.org

Appendix A.  Work Areas

   The areas of common interest between the IETF and the OMA include the
   following:
   o  Instant Messaging based on SIP/SIMPLE
   o  Presence and availability
   o  Privacy
   o  SIP Event Notification
   o  Location services, such as geographic location
   o  Device management
   o  Multimedia messaging, including email interconnectivity and
      mapping
   o  Group management
   o  Telephone number mapping (ENUM)












Huston & Leuca          Expires February 8, 2005                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                OMA Liaison                    August 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Huston & Leuca          Expires February 8, 2005                [Page 8]

