



Network Working Group                                        J. Mattsson
Internet-Draft                                                  Y. Cheng
Intended status: Informational                                  Ericsson
Expires: January 5, 2015                                    July 4, 2014


        Privacy Ensured Cloud Conferencing - Use Case and Goals
         draft-mattsson-avtvore-cloud-conferencing-use-case-00

Abstract

   The aim of this document is to describe the use case of privacy
   ensured cloud conferencing in a pervasive monitoring landscape and to
   point out goals for a solution mitigating the pervasive monitoring
   threat [RFC7258].

   Virtualized cloud-based conferencing is happening and IETF should
   take action to make such services viable and trustworthy from a
   pervasive monitoring perspective.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 5, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Mattsson & Cheng         Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     Privacy Ensured Cloud Conferencing          July 2014


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Background  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Goals and Non-Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
       3.1.1.  Ensure End-To-End(s) Confidentiality  . . . . . . . .   4
       3.1.2.  Ensure End-To-End Source Authentication . . . . . . .   4
       3.1.3.  Provide a more efficient service than Full-Mesh . . .   4
       3.1.4.  Support Cloud Based Conferencing  . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.2.  Non-Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       3.2.1.  Securing the endpoints  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       3.2.2.  Concealing that communication occurs  . . . . . . . .   5
       3.2.3.  Individual Media Source Authentication  . . . . . . .   5
       3.2.4.  Preventing invited user to access content . . . . . .   5
   4.  Problems with Current Technology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8

1.  Introduction

   This document discusses the possibility to provide real-time
   conference communication services to enterprises and other
   organizations that try to ensure the privacy of their communication
   in a world with pervasive monitoring.  This includes being able to
   purchase conferencing supporting network services, including cloud-
   based ones that are resistant to content monitoring.

   This document starts with a background section discussing the
   development in the world that affects considerations for ensuring
   communication privacy.  Next goals and non-goals for privacy ensured
   cloud conferencing are stated, followed by the considerations around
   using current technology and standards.

   Some strategies for secure cloud systems can be found in
   [I-D.jennings-perpass-secure-rai-cloud].








Mattsson & Cheng         Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     Privacy Ensured Cloud Conferencing          July 2014


2.  Background

   Within the field of real-time conferencing there is an ongoing
   transformation.  A transformation towards more cloud based,
   virtualized and software based conferencing server implementations.
   The central conferencing server on dedicated hardware is under heavy
   competition from virtualized servers.  One enabling factor for this
   is the increased capabilities of the end-points that allow them to
   decode and process multiple simultaneously received media streams.
   This in its turn has made the central conferring media nodes to
   switch from mixing or composing media in the decoded domain to
   instead perform the much less heavy-weight operation of selection,
   switching and forwarding of media streams, at least for video.  Thus
   making virtualized cloud-based conferencing services viable.

   This transformation to virtualization and cloud-based services
   increases the threats towards the confidentiality of the content of
   any conference.  The reason is that an attacker interested in
   surveillance of a conference now also has the possibility to attack
   the cloud provider and attempt to get access to the actual hardware
   or virtualization layer as a method of accessing what happens within
   the conference services server instances.

   From the pervasive monitoring debate we know that there are many
   organizations that are actively performing large scale pervasive
   monitoring, this includes national agencies, but also criminal
   organizations may be engaged in such activities.  It has been
   revealed that several large service providers have been compromised,
   resulting in people questioning the impact and security of sourcing
   services for enterprise or governments to external providers.  IETF
   has stated that pervasive monitoring is an attack and that it should
   be mitigated [RFC7258].

   The trend of using virtualized cloud-based services (e.g.
   conferencing) has a number of positive effects on flexibility, CAPEX,
   ease of use, etc.  IETF should take action to make such services
   viable and trustworthy from a pervasive monitoring perspective.  One
   important part of pervasive monitoring is the passive pervasive
   monitoring [I-D.trammell-perpass-ppa].

3.  Goals and Non-Goals

   This section proposed goals and non-goals for the privacy ensured
   conferencing use case.







Mattsson & Cheng         Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     Privacy Ensured Cloud Conferencing          July 2014


3.1.  Goals

3.1.1.  Ensure End-To-End(s) Confidentiality

   The content of the communication and all its media needs to be
   confidential within the group of entities explicitly invited into the
   conference.  An external monitoring adversary should be unable to
   deduce the human to human communication that actually occurred from
   capturing the media packets within a time frame for which the
   communication remains confidential.

3.1.2.  Ensure End-To-End Source Authentication

   In a conference system with multiple participants it is vital that
   the multi-media content presented to any of the participant humans
   are from the stated participants, and not an adversary that attempts
   to inject misleading content.  Nor should an adversary be able to
   fool the system into becoming a trusted party in the conference, only
   explicitly invited parties shall be able to contribute content.

3.1.3.  Provide a more efficient service than Full-Mesh

   A multi-party conference that has the goals of confidentiality and
   source authentication can be established as a full MESH, i.e. each
   participating end-point directly addresses each of the other
   participants.  However, this has a significant issue with the amount
   of consumed resources in both the uplink and the downlink from each
   participant.  To reduce this issue one wants to consider other
   topologies, which implies network or centralized server
   functionalities.

3.1.4.  Support Cloud Based Conferencing

   To achieve a cost effective and scalable conferencing support the
   conference central nodes must be possible to run as instances in a
   cloud based virtualized environment.

   From a security stand point this is a significant issue.  In a
   virtual, possibly multi-tenant, cloud environment the ones running
   the conferencing supporting implementation instance can't trust that
   anything maintained at that instance is secure from an adversary.  A
   pervasive monitoring entity may in fact have direct access to the
   hardware through vulnerabilities in the virtualization layer the
   instance runs in.







Mattsson & Cheng         Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     Privacy Ensured Cloud Conferencing          July 2014


3.2.  Non-Goals

3.2.1.  Securing the endpoints

   The security of a communication session requires that the endpoints
   are not compromised and that the users are trustworthy.  If not,
   credentials and decrypted content may be shared with third parties.
   However this is hard to prevent through system design.  Thus, it
   should be assumed that the endpoint is secure and the user is
   trustwothy, how to achieve this is out of scope.

3.2.2.  Concealing that communication occurs

   A non-goal is to attempt to prevent a pervasive monitoring adversary
   from knowing that the communication session has occurred.  The reason
   for excluding this as a goal is that first of all it is extremely
   difficult to achieve, as a pervasive monitoring adversary can be
   expected to be able to have knowledge of all IP flows that enter or
   exit local ISPs, across links that straddle nation borders or
   internet exchange points.  Thus the flows required to achieve the
   communication session need to be highly difficult to correlate
   between different legs of the communication.  At this stage this is
   deemed too difficult to attempt and will need to be subject for
   future studies.  Existing attempts include The Onion Router (TOR),
   which has been claimed to be possible to monitor, at least partially,
   by an adversary with sufficient reach.

3.2.3.  Individual Media Source Authentication

   Although the participants in the conference are authenticated, it
   should probably not be a goal to provide source authentication of the
   media at the individual user level, instead being satisfied with
   being able to authenticate media as coming from an invited conference
   participant or not.

   There exist solutions that can provide individual media source
   authentication, e.g.  TESLA.  However they impact the performance or
   security properties they provide.  Thus, further studies are required
   to determine impact and resulting security properties if desired to
   have individual source authentication.

3.2.4.  Preventing invited user to access content

   As an invited user will be provided with the content protection keys,
   an invited user can unless active measures are taken against this,
   decrypt content from the time periods prior and post the user is
   officially part of the conference.




Mattsson & Cheng         Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     Privacy Ensured Cloud Conferencing          July 2014


   If this is a concern the solution could be extended to re-key the
   content protection keys every time a user joins or leaves the
   conference so each particular set of conference participants uses a
   unique key.  However, this also changes the trust level required on
   the conference rooster handling at any point and how to keep that
   accurate and secured.  Further the re-keying operations and their
   timely completion become an obstacle in system design.

4.  Problems with Current Technology

   If SRTP is used end-to-end, a multiparty conference where the
   middlebox/server duplicates packets and forwards the complete
   encrypted packets from a client to multiple participants, the RTP
   handling is problematic.

   The RTP mixer will be forced to behave like a video switching MCU in
   RFC 5117.  SRTP prevents the mixer from performing any type of RTP or
   RTCP rewrite.  However, to keep the bitrate in check its switching
   decision will result in stopping RTP streams from reaching the
   client.  This results in RTP sequences with large gaps in them.
   These gaps hide packet losses at the edges of the gaps, resulting in
   that the receiver has issues in determining if loss near switching
   point is intentional or not.  This can cause repair attempts,
   buffering issues, and triggering bit-rate adaptation.  In addition
   the congestion control mechanism has significant difficulties to act
   correctly in such an environment.

   Further the above topology requires the RTP stacks to be capable of
   handling multiple remote peers, including for adaptation of
   congestion control.  This has previously been limited to any-source
   multicast and transport relay topologies, not RTP mixer ones.

   To enable this system's properties, enable RTP mixing, while not
   letting the mixer get access to content, it's required to specify a
   two level security mechanism.  In any multi-vendor environments this
   will require a specification as it will affect the cipher operations
   and the data transmitted between participants.  The application could
   handle automatic key-management in the group of authorized
   participants.  One approach on how to do this is
   [I-D.cheng-srtp-cloud]

   To support video switching/relaying knowing from which points in the
   video streams a receiving endpoint will be able to decode is
   important.  Thus markers for where switching points in the media
   stream are will be required.

   To enable the middle boxes to take local decisions on this, each
   sender will need to include some speaker activity indication;



Mattsson & Cheng         Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     Privacy Ensured Cloud Conferencing          July 2014


   preferably including some type of ranking of how likely this is to
   contain speech.  However, this activity indication also needs to leak
   as little information as possible about the actual content of the
   speech.

5.  Conclusions

   Virtualized cloud-based conferencing is happening and IETF should
   take action to make such services viable and trustworthy from a
   pervasive monitoring perspective.

   From the goals and discussion above it is clear that to provide
   effective cloud based conferencing while protecting from pervasive
   monitoring, two layers of security is needed.  This is not supported
   by SRTP.

   There is currently active work on secure objects in the form of JSON
   objects in the IETF WG JOSE.  But this is not applicable to RTP based
   real-time media.

6.  Security Considerations

   The whole document is about making cloud-based conferencing viable
   and trustworthy from a pervasive monitoring perspective.

7.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Magnus Westerlund for providing much
   of the input to this document as well as much of the text.

8.  References

   [I-D.cheng-srtp-cloud]
              Cheng, Y., Mattsson, J., and Naslund, M., "Secure Real-
              time Transport Protocol (SRTP) for Cloud Services", draft-
              cheng-srtp-cloud-00 (work in progress), July 2014.

   [I-D.jennings-perpass-secure-rai-cloud]
              Jennings, C. and S. Nandakumar, "Trustable Cloud Systems -
              Strategies and Recommendations", draft-jennings-perpass-
              secure-rai-cloud-01 (work in progress), January 2014.

   [I-D.trammell-perpass-ppa]
              Trammell, B., Borkmann, D., and C. Huitema, "A Threat
              Model for Pervasive Passive Surveillance", draft-trammell-
              perpass-ppa-01 (work in progress), November 2013.





Mattsson & Cheng         Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     Privacy Ensured Cloud Conferencing          July 2014


   [RFC7258]  Farrell, S. and H. Tschofenig, "Pervasive Monitoring Is an
              Attack", BCP 188, RFC 7258, May 2014.

Authors' Addresses

   John Mattsson
   Ericsson AB
   SE-164 80 Stockholm
   Sweden

   Phone: +46 10 71 43 501
   Email: john.mattsson@ericsson.com


   Yi Cheng
   Ericsson
   SE-164 80 Stockholm
   Sweden

   Phone: +46 10 71 17 589
   Email: yi.cheng@ericsson.com






























Mattsson & Cheng         Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 8]
