


Network Working Group                                        S. Shalunov
Internet-Draft                                                 Internet2
Expires: July 30, 2005                                  January 26, 2005


             Requirements for Document Notification Service
                     draft-ietf-tools-notification-02

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of Section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 30, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   The output of the IETF consists of documents.  The IETF process is
   largely related to changing the status of documents.  Active
   participation in the work of the IETF often consists of writing or
   editing documents or providing input to the process of changing the
   documents' status.  Passive participation often consists of reading
   documents and observing the changes of their status.  This document
   describes the requirements for an automated service that helps the



Shalunov                  Expires July 30, 2005                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Document Notification Service         January 2005


   IETF participants to learn about the existence and follow the changes
   of status of any particular document.

Table of Contents

   1.  Requirements Notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Document Definition and Document Tags  . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Document States  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Events in the Life of a Document . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.1   Event Anatomy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       5.1.1   Document tag . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       5.1.2   Serial number  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       5.1.3   Document name  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       5.1.4   Document state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       5.1.5   Date and time  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       5.1.6   Event title  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       5.1.7   Event abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       5.1.8   Event URL  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       5.1.9   Event type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.2   Types of Events  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  Existence Notification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  Status Notification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   8.  Notification Dissemination Mechanisms  . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     8.1   Email Notification Dissemination . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     8.2   RSS Notification Dissemination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     8.3   WWW Notification Dissemination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   9.  Errors, Amendments, and Event Retention  . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   10.   Phases of Tool Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   11.   Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   12.   Internationalization Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   13.   IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   14.   Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
       Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 21
















Shalunov                  Expires July 30, 2005                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Document Notification Service         January 2005


1.  Requirements Notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].














































Shalunov                  Expires July 30, 2005                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Document Notification Service         January 2005


2.  Introduction

   At present, notifications related to IETF documents are sent to up to
   three different mailing lists: the IETF announcements list
   (ietf-announce@ietf.org), the general IETF list (ietf@ietf.org), and
   to the mailing list of the working group, if there is one.  Different
   types of messages go to different mailing lists.  Someone who is
   interested in all notifications about a particular document would
   need to subscribe to the three mailing lists and monitor subject
   lines for both the document's file name and its title.  Such person
   would receive not only notifications about the document status and
   its changes, but also various messages related to the discussion of
   the document.  For some people, this would be a convenient way to
   follow a document.  Others might find that they might be getting too
   many messages of no interest and risk missing messages of interest.

   An automated notification service that allows one to follow only the
   changes of official status of a document, without necessarily
   following the changes of all the IETF documents, or the day-to-day
   activity of the working group responsible for the document, thus,
   appears beneficial.  This document describes requirements for such a
   notification service.  When this service is deployed, it becomes
   immediately useful on its own right by supplementing the existing
   notification mechanisms.  As experience is gained with the tool and
   it is accepted by the IETF community, the tool might be used to help
   automate existing notification mechanisms.

























Shalunov                  Expires July 30, 2005                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Document Notification Service         January 2005


3.  Document Definition and Document Tags

   This document discusses the status of other documents.  These other
   documents include:
   1.  IETF internet-drafts;
   2.  RFC documents;
   3.  STD documents;
   4.  BCP documents;
   5.  FYI documents.
   In the future, this list might be expanded, should the IETF or the
   RFC editor choose to start new document series.

   Throughout the life of a document, continuity between versions is
   preserved by being able to refer to the document using the same tag.
   This tag will be called a document tag.  This document assumes that
   any documents to which the automated notification service needs to be
   applicable possess these document tags.  Document tags are strings of
   characters.

   For an internet-draft, the document tag is the file name without any
   extension or a version number (dot in front of an extension and dash
   in front of a version number are omitted, as well).  For example,
   this document's tag is "draft-ietf-tools-notification" (without
   quotes, naturally).  Documents' tags never change; so, should this
   document ever be published as an RFC, the document tag will remain
   the same; should this document be published, e.g., as a BCP and later
   reclassified as a historic FYI, the document tag would still be the
   same.  Note that the RFC editor currently already keeps the
   internet-draft file name (without the extension or the initial
   "draft-" string, but with the version number) from which an RFC
   originated; it can be found in the file rfc-index.xml distributed by
   the RFC editor as the <draft> element.  This is an extremely useful
   practice that should continue.

   It is clearly preferable that document tags be unique.  However, the
   current IETF policies do not appear to disallow the reuse of the file
   name of an expired internet-draft for a new internet-draft.  Changing
   this unfortunate policy is outside of scope of this document and of
   the IETF Tools team in general.  Should such tag collision occur, the
   notification service MAY treat the new internet-draft as a
   continuation of the old one (for the purposes of notifications).  The
   author believes that such collisions need to be prevented from
   happening by the internet-drafts administrator (or the
   internet-drafts submission tool, or whatever or whoever accepts IETF
   internet-draft in the future).  Note that the tool currently used by
   the internet-drafts administrator will (advantageously) not allow
   such reuse.




Shalunov                  Expires July 30, 2005                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Document Notification Service         January 2005


   Frequently, personal drafts are republished as working group drafts.
   In this case, since heritage can be partial and ambiguous, the new
   working group draft MUST be treated by the notification service as a
   completely new document.















































Shalunov                  Expires July 30, 2005                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Document Notification Service         January 2005


4.  Document States

   As the document lives, it goes through a sequence of states.  A
   change in the state always constitutes an event (see Section 5) that
   needs to be reported; however, not all events are necessarily
   associated with a change of state.

   The following states are currently defined:
   I-D-EXISTS
   PUBLICATION-REQUESTED
   AD-EVALUATION
   EXPERT-REVIEW
   IETF-LAST-CALL-REQUESTED
   IN-IETF-LAST-CALL
   WAITING-FOR-WRITEUP
   WAITING-FOR-AD-GOAHEAD
   IESG-EVALUATION
   IESG-EVALUATION-DEFER
   APPROVED-ANNOUNCEMENT-TO-BE-SENT
   APPROVED-ANNOUNCEMENT-SENT
   RFC-ED-QUEUE
   RFC-PUBLISHED
   DNP-WAITING-FOR-AD-NOTE
   DNP-ANNOUNCEMENT-TO-BE-SENT
   AD-IS-WATCHING
   DEAD

   FIXME: Before I write descriptions for these states, can anybody tell
   me about the copyright status of the text found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/public/states_table.cgi?  It's
   unsigned...

   New states might be defined by the IETF in the future, but (so that
   future software can continue to work with old documents) the states
   listed here MUST be supported by all implementations even if a state
   is deprecated and its use in new documents is discouraged or
   prohibited.  Should a state be deprecated, it must not be removed
   from the list above, but rather its description should receive a note
   explaining the deprecated status of the state.












Shalunov                  Expires July 30, 2005                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Document Notification Service         January 2005


5.  Events in the Life of a Document

   The notification service deals with events in the life of documents.

5.1  Event Anatomy

   An event is a tuple with the following members:
   1.  Document tag;
   2.  Serial number;
   3.  Document (new) name;
   4.  Document (new) state;
   5.  Date and time;
   6.  Event title;
   7.  Event abstract;
   8.  Event URL;
   9.  Event type.
   The individual members of the tuple are discussed below.

5.1.1  Document tag

   Document tags are explained in Section 3.

5.1.2  Serial number

   The serial number of an event is an unsigned decimal integer (i.e.,
   "0" or a non-empty string of characters from "0" to "9" that does not
   start with "0").  For any given document tag, events are numbered
   sequentially, starting from 0, as they enter the notification system.
   With each new event for a given document tag, the serial number is
   incremented by 1.  Thus, the tuple <document tag, serial number>
   forms a unique identifier of an event within the notification system.
   See Section 9 for more information on treatment of serial numbers
   when events are later found completely fictitious or need amendments.

5.1.3  Document name

   For an internet-draft, the name of the document, is the file name
   without the extension (or the dot preceding it): e.g.,
   "draft-ietf-tools-notification-00".  For other kinds of documents,
   the name is the document series name followed by the document number
   (without a separating space): e.g., "RFC1234".  Note that an event is
   often (but not always) associated with a change in the name of the
   document.  The new name is always used.

5.1.4  Document state

   The document state is the new state of the document after the event.
   (The old state might or might not coincide with the new state.)



Shalunov                  Expires July 30, 2005                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Document Notification Service         January 2005


   Document states are strings of characters discussed in Section 4.

5.1.5  Date and time

   Date and time are specified together in the following format: four
   digits specifying year; dash; two digits specifying month; dash; two
   digits specifying day of the month; the capital letter "T"; two
   digits specifying the hour of the day in 24-hour format; colon; two
   digits specifying minute; two digits specifying second; and, finally,
   the capital letter "Z".  This timestamp always contains exactly 20
   characters and refers to universal coordinated time (UTC).  The
   timestamp describes the time when the event occured.  Example of a
   valid timestamp: "2005-01-24T04:15:12Z".  This timestamp format MUST
   be used; no other formats or variations or this format are allowed.

5.1.6  Event title

   The title of the event is a human-readable synopsis of the event.  It
   should be suitable for use as an email message subject or a web page
   title.  Examples of reasonable titles:
   o  "New internet-draft: draft-ietf-tools-notification-00.txt";
   o  "New version of internet-draft:
      draft-ietf-tools-notification-17.txt";
   o  "Draft forwarded to IESG: draft-ietf-tools-notification-17.txt";
   o  "IESG comments on draft-ietf-tools-notification-17.txt";
   o  "draft-ietf-tools-notification-17.txt published as RFC8888";
   o  "RFC9999 obsoletes RFC8888".
   (Naturally, the quotes do not appear in the actual titles.) Examples
   of bad titles:
   o  "Event happened";
   o  "Draft advanced";
   o  "RFC publication";
   o  "Frobnication Considered Harmful on the Internet".
   Note that, in particular, the title of the document itself makes a
   poor event title.

5.1.7  Event abstract

   The event abstract elucidates the event and should be suitable for
   being used as a body of an email message or of a short web page that
   would be followed by the event URL, where more information about the
   event could be obtained.  The abstract generally should not exceed a
   page of text or so.  The abstract SHOULD contain as much relevant
   information as practical within the space limits.

5.1.8  Event URL

   The event URL points to a more complete description of the event.



Shalunov                  Expires July 30, 2005                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        Document Notification Service         January 2005


   For example, currently, the URL might point to a relevant URL within
   the I-D tracker [cite: FIXME].  Should no event description be
   published as a document with a URL, the event URL MAY be the URL of
   the document itself.

5.1.9  Event type

   The event type, as a member of the event tuple, is an opaque
   identifier (a string of characters).  Particular event types are
   discussed in Section 5.2.

5.2  Types of Events

   The following event types are valid:
   NEW New document is created.
   VERSION New version of an internet-draft is available.
   EXPIRED The current version of the draft has expired without a new
      version submitted.
   RESURRECTED After an expiration, a new version of the draft has been
      submitted and became available or the text of the draft has been
      made current again in some other way.
   WGLC Working group last call issued on the document.
   IESG-SUBMIT The document has been submitted to the IESG for approval.
   IESG-CHANGE The document had some status change while being
      considered by the IESG (e.g., IESG review, comments, request for a
      change).
   IETFLC General IETF last call issued on the document.
   RFC-SUBMIT The document has been submitted to the RFC editor for
      publication.
   RFC-CHANGE The document, not yet published by the RFC editor, had
      some status change (e.g., authors' 48 hours).
   RFC-PUBLISHED The document is published as an RFC (and, perhaps,
      simultaneously as an STD, BCP, or FYI).
   STD-REMOVED The document is no longer an STD.
   BCP-REMOVED The document is no longer a BCP.
   STD-CHANGED The status of an STD changed while it remained an STD
      (e.g., advanced).
   RFC-CHANGED The document remains an RFC, but some change in its
      status happened (other than those specifically mentioned above,
      e.g., a FYI reclassified as historic).
   ERROR An event was previously entered into the system erroneously and
      this is now discovered and corrected (e.g., it was erroneously
      detected that a document was forwarded to the RFC editor when, in
      fact, the document still remains in the IESG queue).
   MISC An event related to the document, but not mentioned above.

   The most specific event type MUST always be used.  In particular, the
   MISC event type MUST NOT be used when a more appropriate event type



Shalunov                  Expires July 30, 2005                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        Document Notification Service         January 2005


   exists.


















































Shalunov                  Expires July 30, 2005                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        Document Notification Service         January 2005


6.  Existence Notification

   Notifications are generally of two kinds: notifications of existence
   of documents, which help the service's user learn about new
   internet-drafts (discussed in this section), and notifications about
   the change of status of specific documents, which help learn about
   events in the life of a particular document a user is interested in
   (discussed in Section 7).  Existence notifications deal with events
   of type NEW.  Status change notifications deal with events of all
   other types.

   Just as document tags define particular documents, some way is needed
   to define classes of documents about which a user would like to
   learn.  For simplicity's sake, these tags are based on file names.

   An existential tag is a sequence of characters, of which three have a
   special meaning: asterisk ("*"), question mark ("?"), and backslash
   ("\").  A document tag can match an existential tag.  Given an
   existential tag and a document tag, the match is decided as follows:
   1.  In the existential tag, all sequences of two consecutive
       backslash characters (as the string representing the tag is read
       from left to right) are replaced with a pseudo-character
       <backslash> not otherwise in the alphabet.
   2.  In the existential tag, all asterisks not preceded with a
       backslash are replaced with a pseudo-character <asterisk> not
       otherwise in the alphabet.
   3.  In the existential tag, all question marks not preceded with a
       backslash are replaced with a pseudo-character <question> not
       otherwise in the alphabet.
   4.  In the existential tag, all <backslash> pseudo-characters are
       replaced with a backslash.
   5.  If, in the existential tag, each <asterisk> pseudo-character can
       be replaced with a (possibly empty) string of characters and each
       <question> pseudo-character can be replaced with a single
       character so that the existential tag coincides with the document
       tag, the document tag matches the existential tag.  Otherwise, it
       does not match.

   An event is said to match an existential tag if the event's type is
   NEW and the event's document tag matches the existential tag.

   The user of the notification service obtains a set of events of
   interest by deciding on existential tags of interest and then
   submitting these tags in a way discussed in Section 8 to the
   notification service.

   For example, a user interested in internet-drafts of the IETF Tools
   team might subscribe to the existential tag "draft-ietf-tools-*".  To



Shalunov                  Expires July 30, 2005                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft        Document Notification Service         January 2005


   watch emergence of personal drafts by John Doe, one might use
   "draft-doe-*".  To watch emergence of all new internet-drafts, "*"
   can be used.
















































Shalunov                  Expires July 30, 2005                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft        Document Notification Service         January 2005


7.  Status Notification

   A user can submit a document tag to the notification service in a way
   discussed in Section 8 to obtain a set of all events whose document
   tag equals to the one submitted.














































Shalunov                  Expires July 30, 2005                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft        Document Notification Service         January 2005


8.  Notification Dissemination Mechanisms

   Different users would find different notification mechanisms more
   convenient.  The following mechanisms are defined:
   1.  Email,
   2.  RSS, and
   3.  WWW.

8.1  Email Notification Dissemination

   Users can subscribe to existence notifications with given existential
   tags and to status notifications with given document tags.  Each
   event that requires notification would then generate a single,
   separate, email message.

   Email messages generated by the notification service MUST conform to
   [RFC2919].

8.2  RSS Notification Dissemination

   FIXME: I might use some help here.  I really only use RSS with
   rss2email.

8.3  WWW Notification Dissemination

   The WWW mechanism is similar to the RSS mechanism (Section 8.2),
   except for the format.  In the case of WWW notifications, an HTML
   representation of the RSS feed is used.  All events associated with
   the user-selected tags are displayed in reverse chronological order.
   The notification service MAY, for implementation's simplicity's sake,
   present events associated with a document tag in reverse numeric
   order by serial number; of course, no such option is available for
   existential tags.


















Shalunov                  Expires July 30, 2005                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft        Document Notification Service         January 2005


9.  Errors, Amendments, and Event Retention

   Should it be detected that a notification for an event was generated
   in error (the event did not, in fact, occur), a new event of type
   ERROR is created that explains in its title and abstract the nature
   of the error.  Email notifications are generated for this new event.
   Subsequently, the erroneous event, together with the new event of
   type ERROR, is removed from RSS and WWW notification feeds.

   Should it be detected that a notification for an event was generated
   with an error, the event, in its corrected form, should reenter the
   notification service.  When email notifications are generated, it
   MUST be noted in the title (using the word "CORRECTED" in uppercase,
   followed by a colon, at the start of the title) and in the abstract
   that the event was corrected.  The correct type of event MUST be
   transmitted in this case (rather than "ERROR").  Subsequently, the
   erroneous event is corrected in the RSS and WWW notification feeds.

   Note that these provisions only cover true clerical errors and not
   errors of judgment or others.

   The notification service retains information about all events in
   perpetuity.  While not visible through the RSS and WWW notification
   interfaces, any history of revisions of erroneous events MUST be
   retained in perpetuity, as well.

   Serial numbers continue to increase sequentially for events that are
   reissued in an amended form.  Events of type ERROR get their own
   serial number in the usual way, as well; in addition, the serial
   number of the event canceled by the event of type ERROR MUST NOT be
   reused.  Thus, when an event of type ERROR is processed, the RSS and
   WWW feeds will be (perhaps after addition of another event) missing
   two numbers in the sequence (not necessarily consecutive numbers).


















Shalunov                  Expires July 30, 2005                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft        Document Notification Service         January 2005


10.  Phases of Tool Development

   FIXME: This needs to be discussed further.
















































Shalunov                  Expires July 30, 2005                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft        Document Notification Service         January 2005


11.  Security Considerations

   To prevent unwanted email notifications, the notification service
   should follow the usual good mailing list practice: only subscribe
   after receiving a confirmation (via email or WWW) of a subscription
   message sent to the email address being subscribed; an exception is
   formed, of course, when an authenticated WWW user is subscribing his
   own address to new notifications.

   To prevent sensitive information disclosure, the notification service
   SHOULD strive to run with the privileges of an unauthenticated
   network user.  (To minimize polling, the service might receive
   privileged hints of the form "there is new data for draft
   such-and-such in the I-D tracker" or similar, but the actual data put
   into the notifications should come, as much as possible, from an
   already public source.)  In cases where the notification service
   would, by design, be disclosing information not otherwise public,
   careful auditing would need to be conducted: just as it is conducted
   with the tools that currently make the needed information public.

   In general, with email notification, those with access to the mailbox
   of the recipient are to be able to unsubscribe from future
   notifications.  However, IETF mailing lists (such as working group
   mailing lists) are an important exception to this.  Subscribers to
   IETF mailing lists MUST NOT be able to unsubscribe the mailing lists
   from document notifications to which the list administrator has
   subscribed them (users are, of course, always free to unsubscribe
   from the IETF mailing list itself, but they are not to decide whether
   the mailing list will receive notifications about, e.g., a working
   group draft).  FIXME: The exact way in which this is best
   accomplished needs to be discussed further.




















Shalunov                  Expires July 30, 2005                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft        Document Notification Service         January 2005


12.  Internationalization Considerations

   The IETF generally conducts its business in English.  However, should
   notification of events in other languages become necessary in the
   future (after, perhaps, a policy change), the notification service
   MUST be able to use UTF-8 character set from the start.  Since, for
   characters in US-ASCII, UTF-8 coincides with US-ASCII, the burden of
   using UTF-8 on the implementor is negligible (and consists mostly of
   placing "UTF-8" in any appropriate character set fields, where
   required).

   Some email clients and many WWW clients display messages and pages in
   UTF-8 differently from messages in US-ASCII, or not at all, even when
   the text does not actually contain any characters not in US-ASCII.
   For this unfortunate reason, the notification service MUST use the
   US-ASCII character set specification when the message happens to
   actually be in US-ASCII, reserving UTF-8 for the occasions when
   characters outside of US-ASCII are actually present.

































Shalunov                  Expires July 30, 2005                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft        Document Notification Service         January 2005


13.  IANA Considerations

   This document requires no action from the IANA.

14.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2919]  Chandhok, R. and G. Wenger, "List-Id: A Structured Field
              and Namespace for the Identification of Mailing Lists",
              RFC 2919, March 2001.


Author's Address

   Stanislav Shalunov
   Internet2
   1000 Oakbrook Drive, Suite 300
   Ann Arbor, MI  48104
   US

   Phone: +1-734-913-4260
   Email: shalunov@internet2.edu
   URI:   http://www.internet2.edu/~shalunov/


























Shalunov                  Expires July 30, 2005                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft        Document Notification Service         January 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Shalunov                  Expires July 30, 2005                [Page 21]
