





INTERNET-DRAFT                                             Erik Nordmark
Oct 27, 2003                                            Sun Microsystems


    Strong Identity Multihoming using 128 bit Identifiers (SIM/CBID128)

                    <draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt>


   Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet Draft expires April 27, 2004.



   Abstract

   This document contains a rough outline of a potential solution to
   IPv6 multihoming in order to stimulate discussion.

   This proposed solution uses 126 bit identifiers which are hashes of
   public keys (know as Cryptographically-based Identifiers) which are
   created in an autonomous fashion by every host.  When there is a need
   to verify whether a new locator should be used with an identifier
   than a public-key based challenge-response is used.

   The proposal allows locator rewriting by (border) routers, and
   ensures that the upper layer protocols can operate unmodified in a
   multihomed setting using the stable identifiers.



draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                                [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


   Contents

      1.  INTRODUCTION.............................................    3
         1.1.  Non-Goals...........................................    3
         1.2.  Assumptions.........................................    4

      2.  TERMINOLOGY..............................................    4
         2.1.  Notational Conventions..............................    5

      3.  PROTOCOL OVERVIEW........................................    6
         3.1.  Host-Pair Context...................................    8
         3.2.  Message Formats.....................................    9

      4.  PROTOCOL WALKTHROUGH.....................................   12
         4.1.  Initial Context Establishment.......................   12
         4.2.  Locator Change......................................   13
         4.3.  Handling Locator Failures...........................   14
         4.4.  Locator Set Changes.................................   15
         4.5.  Preventing Premeditated Redirection Attacks.........   15

      5.  HANDLING STATE LOSS......................................   17

      6.  APPLICATION USAGE OF IDENTIFIERS.........................   18

      7.  COMPATIBILITY WITH STANDARD IPv6.........................   19

      8.  CHECKSUM ISSUES..........................................   20

      9.  IMPLICATIONS FOR PACKET FILTERING........................   21

      10.  IPSEC INTERACTIONS......................................   22

      11.  SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS.................................   22

      12.  OPEN ISSUES.............................................   23
         12.1.  Initiator Confusion vs. "Virtual Hosting"..........   24

      13.  FUTURE WORK.............................................   25

      14.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS........................................   26

      15.  REFERENCES..............................................   26
         15.1.  Normative References...............................   26
         15.2.  Informative References.............................   27

      AUTHORS' ADDRESSES...........................................   28





draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                                [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


1.  INTRODUCTION

   The goal of the IPv6 multihoming work is to allow a site to take
   advantage of multiple attachments to the global Internet without
   having a specific entry for the site visible in the global routing
   table.  Specifically, a solution should allow users to use multiple
   attachments in parallel, or to switch between these attachment points
   dynamically in the case of failures, without an impact on the upper
   layer protocols.

   This proposed solution uses crypto-based identifiers [CBID]
   properties to perform enough validation to prevent redirection
   attacks.

   The goals for this proposed solution is to:

    o Have no impact on upper layer protocols in general and on
      transport protocols in particular.

    o Address the security threats in [M6SEC].

    o Allow routers rewriting the (source) locators as a means of
      quickly detecting which locator is likely to work for return
      traffic.

    o Minimal per-packet overhead.

    o No extra roundtrip for setup through optional piggybacking.

    o Take advantage of multiple locators for load spreading.



1.1.  Non-Goals

   The assumption is that the problem we are trying to solve is site
   multihoming, with the ability to have the set of site locator
   prefixes change over time due to site renumbering.  Further, we
   assume that such changes to the set of locator prefixes can be
   relatively slow and managed; slow enough to allow updates to the DNS
   to propagate.  This proposal does not attempt to solve, perhaps
   related, problems such as host multihoming or host mobility.

   This proposal introduces an IP layer identifier, but it does not make
   this identifier a first class object.  In particular, there is no
   method for taking a identifier and using it to lookup other
   information (FQDN, set of locators, etc) about the identified entity.
   Even with this limitation the introduction of the identifier is quite



draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                                [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


   useful in identifying the a host.  See discussion in the section on
   future work how it might be possible to add a lookup function over
   time.



1.2.  Assumptions

   The main technical assumptions this proposal makes is that using
   public key signatures during the more uncommon operations would
   provide acceptable performance.  The proposal doesn't require such
   operations during normal communication; only when a locator changes
   for a host will it need to be verified before return traffic will be
   sent to that locator, or when two hosts claim to use the same
   identifier.

   Another assumption is that where DNS is already used (normally at the
   initiating end of communication) it is acceptable to lookup the
   identifier of the peer in the DNS in addition to the current AAAA
   lookup (of the addresses/locators).


2.  TERMINOLOGY

      upper layer protocol (ULP)
                  - a protocol layer immediately above IP.  Examples are
                    transport protocols such as TCP and UDP, control
                    protocols such as ICMP, routing protocols such as
                    OSPF, and internet or lower-layer protocols being
                    "tunneled" over (i.e., encapsulated in) IP such as
                    IPX, AppleTalk, or IP itself.

      interface   - a node's attachment to a link.

      address     - an IP layer name that contains both topological
                    significance and acts as a unique identifier for an
                    interface.  128 bits.

      locator     - an IP layer topological name for an interface or a
                    set of interfaces.  128 bits.  The locators are
                    carried in the IP address fields as the packets
                    traverse the network.

      identifier  - an IP layer identifier for an IP layer endpoint
                    (stack name in [NSRG]).  The transport endpoint is a
                    function of the transport protocol and would
                    typically include the IP identifier plus a port
                    number.



draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                                [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


      Application identifier (AID)
                  - The 128 bit quantity used by upper layer protocols
                    for identifying a peer.  In this proposal the AID=ID
                    i.e. an IP layer identifier.  This is used for
                    pseudo-header checksum computation and connection
                    identification in the ULP.

      address field
                  - the source and destination address fields in the
                    IPv6 header.  As IPv6 is currently specified this
                    fields carry "addresses".  If identifiers and
                    locators are separated these fields will contain
                    locators.

      FQDN        - Fully Qualified Domain Name




2.1.  Notational Conventions

   A, B, and C are hosts.  X is a potentially malicious host.

   FQDN(A) is the domain name for A.

   Ls(A) is the locator set for A, which consists of L1(A), L2(A), ...
   Ln(A).

   ID(A) is an application ID for A.  ID(A) is a 128 bit number
   consisting of two fixed bits (e.g., 10) followed by 126 bits of a
   truncated SHA1 hash of a public key that the host has generated.

   CT(A) is a 64 bit "context tag" allocated by A and used when B sends
   packets to A.  The packets contain the low-order 32 bits of the tag,
   named CT32(A).  The full tag is used for DoS-attack prevention during
   the PK challenge/response.















draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                                [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


3.  PROTOCOL OVERVIEW

   In order to prevent redirection attacks this protocol relies on the
   ability to verify (using public key crypto as in [CBID]) that the
   entity requesting redirection indeed holds the private key where the
   hash of the corresponding public key hashes to the ID itself.

   The initiator of communication, where it uses DNS today to lookup
   FQDN->addresses, will instead lookup both FQDN->identifier (probably
   using some new DNS RR type) and FQDN->locator set (using AAAA
   resource records).  The existence of the identifier RR for the name
   is an indication that the node supports multihoming.

                            -----------------------
                            | Transport Protocols |
                            -----------------------

             ------ ------- -------------- -------------
             | AH | | ESP | | Frag/reass | | Dest opts |
             ------ ------- -------------- -------------

                            -----------------
                            | M6 shim layer |
                            -----------------

                                ------
                                | IP |
                                ------

   Figure 1: Protocol stack

   The proposal uses an M6 shim layer between IP and the ULPs as shown
   in figure 1, in order to provide ULP independence.  The M6 layer
   corresponds to an extension header which is the minimum 8 octets for
   data packets but larger for the messages used to establish the state
   at the two ends and perform the public key challenge response
   exchanges.  In addition to carrying data packets, the M6 protocol has
   three message types to perform a 3-way handshake to establish state
   at the two ends, two message types to perform a challenge
   request/response exchange when a new locator is introduced, and
   finally a single message type to signal that state has been lost.

   Layering AH and ESP above the M6 shim means that IPsec can be made to
   be unaware of locator changes the same way that transport protocols
   can be unaware.  Thus the IPsec security associations remain stable
   even though the locators are changing.  Layering the fragmentation
   header above the M6 shim makes reassembly robust in the case that
   there is broken multi-path routing which results in using different



draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                                [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


   paths, hence potentially different source locators, for different
   fragments.

   The proposal uses router rewriting of (source) locators as one way to
   determine which is the preferred (or only working) locator to use for
   return traffic.  But not all packets can have their locators
   rewritten.  Thus a simple mechanism is needed to indicate to the
   routers on the path whether or not it is ok to rewrite the locators
   in the packet.  Conceptually this is a single bit in the IPv6 header
   (we call it the "rewrite ok" bit) but there is no spare bit
   available.  Instead we allocate two next header values for M6; one
   which means "rewrite ok" and one which means the rewrite should not
   be performed by routers.

   Applications and upper layer protocols use IDs which the M6 layer
   will map to/from different locators.  The M6 layer maintains state,
   called host-pair context, in order to perform this mapping.  The
   mapping is performed consistently at the sender and the receiver,
   thus from the perspective of the upper layer protocols packets appear
   to be sent using IDs from end to end, even though the packets travel
   through the network containing locators in the IP address fields, and
   even though those locators might be rewritten in flight.

      ----------------------           ----------------------
      | Sender A           |           | Receiver B         |
      |                    |           |                    |
      |      ULP           |           |      ULP           |
      |       | src ID(A)  |           |       ^            |
      |       | dst ID(B)  |           |       | src ID(A)  |
      |       v            |           |       | dst ID(B)  |
      |       M6           |           |       M6           |
      |       | src L1(A)  |           |       ^            |
      |       | dst L1(B)  |           |       | src L2(A)  |
      |       v            |           |       | dst L1(B)  |
      |       IP           |           |       IP           |
      ----------------------           ----------------------
              |                                ^
              -- cloud with some routers -------
                                          src L2(A) [Rewritten]
                                          dst L1(B)
   Figure 2: Mapping with router rewriting of locators.

   The result of this consistent mapping is that there is no impact on
   the ULPs.  In particular, there is no impact on pseudo-header
   checksums and connection identification.

   Conceptually one could view this approach as if both IDs and locators
   being present in every packet, but with a header compression



draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                                [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


   mechanism applied that removes the need for the IDs once the state
   has been established.  As we will see below the context tag will be
   used akin to a "compression tag" i.e., to indicate the correct
   context to use for decompression.

   The use of the context tag allows the receiver to find the correct
   context without relying on the locators in the packet.



3.1.  Host-Pair Context

   The host-pair context is established on the initiator of
   communication based on information learned from the DNS (either by
   starting with a FQDN or with an IP address -> FQDN lookup).  The
   responder will establish some initial state using the context
   creation 3-way handshake.  Both hosts later update the peer locators
   based on the source locator in received packets after having verified
   the new locator using a challenge exchange.

   The context state contains the following information:

    - the peer ID; ID(peer)

    - the local ID; ID(local)

    - the set of peer locators; Ls(peer)

    - for each peer locator, a bit whether it has been verified for
      return traffic using a PK challenge.

    - the preferred peer locator - used as destination; Lp(peer)

    - the set of local locators; Ls(local)

    - the preferred local locator - used as source; Lp(local)

    - the context tag used to transmit packets; CT(local)

    - the context to expect in receive packets; CT(peer)

    - State about peer locators that are in the process of being
      verified in using challenge/response.

   This state is accessed differently in the transmit and receive paths.
   In the transmit path when the ULP passes down a packet the key to the
   context state is the tuple <ID(local), ID(peer)>; this key must
   identify at most one state record.  In the receive path it is the



draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                                [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


   CT32(local) that is used to identify at most one state record.

   At the initiating end it is possible that the DNS lookup of different
   FQDNs return the same ID and different locator sets.  This is
   discussed in section 4.1 and 12.1.

   The receiving end allocates the context tags thus it can trivially
   ensure that the CT32(local) is unique.



3.2.  Message Formats

   The base M6 header is as follows:

         0                   1                   2                   3
         0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
        +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
        |  Next Header  |    Type       |          Checksum             |
        +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
        |                  <type specific fields>                       |
        +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   M6 Fields:

      Next Header
                     8-bit selector.  Identifies the type of header
                     immediately following the M6 header.  Uses the same
                     values as the IPv4 Protocol field [RFC-1700 et
                     seq.].

      Type
                     8-bit field.  The type of M6 message.  The M6
                     header carries 7 different message types:

                      o Data message; to be passed to the ULP after
                        replacing the locators with the identifiers.

                      o Context request message; first message of the
                        3-way context establishment.  An ULP packet can
                        be piggybacked on this message.

                      o Context response message; second message of the
                        3-way context establishment.  An ULP packet can
                        be piggybacked on this message.

                      o Context confirm message; third message of the
                        3-way context establishment.  An ULP packet can



draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                                [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


                        be piggybacked on this message.

                      o Challenge request message; first message of the
                        2-way challenge.

                      o Challenge response message; second message of
                        the 2-way challenge.

                      o Unknown context message; error which is sent
                        when no state for context tag.

      Checksum       The Internet checksum applied to the IPv6 address
                     fields and the M6 header.  When computing the
                     checksum the checksum field is set to zero.

      Future versions of this protocol may define message types.
      Receivers MUST silently ignore?  Reject?  [TBD] any message type
      they do not recognize.

   The M6 data message is as follows:

         0                   1                   2                   3
         0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
        +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
        |  Next Header  |    Type = 0   |          Checksum             |
        +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
        |                          Context Tag                          |
        +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   M6 Fields:

      Context Tag
                     32-bit field.  Identifies the context at the
                     receiver.

   This drafts doesn't contain actual message layout for the other M6
   message types.  However, the content of these messages is specified
   below.

   The Context request message contains:

    - Sender Nonce

    - Sender ID

    - Receiver ID

    - Sender context tag (64 bits)



draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                               [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


   The Context response message contains:

    - Receiver Nonce (copied from Sender Nonce in request)

    - Context state consisting of: the two IDs, the two context tags,
      and the initial locators

    - A timestamp or nonce (for sender's benefit)

    - A hash over the context state and timestamp (to prevent
      modification)

   The Context confirm message contains:

    - The context state, timestamp/nonce, and hash copied from the
      context response.

   The Challenge request message contains:

    - Sender generated nonce/timestamp

    - The two IDs

    - The 32-bit context tag from the received data message

    - The source locator from the received data message

   The Challenge response message contains:

    - The nonce/timestamp from the challenge request

    - The 32-bit context tag (from the challenge request)

    - The above locator

    - A hash value (H2) which proves that the sender knows the full 64
      bits of both the context tags.  This allows the receiver of the
      response to avoid verifying the PK signature generated by a host
      which can't be the original peer.

    - The public key of the sender.

    - The public key signature of all of the above fields.

   The Unknown context message contains:

    - The 32 bit context tag in the triggering data message.




draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                               [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


4.  PROTOCOL WALKTHROUGH



4.1.  Initial Context Establishment

   Here is the sequence of events when A starts talking to B:

    1.  A looks up FQDN(B) in the DNS.  The lookup is both for the new
        ID records and the AAAA records.  If no ID record then the peer
        is a standard IPv6 host and the set of AAAA records is returned
        to the application as today.  If an ID record is found then only
        that record is returned to the application.  The ID and AAAA
        content is passed to the M6 layer on the host as ID(B) and
        Ls(B).  To make sure that the lookup from ID(B) returns a single
        state record in the M6 layer there has to be a check if there is
        already a record for that ID with a different Ls.  One could
        envision sending a PK challenge to the locators to resolve such
        a conflict.  See section 12.1 for more discussion.

    2.  The ULP creates "connection" state between ID(A) and ID(B) and
        sends the first packet.  ID(A) was picked using regular source
        address selection mechanisms.

    3.  The leading two bits of the destination address (10) makes the
        transmit side go through M6 processing.  The M6 layer matches on
        ID(B) and finds the proto-context state containing Ls(B) created
        in step 1.  The fact that the context state isn't complete
        triggers context creation.

    4.  A picks a random Nonce to include in the Context Request
        message.  A picks pseudo-random 64-bit context tags (CT(A)) and
        checks for duplicates against existing context state records
        until it finds a unique one.  The nonce and CT(A) are saved in
        the context state.  Then A sends the context request message to
        one of B's locators.  The data packet (TCP SYN or whatever) can
        be piggybacked on the context request message.  The "rewrite ok"
        bit is set in the header.

    5.  The M6 layer on B receives context request message.  It does not
        find any context state for the pair of IDs.  It forms the 64-bit
        pseudo-random CT(B) and checks it against duplicates for
        existing contexts. (It can't check against other contexts in
        progress of being created since it doesn't create any state
        until the context confirm is received.  Hence the duplicate
        check is redone on the context confirm.)  It forms a keyed hash
        (using K(B) which is never shares with anybody) of the context
        state and a timestamp.  Then puts the state, timestamp and hash



draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                               [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


        in the context response message.

        If there was a piggybacked packet on the context request message
        then B passes packet to ULP after putting the identifiers in the
        IP address fields.  The ULP sees a packet identified by ID(A),
        ID(B).

    6.  The M6 layer on A receives the context response message.  It
        looks up the state using CT32(A).  It verifies that the stored
        nonce matches the echoed nonce in the message.  It records the
        source address field in as Lp(peer).  It sends back a context
        confirm message containing what was in the response message.

        If there was a piggybacked packet on the context response
        message then A passes packet to ULP after putting the
        identifiers in the IP address fields.  The ULP sees a packet
        identified by ID(A), ID(B).

    7.  The M6 layer on B receives context confirm message.  It looks up
        context state using CT32(B).  If state is found and the
        identifiers are different than in the context confirm this must
        have been a duplicate caused by concurrent context creations in
        progress.  Requires restarting by responding with a new context
        response with a different CT(B).

        B verifies that the timestamp is recent and then verifies that
        the hash over the state is correct.  Then it can create the
        context state.

        If there was a piggybacked packet on the context confirm message
        then B passes packet to ULP after putting the identifiers in the
        IP address fields.  The ULP sees a packet identified by ID(A),
        ID(B).



4.2.  Locator Change

   This is the sequence of events when B receives a packet with a
   previously unknown source locator for A.

    1.  Host B receives a data message.  Finds the context using the
        CT32(B) that is in the message.  B passes the packet to the ULP
        after replacing the locators with the IDs (whether or not the
        source locator is known).

        If the source locator is in Ls(peer) and already verified then
        the preferred return locator (Lp(peer)) is updated to use it for



draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                               [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


        return packets.

        If the source locator is previously unknown then it is added to
        the context state as a Ls(peer) awaiting verification and a
        Challenge Request packet is generated.  The challenge request
        includes a nonce generated by B, CT32(B) (that was received in
        the packet from the unknown locator), the identifiers and the
        previously unknown peer locator.

    2.  Host A receives the challenge request packet.  Verifies that it
        has state for those identifiers with the CT32(peer) it received
        on the request.

        It computes the hash H2 to show to B that it knows both full 64
        bit context tags as H2 = SHA1(nonce from request, CT(A), CT(B),
        ID(A), ID(B))

        It includes its public key (the one whose hash is ID(A)) and
        signs the whole challenge response using its private key.

    3.  Host B receives the challenge response packet.  It finds the
        context state using CT32(B).  It verifies the nonce against what
        it used for sending the challenge request.  It verifies H2.
        (Only devices on the path between A and B during the context
        establishment knows CT(A) and CT(B), thus this check limits DoS
        attacks based on forcing PK signature verification to attackers
        on the path.)  Then it verifies that the hash of the public key
        equals ID(A), and finally the public key signature using that
        public key.



4.3.  Handling Locator Failures

   The M6 layer is responsible for retransmitting context request
   messages using different locators until a contest response is
   received.

   After context setup the sender can use retransmit hints from the ULP
   to get the M6 layer to try a different verified locator.

   If one outbound path from the site fails and the border routers
   rewrite source locators then the peer in another site will see
   packets with the working source locators.  Once that locator has been
   verified, the return path will switch to use the working locator.  As
   long as both ends are transmitting packets this will relatively
   quickly switch to working locators except when both hosts experience
   a failing locator at the same time.



draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                               [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


   Without locator rewriting one would need to add some notification
   e.g., by defining a new bit in the router advertisement prefixes
   (IMHO this is semantically different than the preferred vs.
   deprecated stuff), but we also need some mechanism to carry this info
   from the border routers to the routers on each subnet.



4.4.  Locator Set Changes

   Should the set of locators change after the context has been
   established the ability to learn and verify new peer locators will
   handle this fine.

   The DNS only needs to be updated with new locators in order to allow
   new communication to be established.

   When a host sees (based on router advertisements [DISCOVERY]) that
   one of its locators has become deprecated and it has additional
   locators that are still preferred, it is recommended that the host
   start using the preferred locator(s) with the contexts that have
   already been established.  This ensures that should the deprecated
   locator become invalid the peers have already verified other
   locator(s) for the host.



4.5.  Preventing Premeditated Redirection Attacks

   The threats document [M6SEC] talks of premeditated redirection
   attacks that is where an attacker claims to be a host before the real
   host appears.

   This proposal is potentially subject to this threat because for
   performance reasons there is no public-key challenge when the context
   state is initially established.

   The following sequence shows how such a redirection attack is
   detected when X pretends to be A:

    1.  Host X with locator L1(X) sends a content request message to B.
        In the message it claims to have ID(A) and includes CT(X).

    2.  The context response and context confirm messages are exchanged
        resulting on B selecting CT(B) for communicating with X (which B
        believes has identifier ID(A)).

    3.  X and B happily communicate without B performing any higher-



draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                               [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


        level, such as IKE/IPsec, identity check on its peer.

    4.  Host A tries to communicate with B.  It sends a context request
        message to B where the message claims to have ID(A) and includes
        CT(A).

    5.  Host B receives the context request and discovers it already has
        context state for ID(A).  B doesn't do anything different than
        if there was no context state - the difference in processing
        happens when the context confirm is received - except that any
        piggybacked ULP packet is not passed to the ULP.  Thus, as in
        section 4.1, a context tag is selected and the context reply is
        sent, which makes A send back a context confirm.

    6.  Host B receives the context confirm and verifies it the same way
        as in section 4.1.  Then it looks if there is already a context
        for ID(A) and finds the context which contains CT(X) and L1(X).

        The existence of this "old" context could be due to multiple
        reasons:

         - The peer lost state while B retained the context state.  In
           this case one would expect that the old context has not been
           used to receive packets for some time. (Having a protocol
           constant denoting the minimum time after sending a packet
           that state can be lost and later recreated would be helpful
           here.)  In this case it would also be common that the source
           address of the packet would fall in the locator set for the
           old context.  But it isn't impossible that a peer state loss
           and using a different locator happens at the same time.

         - The old host was performing a premediated redirection attack.

         - The new host is attempting a redirection attack.

        In all cases the approach consists of sending a challenge to
        both the "new" A and the "old" A.  But depending on the time
        since packets where last received from the "old" A the order can
        be different.  The first peer locator which responds with a
        valid challenge response will "win" and the other context state
        will be deleted.

   TBD: The above has DoS concerns in terms of verifying the challenge
   response.  Having both ends remove the context state at about the
   same time would be beneficial since it would reduce the frequency of
   this happening in the absence of attacks, thus it would be more
   realistic to apply resource limits for this type of challenges.




draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                               [Page 16]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


5.  HANDLING STATE LOSS

   The protocol needs to handle two forms of state loss:

    - a peer loosing all state,

    - the M6 layer garbage collecting state too early due to not being
      aware of what all ULPs do.

   The first case is the already existing case of a host crashing and
   "rebooting" and as a result loosing transport and application state.
   In this case there are some added complications from the M6 layer
   since a peer will continue to send packets assuming the context still
   exists and due to the loss of state on the receiver it isn't even
   able to pass the correct packet up to the ULP (e.g., to be able to
   get TCP to generate a reset packet) since it doesn't know what IDs to
   use when replacing the locators.

   The second case is a bit more subtle.  Ideally an implementation
   shouldn't discard the context state when there is some ULP that still
   depends on this state.  While this might be possible for some
   implementations with a fixed set of applications, it doesn't appear
   to be possible for implementations which provide the socket API;
   there can be things like user-level "connections" on top of UDP as
   well as application layer "session" above TCP which retain the
   identifiers from some previous communication and expect to use those
   identifiers at a later date.  But the M6 layer has no ability to be
   aware of this.

   Thus an implementation shouldn't discard context state when it knows
   it has ULP connection state (which can be checked in e.g., Unix for
   TCP), or when there is active communication (UDP packets being sent
   to ID(A) recently), but when there is an infrequently communicating
   user-level "connection" over UDP or "session" over TCP the context
   state might be garbage collected even though it shouldn't.

   Independently whether the state loss was for the whole host or for
   just the M6 layer things can be recovered when the loss is detected
   as a result of receiving a packet from the peer.  Should B receive a
   packet from some locator without being able to find any context state
   for the CT32(B) that is in the packet, it will send back an Unknown
   context message to the source.  The unknown context message includes
   the receive tag (and it can't receive much other useful information
   since B has no state).  The Unknown context message is sent without
   setting the "rewrite ok" bit since locator rewriting would make it
   harder for A to perform sanity checks on this error message.

   When A receives the Unknown context message it verifies that the



draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                               [Page 17]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


   CT32(B) value is used by a context with the locators that are in the
   IP address fields, and that the source address field is Lp(peer) for
   the context (the preferred peer locator - to which an earlier data
   message would have been sent).  Once this verification has been done
   A needs to restart the 3-way context establishment; A can reuse CT(A)
   for this if it so desires.

   As a result of this error handling mechanism an attacker on the path
   between A and B can send frequent Unknown context messages (but an
   off-path attacker cannot since it wouldn't know CT32(B)).  Since
   state loss is expected to be infrequent it is reasonable to rate
   limit the handling of Unknown context messages per context to one per
   minute.

   In the case of M6 layer state loss (due to too early garbage
   collection) the above provides recovery when the peer transmits.  But
   there is also the possibility that the lack of state will be detected
   when the ULP is passing down a packet to transmit.  In this case M6
   would see a packet which needs state (because the leading to bits of
   the address field is 10) but there is no state.  Unless we invent a
   method (see section 14) to lookup identifiers there is nothing that
   can be done in that case (except perhaps wait for a while in case the
   peer will send a packet triggering recovery using the Unknown context
   message).  Thus it is quite important that the context state is not
   discarded prematurely.

   TBD: If we decide to explore the approach in this proposal further,
   would be it useful to add APIs that allow applications to advise when
   it isn't and when it is ok to discard the context state for a
   particular id?






6.  APPLICATION USAGE OF IDENTIFIERS

   In this proposal the upper layer protocols will operate on the
   identifiers.  As long as the M6 layer doesn't garbage collect context
   state too early then those identifiers can be used by other
   applications on the same host; they will only become useless if none
   of the locators stored in Ls(peer) stop working for instance due to
   renumbering of the peer.

   But the identifier is rather useless for referrals; should B pass
   ID(A) to C there is no mechanism for C to find A's locators.  It is
   only if A somehow contacts C that it can tell that it is indeed A.



draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                               [Page 18]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


   In order to be able to use an identifier for establishing
   communication a host would also need a set of locators where at least
   one locator is still current and working.

   Thus with this approach, unless we defer until we have explored the
   future work in section 14, it would make sense to perform referrals
   by either passing FQDNs or by passing an ID plus the list of locators
   know by the referring host.  One could envision a getpeerlocators()
   API which, given an ID, would extract the locator set from the
   context on the host itself.

   Applications which use to map the peer's IP address to a domain name
   today perform a reverse lookup in the DNS (e.g., using the
   getnameinfo() API).  Since the flat identifier space can't be
   effectively added to the ip6.arpa tree, the getnameinfo() can instead
   extract the locators from the local context state.  For example, this
   operation by B on ID(A) would find Ls(A) in the context and do a
   reverse lookup (presumably only on one of them); L1(A).  This would
   be likely to return FQDN(A).  Applications which today perform a
   forward+reverse lookup would need then lookup FQDN(A) - to find the
   identifier.  Note that the above doesn't show that A actually is the
   "owner" of ID(A).

   One could envision providing an optional stronger verification to the
   applications using the CBID properties; a verification of ID(A) would
   extract Ls(A) and then send a challenge request to the locator.  That
   proof of ownership of ID(A) coupled with the locator->FQDN->ID DNS
   looks gives stronger assurance of the identity of the peer IP layer
   than today.  But as pointed out in [M6SEC], applications which
   require strong identity authentication typically also want integrity
   with or without confidentiality for the communication.  Thus identity
   checks unrelated to payload cryptography might be unnecessary as a
   specific service to the application layer.






7.  COMPATIBILITY WITH STANDARD IPv6

   A host can easily implement M6 in a way that interoperates with
   current IPv6 as follows.

   When the DNS lookup routines do not find an ID record for the peer
   they will return the AAAA resource record set to the application;
   those would be the IPv6 addresses.  When the ULP passes down these
   addresses the M6 layer will see that the leading two bits are not



draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                               [Page 19]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


   (10) thus it will pass things through.

   It is an open issue whether or not it makes sense to check in an
   implementation that the content of the returned ID records start with
   binary 10 and that the content of the returned AAAA records not start
   with binary 10.






8.  CHECKSUM ISSUES

   The IPv6 header does not have a checksum field; the IPv6 address
   fields are assumed to be protected by the ULP pseudo-header checksum.
   The general approach of an M6 shim which replaces locators with
   identifiers (where only the identifiers are covered by the ULP
   checksum) raises the potential issue of robustly handling bit errors
   in the address fields.

   This proposal as currently written has an M6 checksum field to cover
   the locators and the M6 header, but it isn't obvious that such a
   checksum is strictly required for the data packets.

   If there is an undetected bit error in the source address field, this
   would look like an unverified source locator to the receiver.  Thus
   the packet would (after replacing locators with identifiers based on
   the context) be passed to the ULP and a challenge response exchange
   be triggered.  In the case of a bit error in the locator this
   challenge isn't likely to receive a response; and if there is a
   response by someone it wouldn't be from the actual peer thus the
   verification would fail.  Thus such an undetected bit error is
   harmless.

   Except for the obscure case when Ls(A) contains multiple verified
   locators, one or more of those are not working, and the bit error
   causes L1(A) to be replaced by L2(A).  That would make the return
   traffic go to L2(A), but that might be a non-functioning locator.  In
   this case the mistake will be corrected when a subsequent packet is
   received from A.

   An undetected bit error in the destination address field is also
   harmless; it might cause misdelivery of the packet to a host which
   has no context but the reception of the resulting Unknown context
   error message will show that it arrives from the incorrect locator
   thus it will be ignored.




draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                               [Page 20]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


   An undetected bit error in the M6 next header field isn't any
   different than for the base IPv6 next header field.

   An undetected bit error in the context tag in a data message could
   have two possible effects: not finding any context state, or finding
   the incorrect context state.  In the first case the Unknown context
   error message would be dropped by the peer since the tag doesn't
   match the tag that was originally sent.  In the second case this will
   result in a packet with incorrect identifiers being delivered to the
   ULP which most like will drop it due to ULP checksums not matching.

   NOTE: If one thinks that new peer locators could be used for return
   traffic without any challenge/response (e.g., relying on the hard to
   guess context tags), then clearly a checksum must protect against
   undetected bit errors causing the return packets to be sent to a
   bogus locator.






9.  IMPLICATIONS FOR PACKET FILTERING

   Ingress filtering should be replaced by locator rewrite when the
   "rewrite ok" bit is set.

   Locator rewriting (when the bit is set) can be applied at places
   where ingress filtering isn't currently performed (e.g., due to
   multihoming issues).

   Firewall filtering potentially require modifications to be aware of
   M6.  All the packets contain locator thus a firewall would need to be
   aware of the context state to let the correct packets through.  Such
   firewalls could optionally perform their own verification by issuing
   challenge request messages (the protocol doesn't explicitly allow for
   this; they would have to pretend being the actual endpoint sending
   the challenge).













draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                               [Page 21]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


10.  IPSEC INTERACTIONS

   As specified all of ESP, AH, and key management is layered above the
   M6 layer.  Thus they benefit from the stable identifiers provided
   above the M6 layer.  This means the IPsec security associations are
   unaffected by switching locators.

   The alternative would be to layer M6 above IPsec, but that doesn't
   seem to provide any benefits.  Since we want to allow routers
   performing locator rewriting it wouldn't possible to take advantage
   of for instance AH to protect the integrity of the IP headers.






11.  SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS

   This analysis is far from complete.  Early analysis indicates this
   addresses the issues in [M6SEC].

   Just as in today's Internet hosts on the path can inject bogus
   packets; in this proposal they need to extract the context tags from
   the packets in order to do this which wouldn't be hard.  Packet
   injection from off-path places becomes harder since it requires
   guessing the 32 bit context tag.

   Hosts on the path can also launch PK signature verification DoS
   attacks against either end since they can observe the context tags
   from the establishment and therefor compute the H2 hash in the
   challenge response packet.  This would force the endpoint to run the
   signature verification algorithm which is expensive.  If we don't
   expect the locator sets to be very dynamic one could restrict the
   rate at which such verification takes place, at least after the first
   few locators have been verified for a peer.

   The initial setup of a host-pair context does not perform any
   verification using public key crypto, but this does not seem to make
   the result less secure than today's Internet.  Applications which do
   not perform access control based on it's notion of the peer wouldn't
   care about the strength of the peer's identifier.  And applications
   which perform strict access control hopefully do this using strong
   crypto (IPsec, TLS, etc) today and would continue to do so.  That
   leaves applications which perform the questionable practise of merely
   verifying the forward plus reverse lookups in the DNS and then using
   the IP address (or resulting FQDN) for access control discussions.
   As discussed in section 6 the application's lookup of locator->FQDN-



draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                               [Page 22]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


   >ID and verifying that the identifier matches provides about the same
   strength. [TBD are we really sure?]

   The CBIDs are only statistically unique.  But 126 bit identifiers
   seems large enough to make collisions unlikely enough to keep the
   protocol simple.  (If not one could envision complications like
    making the protocol capable of detecting collisions by storing the
   public key in the context state and seeing if a host claims to use
   the same ID but has a different public key.)  While at about 8*10^18
   hosts in the Internet there is approximately a 50% probability that
   there exists 2 hosts with the same 126-bit identifier this has no
   effect on the protocol per see.  It is not until a single host has
   that order of magnitude of context state records that it could get
   confused due to collisions.






12.  OPEN ISSUES

   Some protocol complexity is added by not performing a mutual public-
   key challenge immediately when a context is created.  At the
   expensive of a performance hit one could simplify the protocol to
   always to these challenges.

   Is it possible to facilitate transition to M6 using some "M6 proxy"
   at site boundaries until all important hosts in a site have been
   upgraded to support M6?  Would would be the properties of such a
   proxy?  Would it place any additional requirements on the protocol
   itself?

   One of the issues with FQDNs mapping to AAAA records is that in some
   cases multiple AAAA records mean a multihomed host and in other cases
   it means multiple hosts providing the same service.  If we need to
   introduce a new "ID" resource record type for multihoming, would it
   be useful to try to make this host/service distinction more clear at
   the same time?  An example solution would be that the ID record in
   addition to returning the identifier return the FQDN under which to
   lookup the locators.

   Would destination locator rewriting be a useful way for the routing
   system to pass some information to the host?  Or is source locator
   rewriting sufficient?

   With a context tag sufficiently large, what would happen to the
   residual threats if redirection was allowed without PK checks; either



draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                               [Page 23]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


   by just verifying the H2 hash result (which prevents off-path
   attackers from redirecting) or by only verifying the correct context
   tag in the received packets?  In that case the public key
   verification would only occur when there is a conflict i.e. trying to
   create state for an ID when context state already exists for that ID
   perhaps with different peer locators.

   The mechanisms allow adding locators to a locator set but there is
   currently no mechanism for removing a locator (e.g., when a host
   renumbers).  Does it make sense to add such a mechanism?

   The responder only discovers the peer's locators once they are used
   as sources in packets.  Would it make sense to allow the initiator to
   pass a list of its locators to the responder?  (They would still need
   to be verified before use to prevent 3rd party DoS attacks [M6SEC]).


12.1.  Initiator Confusion vs. "Virtual Hosting"

   When A wants to communicate with host B and host X at the same time
   there can be some confusion since the DNS could return the same
   identifier for B and X while returning different locator sets.  For
   example,

   The lookup of FQDN(B) returns ID(B), Ls(B)

   The lookup of FQDN(X) returns ID(B), Ls(X)


   The result is that connections that could be intended to go to B and
   to X would both end up with the same ID at the ULP, but the
   multihoming shim layer would have two separate locator sets
   associated with ID(B).  Thus at a minimum when the second of the two
   communications starts there has to be some way to resolve this
   conflict.

   If multiple FQDNs map to the same host, which is common in virtual
   hosting using IPv4 today, and the locator set is being modified for
   that host then this could be quite normal; looking up www.foo.com
   would provide the ID of the peer and a perhaps staler set of locators
   for the ID than looking up www.bar.com.

   Is it reasonable to assume when there is some overlap between Ls(B)
   and Ls(X) above that this is a normal condition?  Should one form the
   intersection of Ls(B) and Ls(X) and use that for the existing context
   state?  Or at least purge unverified peer locators, those from which
   the host hasn't seen a challenge response, that are not in the
   intersection from the locator set



draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                               [Page 24]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


   Section 4.1 suggests using a challenge request/response exchange when
   the second lookup takes place.  Should the challenge be performed
   with the newer or older locator sets?  What are the DoS issues in
   performing such a challenge?






13.  FUTURE WORK

   It would be desirable to explore making identifiers first class
   objects and having a lookup system, perhaps based on distributed hash
   tables, for identifiers.  But there are significant scaling issues in
   this domain.

   Instead of making the identifier a hash of a host public key it could
   be composed in two parts (about 60 bits each):
    - A hash of a site public key

    - A hash of a host-within site certificate

   The certificate would be issued by using the site key.

   Thus the verification of a challenge response would consist of
   verifying that

    - the site public key hashes to top N bits of the ID

    - the host certificate hashes to the bottom 126-N bits of the ID

    - the host certificate is signed by the site public key

    - the response is signed by the host public key

   While this in itself isn't interesting, it would make it more
   feasible to use techniques like distributed hash tables to build a
   mapping system from IDs to locators; once (if?) we could do so the IP
   identifiers could become a first class object in the architecture.

   Doing a DHT which scales to having one entry for every IP addressable
   device in the Internet is less likely to be feasible than designing
   an DHT which only needs to scale to one entry per site in the
   Internet.

   There are several issues related to designing such a DHT such as
   ensuring that lookups for IDs within the same site don't depend on



draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                               [Page 25]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


   external connectivity (and the above scheme can easily handle that),
   making the DHT robust against failures and malice, and making it so
   that those deploying hosts in the DHT benefit themselves somehow.

   The use of CBIDs make authorizing insertion and modification
   straightforward; a PK challenge using the CBID property can take care
   of that.






14.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

   This document has benefited from discussions with (in alphabetical
   order):  Marcelo Bagnulo, Iljitsch van Beijnum, Brian Carpenter, Dave
   Crocker, Tony Li, Pekka Nikander, Mike O'Dell, and Pekka Savola.

   The idea to allow locator rewriting by routers was first presented by
   Mike O'Dell [ODELL96].  The techniques for avoiding state DoS attacks
   on the first packet are patterned after [MIPv6].  There are certain
   similarities with HIP, but the SIM design factors things so that the
   strength of the identifier (for "rehoming") is separate from payload
   protection (which can use existing techniques like IPsec).






15.  REFERENCES


15.1.  Normative References

     [M6SEC] Nordmark, E., and T. Li, "Threats relating to IPv6
             multihoming solutions", draft-nordmark-multi6-threats-
             00.txt, October 2003.

     [CBID] G. Montenegro and C. Castelluccia, "Statistically Unique and
             Cryptographically Verifiable Identifiers and Addresses",
             ISOC NDSS02, San Diego, February 2002.

     [ADDR-ARCH] S. Deering, R. Hinden, Editors, "IP Version 6
             Addressing Architecture", RFC 3513, April 2003.





draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                               [Page 26]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


15.2.  Informative References

     [NSRG] Lear, E., and R. Droms, "What's In A Name: Thoughts from the
             NSRG", draft-irtf-nsrg-report-09.txt (work in progress),
             March 2003.

     [MIPv6] Johnson, D., C. Perkins, and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in
             IPv6", draft-ietf-mobileip-ipv6-24.txt (work in progress),
             June 2003.

     [AURA02] Aura, T. and J. Arkko, "MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses",
             draft-aura-mipv6-bu-attacks-01 (work in progress), March
             2002.

     [NIKANDER03] Nikander, P., T. Aura, J. Arkko, G. Montenegro, and E.
             Nordmark, "Mobile IP version 6 Route Optimization Security
             Design Background", draft-nikander-mobileip-v6-ro-sec-01
             (work in progress), June 2003.

     [PAXSON01] V. Paxson, "An Analysis of Using Reflectors for
             Distributed Denial-of-Service Attacks", Computer
             Communication Review 31(3), July 2001.

     [INGRESS] Ferguson P., and D. Senie, "Network Ingress Filtering:
             Defeating Denial of Service Attacks which employ IP Source
             Address Spoofing", RFC 2827, May 2000.

     [ODELL96] O'Dell M., "8+8 - An Alternate Addressing Architecture
             for IPv6", draft-odell-8+8-00.txt, October 1996,

     [IPv6] S. Deering, R. Hinden, Editors, "Internet Protocol, Version
             6 (IPv6) Specification", RFC 2461.

     [NOID] E. Nordmark, "Multihoming without IP Identifiers", draft-
             nordmark-multi6-noid-00.txt, October 2003.

     [DISCOVERY] T. Narten, E. Nordmark, and W. Simpson, "Neighbor
             Discovery for IP Version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 2461, December
             1998.

     [IPv6-SA] R. Atkinson.  "Security Architecture for the Internet
             Protocol".  RFC 2401, November 1998.

     [IPv6-AUTH] R. Atkinson.  "IP Authentication Header", RFC 2402,
             November 1998.

     [IPv6-ESP] R. Atkinson.  "IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP)",
             RFC 2406, November 1998.



draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                               [Page 27]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Strong Identity Multihoming           Oct 27, 2003


AUTHORS' ADDRESSES

     Erik Nordmark
     Sun Microsystems, Inc.
     17 Network Circle
     Mountain View, CA
     USA

     phone: +1 650 786 2921
     fax:   +1 650 786 5896
     email: erik.nordmark@sun.com

Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.







draft-nordmark-multi6-sim-01.txt                               [Page 28]

