



Network                                                      K. Moriarty
Internet-Draft                                           EMC Corporation
Intended status: Informational                                   M. Ford
Expires: April 18, 2016                                 Internet Society
                                                        October 16, 2015


 Coordinating Attack Response at Internet Scale (CARIS) Workshop Report
                   draft-moriarty-carisreport-00

Abstract

   The Internet Architecture Board (IAB) and the Internet Society (ISOC)
   hosted a day-long Coordinating Attack Response at Internet Scale
   (CARIS) workshop which took place 18 June 2015 in coordination with
   the Forum for Incident Response and Security Teams (FIRST) Conference
   in Berlin.  The workshop included members of the FIRST community,
   attack response working group representatives, network & security
   operators, RIR representatives, researchers, vendors, and
   representatives from standardisation communities.  Key goals of the
   workshop were to improve mutual awareness, understanding, and
   coordination among the diverse participating organizations.  The
   workshop also aimed to provide greater awareness of existing efforts
   to mitigate specific types of attacks, and greater understanding of
   the options available to collaborate and engage with these efforts.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 18, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




Moriarty & Ford          Expires April 18, 2016                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    CARIS                     October 2015


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Sessions and Panel Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     1.2.  Coordination between CSIRTs and Attack Response
           Mitigation Efforts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     1.3.  Scaling Response to DDoS and Botnets Effectively and
           Safely  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     1.4.  DNS & RIRs: Attack Response and Mitigation  . . . . . . .   8
     1.5.  Trust Privacy and Data Markings Panel . . . . . . . . . .   9
     1.6.  Workshop Themes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     1.7.  Next Steps  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     1.8.  RIR and DNS Provider Resources  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     1.9.  Education and Guidance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     1.10. Transport Options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     1.11. Updated Template for Information Exchange Groups  . . . .  12
   2.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   3.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     3.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     3.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   Appendix B.  Workshop Attendees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13

1.  Introduction

   The Internet Architecture Board (IAB) and the Internet Society (ISOC)
   hosted a day-long Coordinating Attack Response at Internet Scale
   (CARIS) workshop which took place 18 June 2015 in coordination with
   the Forum for Incident Response and Security Teams (FIRST) Conference
   in Berlin.  The workshop included members of the FIRST community,
   attack response working group representatives, network & security
   operators, RIR representatives, researchers, vendors, and
   representatives from standardisation communities.  Key goals of the
   workshop were to improve mutual awareness, understanding, and
   coordination among the diverse participating organizations.  The
   workshop also aimed to provide greater awareness of existing efforts




Moriarty & Ford          Expires April 18, 2016                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    CARIS                     October 2015


   to mitigate specific types of attacks, and greater understanding of
   the options available to collaborate and engage with these efforts.

   The day-long workshop included a mix of invited and selected speakers
   with opportunities to collaborate throughout, taking full advantage
   of the tremendous value of having these diverse communities with
   common goals in one room.  There were approximately 50 participants
   engaged in the CARIS workshop.

   Attendance at the workshop was by invitation only.  Prior to the
   workshop, existing attack-mitigation working groups were asked to
   complete a survey.  The data gathered through this questionnaire,
   including how others can participate or contribute to the attack-
   mitigation working group, was shared with all of the participants at
   the workshop to better enable collaboration.  Attendees were also
   selected from submissions of 2-page research papers that included
   some key insight or challenge relevant to the broader group.  Paper
   topics included research topics around attack mitigation or
   information sharing/exchange, success stories, lessons learned, and
   deep dives on specific topics such as privacy or trust.

   25 papers were received and 20 template submissions.  The template
   submissions will be maintained at the Internet Society web site and
   as a result of the workshop will be amended to provide additional
   value to the computer security incident response teams (CSIRTs) and
   attack response communities/operators on their information exchange
   activities.  The CARIS participants found the template submissions to
   be very useful in coordinating their future attack mitigation
   efforts.  This is a new initiative and is open for the global
   community and hosted in a neutral location.  All submissions are
   available online and linked from the agenda.

   The workshop talks and panels involved full participation from
   attendees who were required to read all other submissions.  The
   panels were organized to spur conversation between specific groups to
   see if we could further progress towards more efficient and effective
   attack mitigation efforts.  See paper and blog series for additional
   information on possible approaches to accomplish more effective
   attack response and information exchanges with methods that require
   fewer analysts.

   The workshop was run under the Chatham House Rule as a result of the
   often sensitive information involved with incident response.  As
   such, there was no recording, but minutes were taken and used to aid
   in the generation of this report.  Comments will not be attributed to
   any particular attendee, nor will organizations be named in
   association with any discussion topics that were not made public




Moriarty & Ford          Expires April 18, 2016                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    CARIS                     October 2015


   through submission templates or papers by the submitter and
   organization.

1.1.  Sessions and Panel Groups

   1.  Stage Setting and Goals of the Workshop

   2.  Coordination between CSIRTs and attack response mitigation
       efforts

   3.  Scaling response to DDoS and Botnets effectively and safely

   4.  Infrastructure: DNS and RIR providers and researchers

   5.  Trust and Privacy with the exchange of potentially sensitive
       information

   6.  IAB wrap up for architecture next steps

1.2.  Coordination between CSIRTs and Attack Response Mitigation Efforts

   The first panel session on Coordination between CSIRTs and attack
   mitigation efforts included representatives from several
   organizations that submitted templates describing attack mitigation
   efforts.  This panel was purposefully a cross section of
   organizations attending to see if there were opportunities to
   collaborate and improve efficiency and better scale attack
   mitigation.  The panelists described their efforts with the following
   questions in mind:

   o  Describe your use case?

   o  Where they are focusing?

   o  How can others engage with them?

   o  Who participates?

   For each of the following organizations, additional information can
   be found in their template submissions:
   https://internetsociety2.wufoo.com/reports/caris-workshop-template-
   submissions/

   The following summaries are to be read in the context of the workshop
   and not as stand alone descriptions for each organization as these
   summaries are a result of the workshop discussions.





Moriarty & Ford          Expires April 18, 2016                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    CARIS                     October 2015


   While ENISA provides support for the community in the form of
   education, training and collaboration on security and attack
   mitigation, it does not offer a service for attack response or
   mitigation.

   The APWG offered examples of operator driven exchanges focused on
   specific use cases that involve hundreds of participating
   organizations daily.  The APWG operates a data clearinghouse and
   provides infrastructure to support meaningful data exchanges and
   maintains a current set of data through these interactions.  More can
   be learned on the APWG web site in addition to their template
   submission.

   Ren-ISAC represents an interesting operational model that scales well
   through automation, exchanging actionable information between 500
   universities automatically implementing controls.  They leverage a
   small number of analysts to accomplish the task of protecting many
   universities, understanding the scarcity of resources, since many
   universities cannot respond in real-time without this automation.
   The key to the success of their project is actualization with tools
   that allow organizations to make use of data operationally.  They are
   currently working to develop open-source tools to track metrics
   formally.

   CERT.br is the Brazilian CERT and they have made impressive progress
   in a short amount of time.  CERT.br is the national focal point for
   incident reporting, collection and dissemination of threat and attack
   trend information in Brazil.  CERT.br works to increase awareness and
   incident-handling capabilities in country as well as assisting to
   establish new CSIRTs.  In addition to providing training and
   awareness campaigns, they distribute honeypots and have a primary
   focus on network monitoring.  CERT.br requires active participation
   to collaborate and exchange data with them.

   MyCERT's mission is to address security concerns of Malaysian
   Internet users and reduce the probability of successful attacks.
   They have been operational since 1997.  MyCERT is responsible for
   incident handling on intrusions, identity theft, and handling DDoS
   attacks, etc.  MyCERT assists with CSIRT incident help in Malaysia,
   provides malware research, and technical coordination.  In addition
   to incident response and coordination activities, MyCERT members
   provide talks, training, as well as local and regional security
   exercises.  MyCERT also provides incident alerts, advisories on
   vulnerabilities, breaches, etc.

   CERT/CC has been operational since 1998 on an international and
   national scale.  They have long been known for their software
   vulnerability work and the national vulnerability database in the US



Moriarty & Ford          Expires April 18, 2016                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    CARIS                     October 2015


   (CVEs) and informing organizations of vulnerabilities.  CERT/CC helps
   to coordinate between vendors and researchers for improved
   collaborations.  CERT/CC assists with guidance on plans to deal with
   the aftermath, risk assessment practice, bug bounties, and other
   incident related areas.

   Highlighted points from the panel discussion:

   o  Passive surveillance has impacted incident response activities

   o  Government involvement in exchange efforts hasn't been productive,
      lots of talk without useful exchanges

   o  More interest in consuming feeds of information rather than
      sharing information

   o  Ego has been a big issue as is reputation concerns for data shared
      (impact your own reputation) or with data received

   o  There is a perception of weakness around organizations who do
      share attack information in some regions

   o  Sharing alone doesn't help, must lead to operational ROI

   o  Language barriers have been an issue for some national CSIRTs

   o  Sharing too much information leads to capacity and resource issues
      for receiving organizations.  Organizations directly receiving
      feeds often results in mis-interpretation of the data and thinking
      they are under attack when it is not the case.  Operational models
      preferred where there is an impact from exchanges and efficiencies
      gained using a small number of analysts to impact many.

   o  Privacy regulations restricting some from sharing IP address
      information has had an impact on effectiveness of exchanges.
      ENISA is currently running a study on this impact (raised by
      several attendees).

   o  Too many efforts are using data just for blocking attacks and not
      operational mitigation and elimination as part of incident
      response.  Note: Operational efforts stand out in that they do
      eliminate threats and update data warehouses.

   o  Involvement of vendors is needed to better scale attack response.
      This is not seen as a need by all groups, just some sharing groups
      with an operational focus looking for improved efficiency to
      leverage the small number of analysts.  Analysts are a limited
      resource in this technical area of expertise.



Moriarty & Ford          Expires April 18, 2016                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    CARIS                     October 2015


   o  Enterprises don't want another security box as they don't have the
      resources to manage them, so involving vendors doesn't mean
      deploying more equipment, but improving automated controls and
      elimination of threats where possible.  False positives are still
      an issue, which can be problematic for some automation activities.

1.3.  Scaling Response to DDoS and Botnets Effectively and Safely

   The introductory talk provided an interesting history of Distributed
   Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks and the evolution of Botnets as well
   as methods to combat these threats.  The paper by Dave Dittrich is
   available to learn more of this history: this section of the report
   will focus on the workshop discussion in an effort to benefit from
   the discussions concerning how to better scale response to these
   threats.

   Key points from the discussion:

   o  Of the attack types discussed, DDoS and Botnets appear to be the
      furthest along in terms of efficient and effective response.
      Other efforts can learn from this experience.  There has not been
      any interaction between these two attack types that may benefit
      from information exchange tied to remediation activities since
      Botnets can be the source of DDoS attacks.

   o  There is a disparity between short-term mitigation goals and
      actual eradication of DDoS and Botnet threats.  The question was
      raised: how do we normalize the same data in different ways to
      serve different goals?  In other words, DDoS traffic is often the
      result of Botnets, but the data is not shared between the service
      providers and vendors responding to DDoS threats and those
      actively mitigating and eradicating Botnets.

   o  There are ad-hoc trust groups within the OpSec community today:
      CRAG is one example.

   o  Filtering and triage is an issue, but this is a solvable problem.

   o  The IETF DOTS working group was discussed and compared to a
      previous effort, Real-time Inter-network defense (RID) [RFC6545].
      It was stated that the two are similar, except DOTS makes use of
      current data formats and protocols and has the support of multiple
      DDoS vendors.  One of the goals of DOTS is to have this solution
      be the "glue" between vendors to communicate shared data using
      standard formats and protocols developed in open source tools.

   o  The IETF I2NSF effort was discussed to see if there is a way to
      leverage infrastructure to combat DDoS attacks.



Moriarty & Ford          Expires April 18, 2016                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    CARIS                     October 2015


   o  Vendors discussed existing capabilities for DDoS mitigation, while
      sharing exchange groups discussed their mitigation activities
      related to Botnets (see paper submissions).

   o  Trust and reputation of data sources is still a concern.

   o  One of the exchange groups has a goal of "automated takedowns" for
      Botnets.  However, they think they will always have a need for
      manual intervention.

   o  The need for multiple levels of trust seemed to be prevalent among
      those participating in the panel discussion.  Intelligence
      agencies erode trust (this was also mentioned in the first panel
      in terms of surveillance activities from governments).

   o  Although trust was discussed in this panel and there are concerns,
      it was noted that trust is not as big a barrier in these attack
      spaces likely due to the operational experience of participants.

1.4.  DNS & RIRs: Attack Response and Mitigation

   This session was a shift from other sessions in the day as the
   panelists were infrastructure providers for those combating attacks.
   This session was of interest to see how attack and incident
   responders could better collaborate with DNS infrastructure
   organisations and RIRs.  These groups have not interacted in the past
   and it was interesting to see the collaboration opportunities since
   the workshop participants rely on these services to do their jobs.
   From the panelists perspective, DNS and RIRs are separate worlds,
   where they spend a lot of time trying to educate policymakers about
   how they work together to make the Internet work.

   Key discussion points:

   o  The use of passive DNS in attack mitigation was described.

   o  RIRs discussed the data they maintain and provide including
      worldwide BGP update data and root DNS server data.  These data
      sets are available to share with researchers and could be of
      interest to those working on attack response.  The current way the
      data is made available does not scale and ideas were discussed in
      the workshop to improve the scalability should this become a more
      widely used resource.

   o  Some of the global RIRs already actively coordinate with incident
      responders in their region.  In some cases they do facilitate
      information sharing as well as provide education and training.
      Data shared out by RIRs is anonymized.



Moriarty & Ford          Expires April 18, 2016                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                    CARIS                     October 2015


   o  A concern was raised regarding overlapping efforts and a request
      was made for the IETF and ISOC to pay attention to this and help.
      This workshop was one step toward that in bringing together this
      diverse community.  The participants wish to see this type of even
      repeated for future cross area collaboration between the diverse
      set of groups that often only meet within their silo.

   o  Standards for APIs to access data consistently from RIRs and
      scoring methods were discussed as possible ways to scale trust.
      Questions were raised as to how this might be possible.  One might
      receive unverifiable data about a network.  They may be able to
      verify the source's identity, verify route origins, but won't be
      able to verify provenance of data.

1.5.  Trust Privacy and Data Markings Panel

   Why don't organizations share data?  It seems to be a mix of privacy,
   legal, technical/mundane, cultural, and communication issues.  There
   are also concerns about sharing proprietary data with competitors.
   Having said that, most of these reasons are bogus according to
   operationally focused participants of the workshop.  Lawyers need
   contextual education for the intersection of law and technology.
   Sensitive data is still an issue as one can't control what others do
   with data once it is shared.  They don't know what others might do
   with the data and who might receive it indirectly.

   Key points from the panel discussion:

   o  Operationally focused groups do retain/rate/re-mark confidence
      levels based upon the submitter reputation.

   o  The Traffic Light Protocol (TLP) was discussed.  While this is
      useful to some groups who exchange data, others find that it is
      not granular enough for their needs.

   o  In many cases when data is shared the user never knows, and there
      is no way to manage that disclosure.

   o  Trust is personal.  When sharing circles get too large, trust
      breaks down.  The personal relationship aspect of information
      sharing communities was emphasized by several who are actively
      exchanging data and for a number of years.  This is a very
      prevalent theme.

   o  A point of comparison was made that consumer goods and trademarks
      are a byproduct of the Industrial Revolution.  Advertising is a
      large-scale trust model and can we learn from this, does trust
      need branding?



Moriarty & Ford          Expires April 18, 2016                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                    CARIS                     October 2015


   o  Participants observing noted that there appear to be cabals
      operating the groups based on the current trust notions.  This was
      not disputed.

   o  Transparency is vital to maintain trust.

   o  Participants working on automation have found a need to share with
      organizations of all sizes as well as a need to share both
      synchronously and asynchronously.  In an automated model, they
      must ensure data sources are 'authorized' and these efforts have
      encountered questions about anonymization as well as regional
      regulatory perspectives as they vary.

   o  Another automation effort found that people have different upper
      limits for trust group scale, which is sometimes based on
      individualized knowledge of other participants and having a
      comfort level with them.  Social interaction (beer) is a common
      thread amongst sharing partners to build trust relationships.  The
      relationships are formed between individuals and not necessarily
      between organizations.

   o  It's rare for any single piece of information to be clearly
      identifiable as private or public.  Temptation is to say info
      isn't personally identifiable information (PII).  In aggregate,
      however, non-PII can become PII.

   o  There was common agreement that reputation is fundamental.

1.6.  Workshop Themes

   Better scaling attack response through improvements to the efficiency
   and effectiveness of information exchanges.

   1.  Data exchanges should not be just for the purpose of creating
       blacklists that could be redundant efforts.

   2.  Involving service providers and vendors to better coordinate and
       scale response is key.

   Information security practitioners are a scarce resource.

   1.  Training and education was discussed to improve this gap, both to
       train information security professionals and others in IT on
       basic network and system hygiene.

   2.  Leveraging resources to better scale response, using fewer
       resources is critical.




Moriarty & Ford          Expires April 18, 2016                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                    CARIS                     October 2015


1.7.  Next Steps

1.8.  RIR and DNS Provider Resources

   Workshop participants expressed an interest in expanded information
   on the resources and assistance offered by the RIRs and DNS
   providers.  Participants are going to define what is needed.

1.9.  Education and Guidance

   Another reccurring theme was the lack of knowledge by the community
   of basic security principles such as ingress and egress filtering
   explained in BCP38.  The CSIRTS, operators, and vendors of attack
   mitigation tools found this particularly frustrating.  As a result,
   follow up activities may include determining if security guidance
   BCPs require updates or to determine whether there are opportunities
   to educate on these basic principles already documented by the IETF.

1.10.  Transport Options

   One of the more lively discussions was the need for better transports
   for information exchange.  Real-time Inter-network Defense (RID) was
   written more than 10 years ago.  While the patterns established in
   RID still show promise, there are updated solutions being worked on.
   One such solution is in the IETF DOTS working group, that has an
   approach similar to RID with updated formats and protocols to meet
   the demands of todays DDoS attacks.  While TAXII (another transport
   option) is just in transition to OASIS, its base is similar to RID in
   its use of SOAP-like messaging, which will likely prevent it from
   scaling to the demands of the Internet.  Vendors also cited several
   interoperability challenges in TAXII in discussions.  Alternatively,
   XMPP-Grid has been proposed in the IETF SACM working group and it
   offers promise as the data exchange protocol.  XMPP inherently meets
   the requirements for today's information exchanges with features such
   as publish/subscribe, federation, and use of a control channel.
   XMPP-grid is gaining traction with at least 10 vendors using it in
   their products with several more planning to add support.  Review and
   discussion of this draft would be helpful as it transitions to the
   MILE working group as an outcome of the workshop.  REST was also
   brought up as a needed interface because of the low barrier to use.
   The IETF MILE Working Group has a draft detailing a common RESTful
   interface (ROLIE) that could be used with any data format and may be
   of interest.








Moriarty & Ford          Expires April 18, 2016                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                    CARIS                     October 2015


1.11.  Updated Template for Information Exchange Groups

   One of the submission options was for organizations actively
   exchanging data to submit a form describing their work to reduce
   attacks.  The CSIRTs, in particular, liked having access to this
   information in a neutral location like the Internet Society.
   However, they would like to see changes to the form to ensure it's
   usefulness.  There was a desire to have this used by additional
   exchange groups, creating a living library to better understand how
   to become a member, benefit from, or contribute to the success of the
   attack response and CSIRT exchange platforms.

2.  Security Considerations

   The CARIS workshop was focused on security and methods to improve the
   effectiveness and efficiency of attack response to enable better
   scaling.  This report provides a summary and identifies outcomes to
   improve security.  As such, no additional considerations are needed
   in this section.

3.  References

3.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, DOI 10.17487/
              RFC2119, March 1997,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

3.2.  Informative References

   [RFC2827]  Ferguson, P. and D. Senie, "Network Ingress Filtering:
              Defeating Denial of Service Attacks which employ IP Source
              Address Spoofing", BCP 38, RFC 2827, DOI 10.17487/RFC2827,
              May 2000, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2827>.

   [RFC6545]  Moriarty, K., "Real-time Inter-network Defense (RID)", RFC
              6545, DOI 10.17487/RFC6545, April 2012,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6545>.

Appendix A.  Acknowledgements

   Thank you to the members of the program committee (in alphabetical
   order) for your efforts to make this workshop possible and a
   productive session with cross area expertise.  Matthew Ford, Internet
   Society, UK Ted Hardie, Google, USA Joe Hildebrand, Cisco, USA Eliot
   Lear, Cisco, Switzerland Kathleen M.  Moriarty, EMC Corporation, USA
   Andrew Sullivan, Dyn, USA Brian Trammell, ETH Zurich, Switzerland



Moriarty & Ford          Expires April 18, 2016                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                    CARIS                     October 2015


   Thank you to the CARIS workshop sponsors!

   o  FIRST provided a room and excellent facilities in partnership with
      their annual conference in Berlin.

   o  The Internet Society hosted the social event, a boat ride through
      the canals of Berlin.

   o  EMC Corporation provided lunch, snacks and coffee throughout the
      day to keep us going.

Appendix B.  Workshop Attendees

   In alphabetical order by first name, workshop attendees were: Adli
   Wahid, Alexey Melnikov, Andrew Sullivan, Arnold Sykosch, Brian
   Trammell, Chris Morrow, Cristine Hoepers, Dario Forte, Dave Cridland,
   Dave Dittrich, Eliot Lear, Foy Shiver, Frank Xialiang, Graciella
   Martinez, Jessica Stienberger, Jim Duncan, Joe Hildebrand, John Bond,
   John Graham-Cummings, John Kristoff, Kathleen Moriarty, Klaus
   Steding-Jessen, Linda Dunbar, Marco Obiso, Martin Stiemerling, Mat
   Ford, Merike Kaeo, Michael Daly, Mio Suzuki, Mirjam Kuehne, Mr. Fu
   TianFu , Nancy Cam-Winget, Nik Teague, Pat Cain, Roland Dobbins,
   Roman Danyliw, Rosella Mattioli, Sandeep Bhatt , Scott Pinkerton,
   Sharifah Roziah Mohd Kassim, Stuart Murdoch, Takeshi Takahashi, Ted
   Hardie, Tobias Gondrom, Tom Millar, Tomas Sander, Ulrich
   Seldeslachts, Valerie Duncan, Wes Young

Authors' Addresses

   Kathleen M. Moriarty
   EMC Corporation
   176 South Street
   Hopkinton, MA
   United States

   Email: Kathleen.Moriarty@emc.com


   Mat Ford
   Internet Society
   Galerie Jean-Malbuisson 15
   Geneva
   Switzerland

   Email: ford@isoc.org






Moriarty & Ford          Expires April 18, 2016                [Page 13]
