

Mobile IP                                                               
Internet Draft                                                P. McCann 
Document: draft-ietf-mipshop-80211fh-00.txt         Lucent Technologies 
Expires: August 2004                                      February 2004 
    
    
              Mobile IPv6 Fast Handovers for 802.11 Networks 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
    
Abstract 
    
   This document describes how a Mobile IPv6 Fast Handover [2] could be 
   implemented on link layers conforming to the 802.11 suite of 
   specifications [3]. 
    
 
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [4]. 
    
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. Terminology....................................................3 
   3. Deployment Architectures for Mobile IPv6 on 802.11.............4 
   4. 802.11 Handovers in Detail.....................................5 
 
 
McCann                  Expires - August 2004                [Page 1] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover            February 2004 
 
 
   5. FMIPv6 Message Exchanges.......................................7 
   6. Beacon Scanning and NAR Discovery..............................7 
   7. Scenarios......................................................8 
      7.1 Scenario 1abcdef23456g.....................................9 
      7.2 Scenario ab123456cdefg.....................................9 
      7.3 Scenario 123456cdefg.......................................9 
   8. Security Considerations.......................................10 
   9. Conclusions...................................................11 
   References.......................................................11 
   Acknowledgments..................................................13 
   Author's Address.................................................13 
    
 
1. Introduction 
    
   The Mobile IPv6 Fast Handover protocol [2] has been proposed as a way 
   to minimize the interruption in service experienced by a Mobile IPv6 
   node as it changes its point of attachment to the Internet.  Without 
   such a mechanism, a mobile node cannot send or receive packets from 
   the time that it disconnects from one point of attachment in one 
   subnet to the time it registers a new care-of address from the new 
   point of attachment in a new subnet.  Such an interruption would be 
   unacceptable for real-time services such as Voice-over-IP. 
    
   Note that there may be other sources of service interruption that may 
   be "built-in" to the link-layer handoff.  For example, one study has 
   concluded that the 802.11 beacon scanning function may take several 
   hundred milliseconds to complete [5] during which time sending and 
   receiving IP packets is not possible.  This sort of interruption may 
   present an obstacle to real-time service deployment that needs 
   further optimization; however, such optimization is outside the scope 
   of this document. 
    
   The basic idea behind a Mobile IPv6 fast handover is to leverage 
   information from the link-layer technology to either predict or 
   rapidly respond to a handover event.  This allows IP connectivity to 
   be restored at the new point of attachment sooner than would 
   otherwise be possible.  By tunneling data between the old and new 
   access routers, it is possible to provide IP connectivity in advance 
   of actual Mobile IP registration with the home agent or correspondent 
   node.  This removes such Mobile IP registration, which may require 
   time-consuming Internet round-trips, from the critical path before 
   real-time service is re-established. 
    
   The particular link-layer information available, as well as the 
   timing of its availability (before, during, or after a handover has 
   occurred), differs according to the particular link-layer technology 
   in use.  This document gives a set of deployment examples for Mobile 
   IPv6 Fast Handovers on 802.11 networks.  We begin with a brief 
 
 
McCann                   Expires - July 2004                 [Page 2] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover            February 2004 
 
 
   overview of relevant aspects of basic 802.11 [3].  We examine how and 
   when handover information might become available to the IP layers 
   that implement Fast Handover, both in the network infrastructure and 
   on the mobile node.  Finally, we give details on how the proposed 
   Mobile IPv6 Fast Handover protocol would work in this environment. 
     
    
2. Terminology 
    
   This document borrows all of the terminology from Mobile IPv6 Fast 
   Handovers [2], with the following additional terms from the 802.11 
   specification [3] (some definitions slightly modified for clarity): 
    
   Access Point (AP): Any entity that has station functionality and 
                  provides access to the distribution services, via the 
                  wireless medium (WM) for associated stations. 
    
   Association:   The service used to establish access point/station 
                  (AP/STA) mapping and enable STA access to the 
                  Distribution System. 
    
   Basic Service Set (BSS): A set of stations controlled by a single 
                  coordination function, where the coordination 
                  function may be centralized (e.g., in a single AP) or 
                  distributed (e.g., for an ad-hoc network).  The BSS 
                  can be thought of as the coverage area of a single 
                  AP. 
    
   Distribution System (DS): A system used to interconnect a set of 
                  basic service sets (BSSs) and integrated local area 
                  networks (LANs) to create an extended service set 
                  (ESS). 
    
   Extended Service Set (ESS): A set of one or more interconnected 
                  basic service sets (BSSs) and integrated local area 
                  networks (LANs) that appears as a single BSS to the 
                  logical link control layer at any station associated 
                  with one of those BSSs.  The ESS can be thought of as 
                  the coverage area provided by a collection of APs all 
                  interconnected by the Distribution System.  It may 
                  consist of one or more IP subnets. 
    
   Inter-Access Point Protocol (IAPP): A protocol defined for use 
                  between access points [6] at handover time that 
                  allows for the old association with the old AP to be 
                  deleted, and for context to be transferred to the new 
                  AP. 
    

 
 
McCann                   Expires - July 2004                 [Page 3] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover            February 2004 
 
 
   Station (STA): Any device that contains an IEEE 802.11 conformant 
                  medium access control (MAC) and physical layer (PHY) 
                  interface to the wireless medium (WM). 
 
    
3. Deployment Architectures for Mobile IPv6 on 802.11 
    
   In this section we describe the two most likely relationships between 
   Access Points (APs), Access Routers (ARs), and IP subnets that are 
   possible in an 802.11 network deployment.  Here we consider only the 
   infrastructure mode [3] of 802.11.  A given STA may be associated 
   with one and only one AP at any given point in time; when a STA moves 
   out of the coverage area of a given AP it must handover (re-
   associate) with a new AP.  It is important to understand that 802.11 
   offers great flexibility, and that handover from one AP to another 
   does not necessarily mean a change of AR or subnet.   
    
    
                  AR                              AR 
            AR     |    AR                   AR    |     AR 
              \    |   /                       \   |    / 
               Subnet 1                         Subnet 2 
             /  /  |  \  \                    /  /  |  \  \ 
            /  /   |   \  \                  /  /   |   \  \ 
           /   |   |   |   \                /   |   |   |   \ 
        AP1  AP2  AP3  AP4  AP5          AP6  AP7  AP8  AP9  AP10   
    
             Figure 1: An 802.11 deployment with relay APs. 
    
   Figure 1 depicts a typical 802.11 deployment with two IP subnets, 
   each with three Access Routers and five Access Points.  Note that the 
   APs in this figure are acting as link-layer relays, which means that 
   they transport Ethernet-layer frames between the wireless medium and 
   the subnet.  Each subnet is implemented as a single LAN or VLAN.  
   Note that a handover from AP1 to AP2 does not require a change of AR 
   because all three ARs are link-layer reachable from a STA connected 
   to any AP1-5.  Therefore, such handoffs are outside the scope of IP-
   layer handover mechanisms.  However, a handoff from AP5 to AP6 would 
   require a change of AR, because the STA would be attaching to a 
   different subnet.  An IP-layer handover mechanism would need to be 
   invoked in order to provide low-interruption handover between the two 
   ARs. 
    
    




 
 
McCann                   Expires - July 2004                 [Page 4] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover            February 2004 
 
 
                                Internet 
                               /    |   \ 
                              /     |    \ 
                             /      |     \ 
                           AR      AR      AR 
                           AP1     AP2     AP3 
    
        Figure 2. An 802.11 deployment with integrated APs/ARs. 
    
    
   Figure 2 depicts an alternative 802.11 deployment where each AP is 
   integrated with exactly one AR.  In this case, every change of AP 
   would result in a necessary change of AR, which would require some 
   IP-layer handover mechanism to provide for low-interruption handover 
   between the ARs.  Also, the AR shares a MAC-layer identifier with its 
   attached AP. 
    
   In the next section, we examine the steps involved in any 802.11 
   handover. Subsequent sections discuss how these steps could be 
   integrated with an IP-layer handover mechanism in each of the above 
   deployment scenarios. 
    
    
4. 802.11 Handovers in Detail 
    
   An 802.11 handover takes place when a STA changes its association 
   from one AP to another ("re-association").  This process consists of 
   the following steps: 
    
     1. The STA performs a scan to see what APs are available.  The 
        result of the scan is a list of APs together with physical 
        layer information, such as signal strength. 
      
     2. The STA chooses one of the APs and performs a join to 
        synchronize its physical and MAC layer timing parameters with 
        the selected AP. 
         
     3. The STA requests authentication with the new AP.  For an "Open 
        System", such authentication is a single round-trip message 
        exchange with null authentication. 
         
     4. The STA requests association or re-association with the new AP.  
        A re-association request contains the MAC-layer address of the 
        old AP, while a plain association request does not. 
         
     5. If operating in accordance with the IAPP [6], the new AP 
        performs a lookup based on MAC-layer address to obtain the IP 

 
 
McCann                   Expires - July 2004                 [Page 5] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover            February 2004 
 
 
        address of the old AP by consulting a local table or RADIUS 
        server.  It opens a UDP or TCP connection, protected by IPSec 
        encryption, to the old AP.  Via the secure connection, it 
        informs the old AP of the re-association so that information 
        about the STA is deleted from the old AP.  Note that IAPP can 
        only be invoked based on a re-association message, as the plain 
        association message does not contain the old AP's MAC-layer 
        address. 
         
     6. The new AP sends a Layer 2 Update frame on the local LAN 
        segment to update the learning tables of any connected Ethernet 
        bridges. 
    
   Note that in most existing 802.11 implementations, steps 1-4 are 
   performed by firmware that is on-board the 802.11 PCMCIA card.  This 
   might make it impossible for the host to take any actions (including 
   sending or receiving IP packets) before the handoff is complete. 
    
   During step 5, IAPP is used to communicate with the old AP.  The 
   IPSec tunnel between the two APs is originally established with key 
   distribution via RADIUS, but can be subsequently re-used for 
   different MNs that may need to handover between the same pair of APs. 
   Note that the SA is between the pair of APs and has nothing to do 
   with any security association that might be in place between the MN 
   and either of the APs.  During IAPP operation, link-layer context may 
   be transferred from the old AP to the new AP.  The IAPP defines a 
   container for context information.  However, no such context has 
   currently been defined or standardized by IEEE. 
    
   Also note that there is no guarantee that an AP found during step 1 
   will be available during step 2 because radio conditions can change 
   dramatically from moment to moment.  The STA may then decide to 
   associate with a completely different AP.  Usually, this decision is 
   implemented in firmware and the attached host would have no control 
   over which AP is chosen. 
    
   There is no standardized trigger for step 1.  It may be performed as 
   a result of decaying radio conditions on the current AP or at other 
   times as determined by local implementation decisions.  Usually this 
   step will be performed autonomously by firmware in the NIC using 
   proprietary scanning algorithms. 
    
   The coverage area of a single AP is known as a Basic Service Set 
   (BSS).  Note that both APs in the above description are considered to 
   belong to the same Extended Service Set (ESS).  This is to trigger a 
   re-association (rather than plain association) from the STA, which 
   contains information about both the old and new AP.  All APs should 
   therefore broadcast the same ESSID.  If two APs belong to different 
   administrative domains, this may require some inter-domain 
 
 
McCann                   Expires - July 2004                 [Page 6] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover            February 2004 
 
 
   coordination of the ESSID.  Otherwise, there may not be sufficient 
   information to construct the link-layer triggers required by some 
   handover mechanisms. 
    
   A change of BSS within an ESS may or may not require an IP-layer 
   handover, depending on whether the APs provide STAs access to 
   different or the same IP subnets.  If an IP-layer handover is 
   required, then FMIPv6 may be used to decrease the overall latency of 
   the handover.  The main goal of this document is to describe the most 
   reasonable scenarios for how the events of an 802.11 handover may 
   interleave with the message exchanges in FMIPv6. 
    
    
 
5. FMIPv6 Message Exchanges 
    
   An FMIPv6 handover nominally consists of the following messages: 
    
     a. The MN sends a Router Solicitation for Proxy (RtSolPr) to find 
        out about neighboring ARs. 
      
     b. The MN receives a Proxy Router Advertisement (PrRtAdv) 
        containing one or more [AP-ID, AR-Info] tuples. 
      
     c. The MN sends a Fast Binding Update (FBU) to the Previous Access 
        Router (PAR).   
      
     d. The PAR sends an HI message to the New Access Router (NAR). 
      
     e. The NAR sends a HAck message to the PAR. 
      
     f. The PAR sends a Fast Binding Acknowledgement (FBack) message to 
        the MS the new link.  The FBack is also optionally sent on the 
        previous link if the FBU was sent from there. 
      
     g. The MN sends FNA to the NAR after attaching to it. 
    
   The MN may connect to NAR prior to sending the FBU if the handover is 
   un-anticipated.  In this case, the FNA (step g) would contain the FBU 
   (listed as step c above) and then steps d, e, and f would take place 
   from there. 
    
    
6. Beacon Scanning and NAR Discovery 
    
   The RtSolPr message is used to request information about the 
   router(s) connected to one or more APs.  The APs are specified by 
   link layer address in the RtSolPr and associated IP-layer information 

 
 
McCann                   Expires - July 2004                 [Page 7] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover            February 2004 
 
 
   is returned in the PrRtAdv.  In the case of an 802.11 link, the link 
   layer address is the BSSID of some AP. 
   Beacon scanning (step 1 from Section 4) produces a list of available 
   APs along with signal strength information for each.  This list would 
   supply the necessary BSSIDs to fill into the RtSolPr messages.  Note 
   that for this to be possible, the MLME-SCAN.request primitive (See 
   Section 10.3.2.1 of the 802.11 specification [3]) must be available 
   to the host, and the card firmware must not make autonomous handover 
   decisions. 
    
   Note that, aside from physical layer parameters such as signal 
   strength, it may be possible to obtain all necessary information 
   about neighboring APs by using the wildcard form of the RtSolPr 
   message.  This would cause the current access router to return a list 
   of neighboring APs.  This request could be made at the time the MN 
   first attaches to the access router, and periodically thereafter.  
   This would enable the MN to cache the necessary [AP-ID, AR-Info] 
   tuples and might enable it to react more quickly when a handover 
   becomes necessary due to a changing radio environment.  However, if 
   the scale of the network is such that a given access router is 
   attached to many APs, then it is possible that there may not be room 
   to list all APs in the PrRtAdv. 
    
   Because beacon scanning takes on the order of a few hundred 
   milliseconds to complete, and because it is generally not possible to 
   send and receive IP packets during this time, the MN needs to 
   schedule these events with care so that they do not disrupt ongoing 
   real-time services. 
    
    
7. Scenarios 
    
   In this section we look at a few of the possible scenarios for using 
   FMIPv6 in an 802.11 context.  Each scenario is labeled by the 
   sequence of events that take place, where the numbered events are 
   from Section 4 and the lettered events are from Section 5.  For 
   example, "1abcde23456fg" is the sequence where the MN performs a 
   scan, then the MN executes the FMIPv6 messaging to obtain NAR 
   information and send a binding update, then the PAR initiates 
   HI/HAck exchange, then the 802.11 handover completes, and finally 
   the HAck is received at the PAR and the MN sends an FNA. 
    
   Each scenario is followed by a brief description and discussion of 
   the benefits and drawbacks. 
    
    



 
 
McCann                   Expires - July 2004                 [Page 8] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover            February 2004 
 
 
7.1 Scenario 1abcdef23456g 
    
   This scenario is the one most envisioned by the FMIPv6 specification.  
   Note that in this scenario, the scan request primitive is made 
   available to the host and the firmware in the 802.11 device does not 
   autonomously make handover decisions. 
   There is no guarantee that the RtSolPr/PrRtAdv exchange will complete 
   especially in a radio environment where the connection to the old AP 
   is deteriorating rapidly.  Also, there is no guarantee that the MN 
   will actually attach to the given new AP after it has sent the F-BU 
   to the oAR, because changing radio conditions may cause nAR to be 
   suddenly unreachable. 
    
    
7.2 Scenario ab123456cdefg 
    
   This is the "reactive handover" from the FMIPv6 specification.  This 
   scenario does not require host intervention between steps 1 and 2. 
    
   However, it does require that the MN obtain the link-layer address of 
   NAR prior to handover, so that it has a link-layer destination 
   address for outgoing packets (default router information).  This 
   would then be used for sending the FNA (with encapsulated FBU) when 
   it reaches the new subnet.   
    
    
7.3 Scenario 123456abcdefg 
    
   In this scenario the MN does not obtain any information about the NAR 
   prior to executing the handover.  It is completely reactive, and 
   consists of soliciting a router advertisement after handover, and 
   then sending an FNA with encapsulated FBU immediately. 
    
   This scenario may be appropriate when it is difficult to learn the 
   link-layer address of the NAR prior to handover.  This may be the 
   case, e.g., if the scan primitive is not available to the host and 
   the wildcard PrRtAdv form returns too many results.  It may be 
   possible to skip the router advertisement/solicitation steps (ab) in 
   some cases, if it is possible to learn the NAR's link-layer address 
   through some other means.  In the deployment illustrated in Figure 2, 
   this would be exactly the new AP's MAC layer address, which can be 
   learned from the link-layer handoff messages.  However, in the case 
   of Figure 1, this information must be learned through router 
   discovery of some form.  Also note that even in the case of Figure 2, 
   the MN must somehow be made aware that it is in fact operating in a 
   Figure 2 network and not a Figure 1 network.  One option might be the 
   Candidate Access Router (CAR) discovery protocol [7] currently being 
   worked in the Seamoby working group. 
    
 
 
McCann                   Expires - July 2004                 [Page 9] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover            February 2004 
 
 
    
8. Security Considerations 
    
   The FBU message (the only FMIPv6 message that sets up forwarding 
   state) is protected by well-understood Mobile IPv6 security 
   mechanisms, so the PAR can guarantee it was actually generated by the 
   MS.  However, if the association with the new AP is not protected 
   using mutual authentication, it may be possible for a rogue AP to 
   fool the MN into sending an FBU to the PAR when it is not in its best 
   interest to do so. 
 
   There are several security issues of note with the underlying 802.11 
   handoff mechanisms.  Note that steps 5 and 6 from Section 4 install 
   layer-2 forwarding state that can redirect user traffic and cause 
   disruption of service if they can be triggered by malicious nodes. 
    
   Note that step 3 from Section 4 could potentially provide some 
   security; however, due to the identified weaknesses in WEP shared key 
   security [8], there is currently no authentication algorithm for step 
   3 that is both standardized and secure. 
    
   It may be the case that many deployments are configured as "Open 
   Systems", which will rely instead on higher-layer authentication such 
   as 802.1X Port-Based Network Access Control [9].  According to 
   published standards, such authentication techniques would happen only 
   after association or re-association takes place, which leaves the re-
   association messages unprotected.  This would allow malicious nodes 
   to redirect traffic to a different AP on the same subnet.  Work is 
   currently underway to better integrate 802.1X with 802.11 [10] but it 
   is not yet complete. 
    
   The 802.1X standard defines a way to encapsulate EAP on 802 networks 
   (EAPOL, for "EAP over LANs").  With this method, the client and AP 
   participate in an EAP exchange which itself can encapsulate any of 
   the various EAP authentication methods.  The EAPOL exchange can 
   output a master key, which can then be used to derive transient keys, 
   which in turn can be used to encipher/authenticate subsequent 
   traffic.  It is possible to use 802.1X pre-authentication [10] 
   between a STA and a target AP while the STA is associated with 
   another AP; this would enable authentication to be done in advance of 
   handover, which would both protect the re-association message and 
   allow fast resumption of service after roaming.  However, because 
   EAPOL frames carry only MAC-layer instead of IP-layer addresses, this 
   is currently only specified to work within a single subnet, where IP 
   layer handoff mechanisms are not needed anyway.  In our case (roaming 
   across subnet boundaries) the 802.1X exchange would need to be 
   performed after roaming to, but prior to re-association with, the new 
   AP.  This would introduce additional handover delay while the 802.1X 

 
 
McCann                   Expires - July 2004                [Page 10] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover            February 2004 
 
 
   exchange takes place, which may also involve round-trips to RADIUS or 
   Diameter servers. 
    
   Perhaps faster cross-subnet authentication could be achieved by 
   leveraging the context transfer features of the IAPP to carry 
   security credentials [11], or with the use of pre-authentication 
   using an IP-layer mechanism such as PANA [12] that would cross subnet 
   boundaries.  To our knowledge this sort of work is not currently 
   underway in the IEEE.  The security considerations of these new 
   approaches would need to be carefully studied. 
    
 
9. Conclusions 
    
   The Mobile IPv6 Fast Handoff specification presents a protocol for 
   shortening the period of service interruption during a change in 
   link-layer point of attachment.  This document attempts to show how 
   this protocol may be applied in the context of 802.11 access 
   networks. 
    
   There are currently serious security problems in the published 
   specifications that define the 802.11 handover process that must be 
   fixed before even intra-subnet mobility can be considered secure.  
   In-progress specifications may fix these problems but may also 
   introduce additional delay for handover across different subnets.  
   Usually, only the APs themselves are aware that good link-layer 
   security is in place.  This information could be made available to 
   ARs with the use of a new protocol, but such mechanisms are prone to 
   be link-layer specific. 
    
   Obtaining the desired PrRtAdv prior to handover requires that 
   messages be exchanged over the wireless link during a period that is 
   normally under the control of low-level firmware.  The performance 
   impact of this requirement, and of the failure to meet it in certain 
   radio conditions, must be critically evaluated with experimental 
   data.  Also, given a particular firmware implementation of handover, 
   it may be impossible for a host to send the required IP-layer 
   messages as indicated in the scenario from Section 7.1.  However, in 
   these cases it seems that the scenario from Section 7.2 or at worst 
   the scenario from Section 7.3 present reasonable fall-back 
   strategies. 
    
    
References 
    
                     
   1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 

 
 
McCann                   Expires - July 2004                [Page 11] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover            February 2004 
 
 
                                                                         
    
   2  Koodli, R. (editor), "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6", draft-ietf-
      mipshop-fast-mipv6-01.txt, February 2004.  Work In Progress. 
    
   3  "Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) 
      Specifications", ANSI/IEEE Std 802.11, 1999 Edition. 
    
   4  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   5  Mitra, A., Shin, M., and Arbaugh, W., "An Empirical Analysis of 
      the IEEE 802.11 MAC Layer Handoff Process", CS-TR-4395, University 
      of Maryland Department of Computer Science, September 2002. 
    
   6  "Recommended Practice for Multi-Vendor Access Point 
      Interoperability via an Inter-Access Point Protocol Across 
      Distribution Systems Supporting IEEE 802.11 Operation", IEEE Std 
      802.11f/D4, July 2002.  Work In Progress. 
    
   7  Liebsch, M., Singh, A. (editors), Chaskar, H., Funato, D., Shim, 
      E., "Candidate Access Router Discovery", draft-ietf-seamoby-card-
      protocol-06.txt, December 2003.  Work In Progress. 
    
   8  Borisov, N., Goldberg, I., and Wagner, D., "Intercepting Mobile 
      Communications: The Insecurity of 802.11", Proceedings of the 
      Seventh Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and 
      Networking, July 2001, pp. 180-188. 
    
   9  "Port-Based Network Access Control", IEEE Std 802.1X-2001, 
      October, 2001. 
    
   10 "Draft Supplement to IEEE 802.11: Specification for Enhanced 
      Security", IEEE Std 802.11i/D2.2, July 2002.  Work In Progress. 
    
   11 Aboba, B., and Moore, T., "A Model for Context Transfer in IEEE 
      802", draft-aboba-context-802-00.txt, October 2003.  Work In 
      Progress. 
    
   12 Forsberg, D., Ohba, Y., Patil, B., Tschofenig, H., "Protocol for 
      Carrying Authentication for Network Access (PANA)", draft-ietf-
      pana-pana-02.txt, October 2003.  Work In Progress. 
    
    
    




 
 
McCann                   Expires - July 2004                [Page 12] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover            February 2004 
 
 
Acknowledgments 
    
   Thanks to Bob O'Hara for providing explanation and insight on the 
   802.11 standards.  Thanks to James Kempf and Erik Anderlind for 
   providing comments on an earlier draft. 
    
    
Author's Address 
    
   Pete McCann 
   Lucent Technologies 
   Rm 9C-226R 
   1960 Lucent Lane 
   Naperville, IL  60563 
   Phone: +1 630 713 9359 
   Fax:   +1 630 713 1921 
   Email: mccap@lucent.com 
  
 
Intellectual Property Statement 
 
   At the time of submission the author is not aware of any intellectual 
   property rights that pertain to the implementation or use of the 
   technology described in this document.  However, this does not 
   preclude the possibility that Lucent Technologies, Inc. or other 
   entities may have such rights.  The patent licensing policy of Lucent 
   Technologies, Inc. is on file with the IETF Secretariat. 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it 
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the 
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and 
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of 
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of 
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to 
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such 
   proprietary rights by implementers or users of this specification can 
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights, which may cover technology that may be required to practice 
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
   Director. 
    
 
 
 
McCann                   Expires - July 2004                [Page 13] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover            February 2004 
 
 
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved.  
       
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to    
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it    
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published    
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any    
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are    
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other    
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English.  
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
      
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  






















 
 
McCann                   Expires - July 2004                [Page 14] 