Network Working Group                                            C. Reed
Internet-Draft                                              Open Geospatial Consortium
Expires: July 6, 2005                   		       January 2005

              A URN namespace for the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC)
			draft-creed-ogc-urn-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. The list of Internet-Draft 
   Shadow Directories can be accessed at http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 6, 2005.

Copyright Notice

Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005). This document is subject
to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.
 
Abstract

   This document describes a URN (Uniform Resource Name) namespace that
   is engineered by the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) for naming
   persistent resources published by the OGC  (such as OGC Standards,  
   XML  (Extensible Markup Language) Document Type Definitions, XML 
   Schemas, Namespaces, Stylesheets, and other documents).  The formal 
   Namespace  identifier (NID) is "ogc".

   Reed		          draft-creed-ogc-urn-00.txt          	[Page 1]
Internet-Draft        A URN namespace for the OGC       January 6, 2004


1. Introduction

   The Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) produces many kinds of technical 
   documents, including: specifications, working drafts, technical 
   reports, discussion papers, and XML schemas. The OGC wishes to 
   provide persistent, location-independent identifiers for these 
   resources.

   The core mission of the OGC is to develop spatial interface 
   specifications that are openly available and royalty free. Products and
   services that conform to OGC interface specifications enable users to freely
   exchange and process spatial information across networks, computing
   platforms, and products.  Interoperability in such an environment 
   is facilitated by the use of a system of persistent identifiers 
   that are global in scope.

   Motivated by these concerns, the OGC would like to assign formal 
   URNs to published resources in order to provide persistent, 
   location-independent identifiers for them. The process for 
   registering a namespace identifier is documented in RFC 3406 [2].
   The official IANA registry of URN namespaces is available online:
   <http://www.iana.org/assignments/urn-namespaces>.


2. Specification Template

   Namespace ID:

      "ogc" requested.

   Registration Information:

      Registration Version Number: 1
      Registration Date: 2004-09-20

   Declared registrant of the namespace:

      Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. (Headquarters)
      35 Main Street, Suite 5
      Wayland, MA 01778-5037, USA
      c/o Carl Reed (creed@opengeospatial.org)

   Reed		          draft-creed-ogc-urn-00.txt          	[Page 2]
Internet-Draft         A URN namespace for the OGC     January 6, 2004

Declaration of structure:

      The Namespace Specific String (NSS) is structured in accord with 
      the syntax described RFC 2141 [1]. All of the URNs assigned by 
      the OGC will have a hierarchical structure in which there are 
      four top-level category branches:

         "specification", ôserviceö, ôtcö, ôdefö

      The general structure of the NSS for all categories of the 
      hierarchy follows the same general form, based on Extended Backus-Naur
      Form:

         urn:ogc:{category.label}:{resource.group}:{resource.type}
             {-resource.subtype}?{[doc.id]}?:{[resource.label]}?:{[release]}?:
             {[parameters]}

      where the parts are as follows:
      
      category.label - one of "specification", "service", ôdefö or ôtcö"
      resource.group - a unique identifier for a particular collection
          or group of resources.  An example of a useful grouping might
          be 'catalogue' which groups resources created during the 
          development of the OGC Catalogue specification. This would be
          indicated with a URN string beginning with: 
        urn:ogc:specification:catalogue
      resource.type - identifies the type of resource, such as a document,
          working group, interface, schema, stylesheet, or model
      resource.subtype - may be used to refine the resource type 
          [e.g. document subtypes such as ôisö (implementation specification),
            ôdpö (discussion paper), ôapö (application profile), and ôadtö (abstract 
             data type)]. The subtypes are assigned by the OGC Technical
             Committee Chair with concurrence of the OGC Document
             Subcommittee.
      doc.id - OGC document number if one has been assigned [optional].
      resource.label - a short, mnemonic label for the resource [optional].
      release - version number or ISO date string [optional].
      Parameters û for category def only. A set of parameters related to a service
      call.

      Each category branch is described below and some examples for 
      each branch are provided; these examples are provided for informa-
     Reed		draft-creed-ogc-urn-00.txt                    	[Page 3]
Internet-Draft       A URN Namespace for the OGC       	    January 6, 2004

      tional purposes only.

     Specification Branch [urn:ogc:specification]

    The "specification" branch of the hierarchy identifies all published 
         OGC specifications and related supporting schemas.

    Examples:

         urn:ogc:specification:gml:doc-is(02-023r4):3.00
         urn:ogc:specification:gml:schema-xsd:feature:3.01
         urn:ogc:specification:catalogue-profile:doc-ap(03-094):0.8.0
         urn:ogc:specification:catalogue-profile:schema-xsd:discovery:0.8.0
         urn:ogc:specification:wfs-1.0:wsdl-1.1:interfaces:1.1


      Service Branch [urn:ogc:service]

         The "service" branch of the hierarchy identifies access to an OGC
         enabled service.

         Examples:
         urn:ogc:service:CatalogueService:2.0:HTTP
         urn:ogc:service:wms:3.0:HTTP
         urn:ogc:service:CRS:2.0:HTTP:ebRIM
         urn:ogc:service:WebFeatureService:1.0:HTTP


      TC Branch [urn:ogc:tc]

         The "tc" branch of the hierarchy identifies work products of
         the various OGC Working Groups, SIGS, and committees of the OGC
         technical committee.
         
         Examples:
         urn:ogc:tc:ows-2:doc-rfq(03-ijk):20031127
         urn:ogc:tc:arch:doc-atb(03-040):refmodel:0.1.2
         urn:ogc:tc:plenary:doc-minutes:20040620


      Definition Branch [urn:ogc:def]         
         The "def" branch of the hierarchy currently references definitions of 
         coordinate reference systems, coordinate (transformation) operations, 
        Reed		         draft-creed-ogc-urn-00.txt                    [Page 4]
Internet-Draft         	A URN namespace for the OGC     	January 6, 2004

         and components thereof, that are specified or recognized
         by the OGC in a formal OGC document. The use of the ôdefö 
         category may be expanded in the future to accommodate the needs 
         of new  OGC  standards.  
    
         Examples:
         urn:ogc:def:crs:EPSG:26986:6.3
         urn:ogc:def:crs:OGC:WMS2:1.3
         urn:ogc:def:crs:OGC:42003:1.3:1:-100:45

   Relevant ancillary documentation:

      None

    Namespace Considerations:

      There is currently no available namespace that will allow the OGC
      to uniquely specify and access resources, such as schemas and registries,
      that are required by organizations implementing OGC standards. There is 
      also a need for other standards organizations, such as OASIS and the
      IETF to be able to access OGC specific resources.

   Community Considerations
      Many of the current OGC standards require access to resources, such as
      schemas, registries, catalogues, OGC documents, and OGC 
      enabled services. In order for the larger IT community to be able to 
      effectively implement applications that access OGC resources, a unique
      namespace is required. We desire these resources to be freely and
      openly available as a set of community resources.
 
   Identifier uniqueness considerations:

      Identifier uniqueness will be ensured by the OGC when
      assigning a URN to a resource

   Identifier persistence considerations:

      The OGC is committed to maintaining the accessibility and
      persistence of all the resources that are assigned URNs.

   Process of identifier assignment:

      OGC may delegate authority for assignment of portions of its 
       Reed		  draft-creed-ogc-urn-00.txt              	   [Page 5]
Internet-Draft         A URN namespace for the OGC     January 6, 2004

      namespace to other parties.  Assignment is limited to the 
      authorized entity only and may not be re-assigned.

   Process of identifier resolution:

      No special resolution process is identified here, however it is
      expected that OGC catalogue services will provide a facility for
      retrieving resources by URI in a direct or brokered manner.

   Rules for Lexical Equivalence:

      URNs are lexically equivalent if they are lexically identical.

   Conformance with URN Syntax:

      No special considerations.

   Validation mechanism:

      None specified.  Users are recommended to confirm the validity 
      of OGC URN's by consulting the original documents.

   Scope:

      Global

3. Security Considerations

   There are no additional security considerations other than those
   normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general.

References

   [1] Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997. Available [online]:
       <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2141.txt>

   [2] Daigle, L. et al., "Uniform Resource Names (URN) Namespace 
       Definition Mechanisms", RFC 3406, October 2002. Available 
       [online]: <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3406.txt>       
       
Author Address

   Carl Reed, PhD
Reed		          draft-creed-ogc-urn-00.txt          	   [Page 6]
Internet-Draft         A URN namespace for the OGC     January 6, 2004

   CTO and Executive Director Specification Program
   Open GIS Consortium, Inc.
   35 Main Street, Suite 5
   Wayland, MA 01778-5037, USA
   Email:   creed@opengeospatial.org

 Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION
   HE/SHE REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE
   INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK
   FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE





 Reed		          draft-creed-ogc-urn-00.txt          	   [Page 7]
Internet-Draft         A URN namespace for the OGC     January 6, 2004
 
   USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY
   RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
   OR FITNESS FOR PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement(s)

  Thanks to Jon Peterson, Leslie Daigle, and Arliss Whiteside for their review
  and comments.
