Integrated Directory Services Working Group		      C. Apple
draft-ietf-ids-iwps-user-rqmts-00.txt		AT&T Bell Laboratories
Expires: 22 May	1996					   T. Genovese
							     Microsoft
							       P. Jurg
							    SURFnet bv
							     A.	Marine
							     NASA NAIC
						      22 November 1995


      User Requirements	for an Internet	White Pages Service (IWPS)


			  Status of this Memo

   This	document is an Internet-Draft. Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of	the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its	areas,
   and its working groups. Note	that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as	Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to	use Internet- Drafts as	reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

   To learn the	current	status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
   Directories on ds.internic.net (US East Coast), nic.nordu.net
   (Europe), ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast), or munnari.oz.au (Pacific
   Rim).

   Distribution	of this	memo is	unlimited.  Comments and critiques of
   this	document welcome. Send them to the Integrated Directory	Services
   (IDS) Working Group (ietf-ids@umich.edu) or to the editors.

Abstract

   The IETF Integrated Directory Services (IDS)	Working	Group proposes
   to establish	a set of specifications	for a simple Internet white
   pages service without prejudice to existing recommendations or
   implementations. This set of	I-Ds will document user	and schema
   requirements.

   Section 1.0 provides	a brief	introduction to	related	work and
   describes the purpose of this document.




Apple, et. al.							[Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT	     User Requirements for an IWPS	22 November 1994


   Section 2.0 describes the scope of this document.

   Section 3.0 presents	several	illustrative user scenarios in the form
   of descriptive application flows.

   Section 4.0 summarizes, describes, and augments requirements
   documented by Postel	and Anderson [3].

   Section 5.0 restates	security considerations	in terms more commonly
   used	to describe security features and services than	those used in
   Section 4.0.

   Section 6.0 includes	acknowledgements of individual contributions to
   this	document.

   Section 7.0 provides	a list of references.

   Section 8.0 provides	the editors' addresses.

1.0 Introduction

   The Internet	community has done a significant amount	of work	in the
   analysis of Internet	White Pages Services and several documents
   address the issue of	IWPS requirements [2][3].  The work on this
   document has	benefited from the review of this work and several
   implementations. Each implementation	was developed to explore a
   solution set	of requirements.  A number of them are based on	an
   underlying technology like X.500 [1].  Others have defined new or
   built on old	systems	[4]. With each approach	we acquired a new
   understanding of the	general	problem	set. The Internet always
   benefits from this type of implementation diversity and the most
   likely future for the IWPS is that it will consist of a number of
   directory like services that	will interwork to provide the general
   IWPS.

   The purpose of this document	is to define a single set of user
   requirements	for the	Internet White Pages Service that accommodates
   the wide variety of information retrieval protocols which can be used
   to create a directory service. Based	upon the work done to date on
   building and	deploying directory service systems, many user-related
   issues and requirements become obviated. Therefore, a common	set of
   user	requirements will be documented	in the sections	that follow. It
   is not the purpose of this document to propose restrictions for the
   development of the independent implementations of the IWPS.






Apple, et. al.							[Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT	     User Requirements for an IWPS	22 November 1994


2.0 Scope

   This	document will describe user requirements and issues for	a
   narrowly defined subset of white pages directory services intended to
   provide information about Internet Users.  These requirements are
   based in part on the	work performed in the inactive IETF WHIP Working
   Group and in	part on	the user scenario descriptions documented in
   section 3 of	this document. This document attempts to establish a
   common set of requirements for different classes of users of	an IWPS.
   The concerns	of end-users, machine-users, and administrative	users
   were	considered and addressed during	the process of writing the
   scenarios and requirements documented below.

3.0 User Scenarios

   When	writing	user-driven service requirements, it is	often useful to
   document operational	or flow-based descriptions of how a service
   might be used. In the case of the IWPS, the following questions were
   used	to frame these operational descriptions:

	 - What	type(s)	of information must the	user specify?

	 - What	type(s)	of information might be	optional?

	 - What	type(s)	of information should be returned?

	 - Is there a way for users to specify the type(s) of
	   information they want returned?

	 - Can the user	send in	a request via electronic mail, or must
	   they	use a service via some protocol? Or does the user have
	   an option to	do either?

	 - Can the user	specify	a limit	on the number of entries
	   returned?

	 - Is a	maximum	number of entries that can be returned in
	   response to a request set by	some party other than a	human
	   user?

	 - What	kinds of error and status indicators and messages are
	   delivered to	users?

	 - Does	the user see some sort of indicator that looks different
	   depending on	how long the search could take?





Apple, et. al.							[Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT	     User Requirements for an IWPS	22 November 1994


	 - Do administrative users get faster response times than other
	   types of users?

	 - How is modification handled?	By who?	How are	such
	   modifications authorized and	authenticated?

   Flow-based descriptions of how the IWPS might be used by different
   types of users are included below.  These descriptions are not
   exhaustive in scope,	but serve to clarify how the IWPS might	be used.
   These scenarios are intended	to neither restrict IWPS implementors
   nor imply that IWPS features	illustrated are	more important than
   other IWPS features.	 Scenarios for end-users, machine-users, and
   administrative users	are included.

3.1  End-User Scenarios

3.1.1 End-User Search w/o Security


     a.	 An End-User accesses a	WWW-based form that acts as an interface
	 to the	IWPS.

     b.	 The End-User sees a screen enabling them to submit a query
	 based on one or more of the following search criteria:

	    - name

	    - voice telephone number

	    - e-mail address

	    - organization name

	    - favorite beer

	    - postal address

	 The End-User also sees	indicators that	they must specify at
	 least one of either name, voice telephone number, or e-mail
	 address.

	 A note	might also be displayed	to the End-User, suggesting
	 that, while not mandatory, inclusion of other defined search
	 criteria will generally result	in a shorter response time and
	 fewer listings	returned.





Apple, et. al.							[Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT	     User Requirements for an IWPS	22 November 1994


     c.	 The End-User specifies	the name and organization for the person
	 they wish to search for and clicks on the submit button.

     d.	 The End-User's	browser	encodes	the form values	into a CGI
	 script	call, with the keys "name" and "org" set equal to
	 "Smith" and "AT&T" respectively.

     e.	 The WWW server	receiving the CGI script call invokes the
	 appropriate CGI script, which queries AT&T's public employee
	 database and returns the first	100 listings retrieved to the
	 user's	browser	along with an indicator	that the next 100
	 listings for name=Smith, org=AT&T can be retrieved if desired
	 by clicking on	a particular area of their screen.  The	WWW
	 server	also must also pass the	context	of this	search session
	 to the	End-User's client as hidden key-value pairs so that the
	 next 100 listings can be returned if requested. No search
	 context information is	maintained on the WWW server in	this
	 case, but is passed back to the server	upon indication	by the
	 End-User that they wish to retrieve the next 100 listings.

3.1.2 End-User Search w/Sliding	Geographic Scope Options

   This	application flow is similar to the one described in paragraph
   3.1.1, with the exception that a list of mutually exclusive
   geographic search scope limits are shown. Specifically, the options
   shown consist of the	following:

      -	City Scope (includes a text box	to specify the city)

      -	State Scope (includes a	text box to specify two	letter state
	code)

      -	Multiple State/Province	Scope (includes	a text area to specify
	the list of states/provinces)

      -	Country	Scope (includes	a text box to specify the country)

      -	Multiple Country Scope (includes a text	area to	specify	the list
	of countries)

      -	Global Scope

   Selection of	one of these options and completion of additional
   information as required by the particular option chosen is mandatory.

   The End-User	will also see a	graphical indicator of relative	response




Apple, et. al.							[Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT	     User Requirements for an IWPS	22 November 1994


   time	for each of these options as follows:

   Scope Option			   Indicator of	Relative Response Time
   --------------------------------------------------------------------
   City	Scope			   Lightening Bolt
   State/Province Scope		   Stop	Watch
   Multiple State/Province Scope   Clock on a Wall
   Country Scope		   Grandfather Clock
   Multiple Country Scope	   Grandfather Clock w/	Spider Web
   Global Scope			   R.I.P.

   Thus	the user has some idea of relative response times when deciding
   upon	the geographic limit to	impose on the search scope. Note: these
   indicators are merely illustrative and most likely are not reflective
   of good user	interface quidelines and practices.

   Otherwise, the application flow is the same as that described in
   paragraph 3.1.1.

3.1.3 Encrypted	End-User-Initiated Information Update

   In this scenario, an	End-User wants to change their electronic mail
   address and wishes to use encryption	as an authentication mechanism.

     a.	 The End-User submits an e-mail	message	(from their old	e-mail
	 address) encrypted with their private key to an Authoritative
	 IWPS Information Base Update Agent with the following content:

	    for	<name>=Christopher_W_Apple
	    {
	       change <email>
	       {
		  from:	"capple@arch4.att.com"
		  to:	"capple@dir1.control.att.com"
	       }
	    }


     b.	 The Authoritative IWPS	Information Base Update	Agent retrieves
	 the End-User's	public key based upon their old	e-mail address
	 and attempts to decrypt the message.

     c.	 If the	decryption process is successful, the Agent updates the
	 master	copy of	the <email> attribute such that	the new	value
	 replaces the old value	and delivers a confirmation message,
	 encrypted with	the Agent's private key, to both the new and the




Apple, et. al.							[Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT	     User Requirements for an IWPS	22 November 1994


	 old e-mail address.

	 If the	decryption process is unsuccessful, the	Agent logs the
	 failed	decryption event, and sends an error-indication	message,
	 encrypted with	the Agent's private key, to the	old e-mail
	 address.

     d.	 For either case described in step c) of this application flow,
	 the End-User's	browser	fetches	the public key of the Agent and
	 decrypts the message.

3.1.4 End-User Batch Search Request w/o	Security


     a.	 The End-User sends an e-mail message to an IWPS server
	 containing the	following message body:

	    list_n := {Chris_Apple,Peter_Jurg,April_Marine}

	    foreach element of list_n
	    {
	       return <name>;
	       return <org>;
	       return <email>;
	       return <telno>;
	    }


     b.	 Upon receipt by the IWPS server mailing list processor, the
	 End-User's request is queued for query	resolution processing.
	 The mailing list processor also sends a confirmation e-mail to
	 the "reply-to:" e-mail	address	indicating that	the request has
	 been queued.

     c.	 Eventually, the request is processed and the names specified in
	 the list are resolved into the	fully-qualified	name (<name>),
	 organization (<org>), e-mail address (<email>), and voice
	 telephone number (<telno>).

     d.	 If it is not possible for one or more of names	to be
	 unambiguously resolved, a list	of possible names is returned
	 along with an indicator of receipt of an ambiguous request and
	 any resolvable	listings.

     e.	 If a particular attribute is either undefined,	defined	but not
	 populated, or defined but indicated as	private, an indication




Apple, et. al.							[Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT	     User Requirements for an IWPS	22 November 1994


	 of the	status of missing attribute values is returned.

     f.	 The results of	query resolution are e-mailed to the "reply-to:"
	 address referred to in	step b of this application flow.

3.2 Machine User Scenarios

3.2.1 Addressing Electronic Mail by Local Recipient's Name

  a.  End-User types in	their preferred	electronic mail	tool at	an
      operating	system shell prompt followed by	one or more recipient
      names:

      $mailx Chris_Apple

  b.  End-User proceeds	to compose electronic mail message and indicates
      that the message should be delivered to the list of recipients as
      they normally would.

  c.  Before the mail-tool process terminates, it performs a local white
      pages directory query, attempting	to resolve the recipient names
      into electronic mail addresses.

  d.  The local	white pages directory query results in the following
      information being	displayed to the End-User:
      Recipient-Name: Chris_Apple cannot be resolved unambiguously.

      Please select one	of the following:

	 1) Chris_Apple: capple@arch4.ho.att.com : preferred
	 2) Chris_Apple: capple@orb.att.com

      Enter your choice	here:

  e.  Since the	End-User can see that Chris prefers to have mail sent to
      capple@arch4.ho.att.com they enter 1.

  f.  The mail-tool sends the electronic mail address retrieved	and
      indicated	by the End-User	as the value of	the "to:" field	in the
      electronic mail message header to	the local mail delivery	agent.

  g.  The mail message is delivered to the capple@arch4.ho.att.com
      mailbox for Chris_Apple.







Apple, et. al.							[Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT	     User Requirements for an IWPS	22 November 1994


3.2.2 Addressing Electronic Mail by Remote Recipient's Name

  a.  End-User types in	their preferred	electronic mail	tool at	an
      operating	system shell prompt followed by	one or more recipient
      names:

      $mailx April_Marine

  b.  End-User proceeds	to compose electronic mail message and indicates
      that the message should be delivered to the list of recipients as
      they normally would.

  c.  Before the mail-tool process terminates, it performs a local white
      pages directory query, attempting	to resolve the recipient name
      into an electronic mail address.

  d.  The local	white pages directory query results in the following
      information being	displayed to the End-User:
      Recipient-Name: April_Marine is unknown to this system.

      Search Alternate Directory at:

	 1) NASA
	 2) SRI

      Please enter choice:

  e.  The End-User knows that April currently works at NASA and	enters
      1.

  f.  The mail-tool process initiates a	query of the white pages
      directory	for NASA and receives April's electronic mail address
      which it stores for later	use.

  g.  The mail-tool sends the electronic mail address retrieved	and
      indicated	by the End-User	as the value of	the "to:" field	in the
      electronic mail message header to	the local mail delivery	agent.

  h.  The mail message is delivered to the address for April_Marine at
      NASA.

3.3 Administrative User	Scenarios








Apple, et. al.							[Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT	     User Requirements for an IWPS	22 November 1994


3.3.1 Changing the Content of an Authoritative IWPS Resource Record (RR)

An employee moves from one department inside of	an organization	to
another.  The authoritative IWPS RR for	an employee is maintained by the
administrator of an associated group of	departmental IWPS servers.  This
organization has established a policy that the IWPS administrator is the
only person authorized to modify department numbers and	may only do so
upon receipt of	an electronic mail message signed by the human resources
department of that organization. Digital signatures are	applied	to
messages requesting that changes to IWPS RRs be	made to	authenticate and
confirm	the integrity of change	requests.

  a.  Human resources representative receives appropriate paperwork
      indicating an approved transfer of an employee from department
      XYZ-123 to department ABC-456.

  b.  Human resources representative sends a digitally signed electronic
      mail message to the IWPS server administrator, requesting	that
      this employee's department number	be changed from	XYZ-123	to ABC-
      456.

  c.  IWPS server administrator	retrieves public key for human resources
      representative to	verify the digital signature of	the message.

  d.  If the digital signature is verified, the	IWPS server
      administrator logs into an administration	tool for the IWPS RR
      database and queries it to verify	that the current department
      number is	set to XYZ-123.

      Otherwise, the IWPS server administrator logs the	failed digital
      signature	verification, notifies human resources of the nature of
      the message received, and	the application	flow ends.

  e.  The IWPS server is currently loaded quite	heavily, but recognizes
      that this	query originated from an administrative	user and assigns
      a	higher priority	to the processing of this request.

  f.  The IWPS server query results indicate that the department number
      for the employee in question is currently	XYZ-123.

  g.  The IWPS server administrator instructs the administrative tool to
      create a delayed IWPS RR database	update request since they
      noticed that the server was a bit	slow in	responding to their
      initial query.






Apple, et. al.						       [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT	     User Requirements for an IWPS	22 November 1994


  h.  The IWPS RR database administrative tool stores the update request
      in a batch file of other such requests for processing at a pre-
      designated time (e.g., a time of day during which	IWPS server
      utilization is expected to be low).

3.3.2 Moving an	Authoritative IWPS RR into another Administrative Domain

Similar	to the application flow	described above	in paragraph 3.3.1, an
employee has transferred from one department to	another. However, in
this case, the IWPS servers for	the old	and the	new department fall into
different administrative domains. In addition to the organizational
policies defined above in paragraph 3.3.1, the organization also has a
statement of policy indicating that IWPS RRs that are moved from one
administrative domain to another mandate that an alias for the new
location of the	authoritative IWPS RR be created and maintained	for 2
months after the effective date	of the employee's transfer.

  a.  Human resources representative receives appropriate paperwork
      indicating an approved transfer of an employee from department
      XYZ-123 to department EFG-789.

  b.  Human resources representative sends a digitally signed electronic
      mail message to the administrator	of the IWPS server in the
      administrative domain corresponding to the employee's old
      department indicating that the employee has been transferred from
      department XYZ-123 to department EFG-789.

  c.  IWPS server administrator	retrieves public key for human resources
      representative to	verify the digital signature of	the message.

  d.  If the digital signature is verified, the	IWPS server
      administrator logs into an administration	tool for the IWPS RR
      database and queries it to verify	that the current department
      number is	set to XYZ-123.

      Otherwise, the IWPS server administrator logs the	failed digital
      signature	verification, notifies human resources of the nature of
      the message received, and	the application	flow ends.

  e.  The IWPS server query results indicate that the department number
      for the employee in question is currently	XYZ-123.

  f.  The IWPS server administrator recognizes that department number
      EFG-789 falls outside of the scope of their administrative domain
      and sends	a digitally signed e-mail message to the administrator
      of the IWPS server within	the administrative domain authoritative




Apple, et. al.						       [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT	     User Requirements for an IWPS	22 November 1994


      for the IWPS RRs of department EFG-789. This e-mail message
      contains a copy of the e-mail from the human resources
      representative along with	an encrypted copy of the current
      employee IWPS RR.

  g.  The administrator	for the	EFG-789-authoritative IWPS server
      retrieves	the public key for the XYZ-123-authoritative IWPS server
      administrator to verify the digital signature and	decrypt	the IWPS
      RR for the transferred employee.

  h.  If the signature is verified, the	administrator for the EFG-789-
      authoritative logs into an administrative	tool for the IWPS RR
      database and creates a new RR for	the transferred	employee with
      the new department number	populated.

      Otherwise, the digital signature verification failure is logged
      and reported to the administrator	of the XYZ-123-authoritative
      IWPS server.

  i.  The EFG-789-authoritative	IWPS server generates a	digitally signed
      message indicating that an automated IWPS	RR database update agent
      in the XYZ-123-authoritative domain should change	the IWPS RR type
      from an authoritative RR to that for an alias pointing to	the new
      RR and that this alias should have a time-to-live	value of 2
      months from the effective	date of	the employee transfer.

  j.  Upon retrieval of	an appropriate public key and successful digital
      signature	verification, the changes described above are made.  The
      XYZ-123-authoritative IWPS RR database update agent also triggers
      the creation of a	record in an add-modify-delete database	activity
      log for the IWPS server authoritative for	the XYZ-123 department.

4.0 Requirements

   Included below are requirements which were documented in one	form or
   another in RFC 1588[3]. General requirements	about white pages
   directory services are presented. More specific requirements	are
   grouped according to	the user classes mentioned above and are
   accompanied by text describing the intent or	need for each.

4.1 General Requirements

   In finding people, the service should work fast when	searching for
   people by name, even	if search criteria values regarding location or
   organization	is vague. In finding information about people, the
   service should retrieve information associated with people, such as a




Apple, et. al.						       [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT	     User Requirements for an IWPS	22 November 1994


   phone number, a postal or email address, or even a certificate for
   security applications (authentication, integrity, and privacy).
   Additional information associated with people can also be provided by
   a directory service,	such as	a list of publications,	a description of
   current projects, or	a current travel itinerary.

   A white pages directory should be flexible, should have low resource
   requirements, and should integrate into other systems that may be
   currently in	use; it	should not cost	a lot, so that future
   transitions are not too costly; there should	be the ability to
   migrate to improved technology, if a	better solution	becomes
   available; there should be a	way to share local directory information
   with	the Internet in	a seamless fashion and with little extra
   administrative effort; the query responses should be	reliable enough
   and consistent enough that automated	tools search, retrieval, and
   administration tools	can be used.

4.2 End-User Requirements

   Searching - Searching is the	ability	to find	information about people
   given some information about	them. This information can be fuzzy
   ("Find Apple	in New Jersey")	or more	specific ("Find	Chris Apple in
   Aberdeen, NJ	who works at AT&T Bell Laboratories"). Generally, more
   specific search criteria should result in less voluminous results
   than	will searches based on fuzzy search criteria. Often, a list of
   results will	be returned.

   Relaxed Spelling - Users will want to be able to submit truncated
   search criteria.

   Information Retrieval - Retrieval is	defined	as obtaining additional
   information associated with a person, such as an address, telephone
   number, email mailbox, or security certificate.

   Authentication of Results - Users want to be	assured	that information
   search and retrieval	results	are authentic.

   Reasonable level of data quality - Data should be up	to date. "Live"
   data	should be used to populate Internet WPS, to avoid stale	data.

   Supports privacy requirements of various individual end-users -
   individuals may or may not want to be listed	with the IWPS and should
   be given a mechanism	by which such preferences can be indicated to
   administrators of the service. Individuals may want to limit	or
   prevent access to specific types of information contained in	their
   IWPS	RR.




Apple, et. al.						       [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT	     User Requirements for an IWPS	22 November 1994


   Registration	with Service - individuals should be able to obtain a
   globally unique identifier (Uniform Person Identifier)

   Fast	response times for both	search and retrieval -	Users want fast
   searching across the	distributed database on	attributes different
   from	the database structure.	Pre-computed indices satisfy this
   desire, though only for specified searches.

   Support for batch/off-line search/retrieval requests	- users	may want
   to submit batch requests for	off-line processing and	subsequent
   delivery via	e-mail.

   Service Status Notification - users will want to receive an
   indication that service is unavailable as well as the reason	for said
   unavailability

   Service Request Error Results - Users will want to receive indication
   of the nature of errors that	occur during the processing of search
   and retrieval requests.

   Ease-of-Use - service must be easy to use. There must be a shallow
   learning curve for novice users.

   Support storage and retrieval of security certificates and/or public
   keys	- Security certificates	(a type	of information associated with
   an individual) are essential	for the	use of end-to-end
   authentication, integrity, and privacy in Internet applications. The
   development of secure applications in the Internet is dependent on a
   directory system for	retrieving the security	certificate associated
   with	an individual.	For example, the privacy enhanced electronic
   mail	(PEM) system has been developed	and is ready to	go into	service,
   and is now hindered by the lack of an easily	used directory of
   security certificates.  An open question is whether or not such a
   directory needs to be internally secure.

   Availability/Reliability - Service should be	highly reliable	and
   available a large percentage	of the time.

   Support Multiple interfaces - Service should	be accessible via
   multiple protocol interfaces

   Support multiple clients - Service should be	accessible via many
   different client types (e.g.	support	for different types of content
   browsers).

   Low Resource	Requirements - Service should place low	resource




Apple, et. al.						       [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT	     User Requirements for an IWPS	22 November 1994


   requirements	on client platforms.

   Inexpensive - Service should	be inexpensive or free to use.

   Evolvability	- Service should be evolvable such that	new features and
   access to additional	information types can be provided when demand is
   sufficient to justify it.

   Information Integrity - Assurance that data about themselves	will not
   be changed by an unauthorized party.

   Navigation -	the service should include options that	allow the
   distributed information tree	to be navigated	to locate globally
   unique person names.

   Support for Multimedia Content - users will want the	IWPS to	be
   capable of locating multimedia content associated with people;
   perhaps an image or a sound or video	clip.

   User	Manuals	- Guidelines are needed	for methods of searching and
   using directory information.

   Local Value - Adds value if run strictly as local service.

   Ambiguous Criteria Feedback - the user should receive feedback on how
   to better specify search criteria, either in	the form of instructions
   or of a list	of options that	have some approximate relationship to
   criteria submitted.

   Support for Multiple	Languages - the	user should be able to indicate
   language preferences	as a part of IWPS requests; help, error, and
   status messages should be presented in the language of the user's
   choice; on-line documentation for users should be made available in
   multiple languages.

   Data	Completeness - The IWPS	should be able to provide a user with an
   indication of the data completeness.	For example if you search for
   someone named xxx within an organization and	the result is that xxx
   cannot be found, you	would like to know whether or not all employees
   of this organization	are in the database. In	the first case you know
   that	xxx doesn't exist over there, in the latter case you're	not sure
   about that and the IWPS could point you to a	general	address	of the
   organization	where you can get more information. Such a feature is
   especially important	if commercial organizations decide not to reveal
   all internal	address	information through the	IWPS.





Apple, et. al.						       [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT	     User Requirements for an IWPS	22 November 1994


   Data	Age - As a user	you would like to know when the	last update was
   done	on parts of the	data.

4.3  Machine User Requirements

   In addition to the requirements above in 2.1, the following are
   requirements	of machine users of a white pages directory service:

   Contextual Views - Service must be capable of providing contextual
   views of directory information to machine users of directory
   services. An	example	of this	could be thought of in terms of
   electronic mail addressing by name, rather than e-mail address. A
   user	would key in a globally	unique person name as the e-mail
   address, perhaps preceeded with some	reserved character that
   indicates that the local mail server	should use the IWPS to resolve
   the unique person name into that person's (hopefully) current e-mail
   address.

   Query Automation - the ability to automate Internet WPS queries is
   essential for providing an IWPS to machine users. See example for
   Contextual Views.

   Common Interface Definition - having	a common interface defined for
   machine users of directory services is essential. This machine
   interface should allow machine users	to issue appropriate commands
   from	a common set to	the directory service that enable it to	search
   for and retrieve information	necessary to perform its functions. This
   could take the form of an API library used to build proxy clients or
   of an SQL-like interface to IWPS servers. As	a minimum, this	Common
   Interface Definition	should include the following components:


      -	Standard protocols for directory queries

      -	Standard query format

      -	Standard field names

      -	Standard searching algorithms and strategies

4.4 Administrative User	Requirements

   Ease-of-Use - Ability to externalize	existing local directory to
   Internet (with minimum effort) -- or	-- Ability to easily export
   local directory info	to Internet WPS	(data conversion tools?) Simple
   site	registration processes.	Easy to	install	servers. Clear idea of




Apple, et. al.						       [Page 16]

INTERNET-DRAFT	     User Requirements for an IWPS	22 November 1994


   naming authorities.

   Level-of-Complexity - Allow site to choose level of complexity they
   choose to deploy. This complexity will be proportionate with	site
   needs.

   Low Entry Cost - Software freely available /	public domain versions;
   low resource	consumption; short installation	time.

   Availability/Reliability - a	highly available/reliable service
   infrastructure (authoritative name servers and index	servers)

   Registration	Process	- Clear	mechanisms defined for new sites to join
   Internet WPS. Assistance available for new sites to join Internet
   WPS.	 Simple	centralized organization registration procedures (if
   used	at all).

   Privacy/Confidentiality - Ability to	limit information exposed
   outside an organization from	a local	site. Ability to limit
   information exposed to end-users or machine users based on legal and
   regulatory restrictions imposed by various national,	regional, and
   local legislative bodies.

   Easy	to build client	software (user agents).

   Synchronization/Replication Tools - administrators should have access
   to directory	synchronization, replication, and partitioning tools.

   Ability to develop &	deploy high performance	servers	for upper layers
   of tree (if tree structure used) or centroids

   Local service easy to integrate into	global service.

   Flexible Technology Choices - Ability for local sites to decide what
   protocol or technology they choose to deploy	or externalize in
   providing access to locally owned and administered information.

   Access Control - Administrative users must have appropriate access
   control tools available to them such	that unauthorized parties cannot
   modify the contents of either local directory information servers or
   IWPS	index/name resolution servers.

   Data	Trawling - Administrative users	must have tools	that enable them
   to prevent data trawling activities.

   Data	Update/Modification - Administrative users must	have secure




Apple, et. al.						       [Page 17]

INTERNET-DRAFT	     User Requirements for an IWPS	22 November 1994


   updating and	modification utilities at their	disposal. Data should be
   maintained by local organizations.

   Help	- Cookbooks for	administrators wishing to install servers,
   register their local	site, or otherwise configure service options
   should be made freely available. New	administrators may need
   assistance in getting their servers up and linked to	a central
   server.

   Search Scope	- Administrators should	be provided with capabilities
   that	allow them to place a ceiling over the number of servers that
   can be contacted in a given search. Administrators should be	provided
   with	configurable facilities	that enable application	of searching
   heuristics to minimize the effect of	ill-formed queries. Knowledge
   servers are another option to consider.

   Indexing - Administrators should be provided	with tools that	enable
   them	to retrieve/exchange/construct indices of various portions of
   the distributed directory.

   Upgrade Manageability - Administrative users	should be provided with
   a reasonably	painless upgrade path from one successive version of
   service related software to another.

   Data	Feeds -	Administrators should have authoritative data feeds for
   all information that	is to be a part	of the distributed directory
   database.  Administrators should have tools that assist them	in
   maintaining data feeds associated with rapidly changing information?

   Data	Caching	- Administrative users should be able to configure data
   caching methods appropriate for the lifetime	of the information
   contained in	their portions of the distributed directory database.

   Evolvability	- Administrative users will want any naming schema used
   to be extensible and	flexible but consistent	so that	it is easier to
   administer and to maintain across service-related software patch
   application and upgrade installation

   Ability to Point to Multimedia Resources - IWPS content should be
   confined to searchable attributes (names, etc.) and should be able to
   contain pointers to non-searchable information stored elsewhere
   (images, video clips, sound clips, etc.). This requirement arises
   from	the inclination	of administrative users	to reduce storage
   requirements	for directory services.






Apple, et. al.						       [Page 18]

INTERNET-DRAFT	     User Requirements for an IWPS	22 November 1994


5.0 Security Considerations

   Based on the	requirements documented	in Section 4.0,	the IWPS will
   require the following security features:

     a.	 the capability	to generate and	verify electronic information
	 signatures

     b.	 the capability	to encrypt and decrypt electronic information
	 with public and private keys

     c.	 a key management and distribution infrastructure

     d.	 a mechanism for hiding	white pages directory data from	users
	 outside of an authorized user group

     e.	 a mechanism for the detection and prevention of data trawling

   To be implemented in	a scalable manner, these features require the
   provision of	confidentiality, authentication, integrity, privacy, and
   data	protection infrastructure services on the Internet.

6.0 Acknowledgements

   April Marine	and Tony Genovese contributed to this I-D by suffering
   through telephone conversations with	Chris Apple about the scope and
   nature of this paper.

   Tony	Genovese, Peter	Jurg, and  April Marine	provided editorial
   comment and feedback	during numerous	rough draft reviews of this I-D.

7.0 References

   [1]	Hardcastle-Kille, S.; Huizer, E.; Cerf,	V.; Hobby, R.; Kent, S.;
   "A Strategic	Plan for Deploying an Internet X.500 Directory Service",
   RFC 1430, ISODE-Consortium, February	1993.

   [2]	Sollins, K., "A	Plan for Internet Directory Services", RFC 1107,
   Laboratory for Computer Science, MIT, July 1989.

   [3]	Postel,	J., Anderson, C., "WHITE PAGES MEETING REPORT",	RFC
   1588, University of Southern	California, February 1994.

   [4]	Deutsch, P., Schoultz, R., Faltstrom, P., Weider, C.,
   Architecture	of the Whois++ Service,	Internet Draft:	draft-ietf-
   wnils-arch-01.txt, April 6, 1994.




Apple, et. al.						       [Page 19]

INTERNET-DRAFT	     User Requirements for an IWPS	22 November 1994


   [5] Genovese, T., "A	Specification for a Simple Internet White Pages
   Service", draft-ietf-ids-iwps-design-spec-01.txt, July 7, 1995.

   8.0 Editors'	Addresses

   Chris Apple
   AT&T	Bell Laboratories
   Room	1L-338,	101 Crawfords Corner Road
   P.O.	Box 3030
   Holmdel, NJ 07733-3030
   USA

   Phone: (908)	949-5937
   E-mail: capple@arch4.ho.att.com

   Tony	Genovese
   The Microsoft Corporation
   One Microsoft way
   Redmond, Washington 98007
   USA

   Phone: (206)	703-0852
   E-mail: tonyg@microsoft.com

   Peter Jurg
   SURFnet bv
   Postbus 19035
   NL-3501 DA Utrecht
   The Netherlands

   Phone: +31 30 310290
   Fax:	+31 20 340903
   E-mail: Peter.Jurg@surfnet.nl
   X.400: C=nl;	ADMD=400net; PRMD=surf;	O=surfnet; S=jurg

   April N. Marine
   Network Applications	and Information	Center
   NASA	Ames Research Center
   M/S 204-14
   Moffett Field, CA 94035-1000
   USA

   Phone:  (415) 604-0762
   E-mail:  amarine@atlas.arc.nasa.gov






Apple, et. al.						       [Page 20]
