
   Network Working Group                                L. Fang, Ed. 
   Internet Draft                                Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   Category: Informational                                           
   Expires: May 2008                                                 
                                                                     
                                                       November 2007 
 
 
              Security Framework for MPLS and GMPLS Networks 
         draft-ietf-mpls-mpls-and-gmpls-security-framework-01.txt 
    
Status of this Memo 
 
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
    
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
       
Copyright Notice 
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 
    
Abstract 
    
   This document provides a security framework for Multiprotocol Label 
   Switching (MPLS) and Generalized Multiprotocol Label Switching 
   (GMPLS) Networks (MPLS and GMPLS are described in [RFC3031] and 
   [RFC3945]). This document addresses the security aspects that are 
   relevant in the context of MPLS and GMPLS. It describes the 
   security threats, the related defensive techniques, and the 
   mechanisms for detection and reporting. This document emphasizes 
   RSVP-TE and LDP security considerations, as well as Inter-AS and 
   Inter-provider security considerations for building and maintaining 

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      1 
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   MPLS and GMPLS networks across different domains or different 
   Service Providers.  
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
   1. Introduction..................................................3 
   1.1.  Structure of this Document.................................4 
   1.2.  Authors and Contributors...................................4 
   2. Terminology...................................................5 
   2.1.  Terminology................................................5 
   2.2.  Acronyms and Abbreviations.................................7 
   3. Security Reference Models.....................................8 
   4. Security Threats.............................................10 
   4.1.  Attacks on the Control Plane..............................11 
   4.2.  Attacks on the Data Plane.................................14 
   5. Defensive Techniques for MPLS/GMPLS Networks.................16 
   5.1.  Authentication............................................17 
   5.2.  Cryptographic techniques..................................19 
   5.3.  Access Control techniques.................................28 
   5.4.  Use of Isolated Infrastructure............................33 
   5.5.  Use of Aggregated Infrastructure..........................33 
   5.6.  Service Provider Quality Control Processes................34 
   5.7.  Deployment of Testable MPLS/GMPLS Service.................34 
   6. Monitoring, Detection, and Reporting of Security Attacks.....34 
   7. Service Provider General Security Requirements...............35 
   7.1.  Protection within the Core Network........................36 
   7.2.  Protection on the User Access Link........................39 
   7.3.  General Requirements for MPLS/GMPLS Providers.............41 
   8. Inter-provider Security Requirements.........................42 
   8.1.  Control Plane Protection..................................42 
   8.2.  Data Plane Protection.....................................46 
   9. Security Considerations......................................48 
   10.  IANA Considerations.........................................48 
   11.  Normative References........................................49 
   12.  Informational References....................................49 
   13.  Author's Addresses..........................................51 
   14.  Acknowledgements............................................54 
    
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      2 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119 [RFC 
   2119]. 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
   Security is an important aspect of all networks, MPLS and GMPLS 
   networks being no exception.  
    
   MPLS and GMPLS are described in [RFC3031] and [RFC3945]. Various 
   security considerations have been addressed in each of the many 
   RFCs on MPLS and GMPLS technologies, but no single document covers 
   general security considerations. The motivation for creating this 
   document is to provide a comprehensive and consistent security 
   framework for MPLS and GMPLS networks. Each individual document may 
   point to this document for general security considerations in 
   addition to providing security considerations specific to the 
   particular technologies the document is describing.  
    
   In this document, we first describe the security threats relevant 
   in the context of MPLS and GMPLS and the defensive techniques to 
   combat those threats. We consider security issues deriving both 
   from malicious or incorrect behavior of users and other parties and 
   from negligent or incorrect behavior of providers. An important 
   part of security defense is the detection and reporting of a 
   security attack, which is also addressed in this document.  
    
   We then discuss possible service provider security requirements in 
   a MPLS or GMPLS environment. Users have expectations for the 
   security characteristics of MPLS or GMPLS networks. These include 
   security requirements for equipment supporting MPLS and GMPLS and 
   operational security requirements for providers. Service providers 
   must protect their network infrastructure and make it secure to the 
   level required to provide services over their MPLS or GMPLS 
   networks.  
    
   Inter-AS and Inter-provider security are discussed with special 
   emphasis, because the security risk factors are higher with inter-
   provider connections. Depending on different MPLS or GMPLS 
   techniques used, the degree of risk and the mitigation 
   methodologies vary. This document discusses the security aspects 
   and requirements for certain basic MPLS and GMPLS techniques and 
   inter-connection models. This document does not attempt to cover 
   all current and future MPLS and GMPLS technologies, as it is not 
   within the scope of this document to analyze the security 
   properties of specific technologies. 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      3 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
    
   It is important to clarify that, in this document, we limit 
   ourselves to describing the providers' security requirements that 
   pertain to MPLS and GMPLS networks. Readers may refer to the 
   "Security Best Practices Efforts and Documents" [opsec effort] and 
   "Security Mechanisms for the Internet" [RFC3631] for general 
   network operation security considerations. It is not our intention, 
   however, to formulate precise "requirements" for each specific 
   technology in terms of defining the mechanisms and techniques that 
   must be implemented to satisfy such security requirements. 
    
   1.1. Structure of this Document 
    
   This document is organized as follows. In Section 2, we define the 
   terminology used. In Section 3, we define the security reference 
   models for security in MPLS/GMPLS networks, which we use in the 
   rest of the document. In Section 4, we describe the security 
   threats specific to MPLS and GMPLS. In Section 5, we review 
   defensive techniques that may be used against those threats. In 
   Section 6, we describe how attacks may be detected and reported. In 
   Section 7, we describe security requirements providers may have to 
   guarantee the security of the network infrastructure for MPLS/GMPLS 
   services. In section 8, we discuss Inter-provider security 
   requirements. Finally, in Section 9, we discuss security 
   considerations for this document. 
    
   This document has used relevant content from RFC 4111 "Security 
   Framework of Provider Provisioned VPN for Provider-Provisioned 
   Virtual Private Networks (PPVPNs)" [RFC4111], and "MPLS 
   InterCarrier Interconnect Technical Specification" [MFA MPLS ICI] 
   in the Inter-provider security discussion. We acknowledge the 
   authors of these documents for the valuable information and text. 
    
    
   1.2. Authors and Contributors 
    
   Authors: 
   Luyuan Fang, Ed., Cisco Systems, Inc.  
   Michael Behringer, Cisco Systems, Inc.  
   Ross Callon, Juniper Networks 
   J. L. Le Roux, France Telecom 
   Raymond Zhang, British Telecom 
   Paul Knight, Nortel 
   Yaakov Stein, RAD Data Communications 
   Nabil Bitar, Verizon 
   Richard Graveman, RFC Security, LLC 
   Monique Morrow, Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   Adrian Farrel, Old Dog Consulting 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      4 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   As a design team member for the MPLS Security Framework, Jerry Ash 
   also made significant contributions to this document. 
 
    
          
    
2. Terminology 
    
   2.1.  Terminology 
 
   This document uses MPLS and GMPLS specific terminology. Definitions 
   and details about MPLS and GMPLS terminology can be found in 
   [RFC3031] and [RFC3945]. The most important definitions are 
   repeated in this section; for other definitions the reader is 
   referred to [RFC3031] and [RFC3945]. 
 
   Customer Edge (CE) device: A Customer Edge device is a router or a 
   switch in the customer's network interfacing with the Service 
   Provider's network. 
    
   Forwarding Equivalence Class (FEC): A group of IP packets that are 
   forwarded in the same manner (e.g., over the same path, with the 
   same forwarding treatment). 
    
   Label: A short, fixed length, physically contiguous identifier used 
   to identify a FEC, usually of local significance. 
    
   Label Switched Hop: A hop between two MPLS nodes, on which 
   forwarding is done using labels. 
    
   Label Switched Path (LSP): The path through one or more LSRs at one 
   level of the hierarchy followed by a packets in a particular FEC. 
    
   Label Switching Router (LSR): A MPLS node capable of forwarding 
   native L3 packets. 
    
   Layer 2: The protocol layer under layer 3 (which therefore offers 
   the services used by layer 3).  Forwarding, when done by the 
   swapping of short fixed length labels, occurs at layer 2 regardless 
   of whether the label being examined is an ATM VPI/VCI, a frame 
   relay DLCI, or a MPLS label. 
    
   Layer 3: The protocol layer at which IP and its associated routing 
   protocols operate. 
    
   Link Layer: Synonymous with layer 2. 
    

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      5 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   Loop Detection: A method of dealing with loops in which loops are 
   allowed to be set up, and data may be transmitted over the loop, 
   but the loop is later detected. 
    
   Loop Prevention: A method of dealing with loops in which data is 
   never transmitted over a loop. 
    
   Label Stack: An ordered set of labels. 
 
   Merge Point: A node at which label merging is done. 
    
   MPLS Domain: A contiguous set of nodes that perform MPLS routing 
   and forwarding and are also in one Routing or Administrative 
   Domain. 
    
   MPLS Edge Node: A MPLS node that connects a MPLS domain with a node 
   outside of the domain, either because it does not run MPLS, or 
   because it is in a different domain.  Note that if a LSR has a 
   neighboring host not running MPLS, then that LSR is a MPLS edge 
   node. 
    
   MPLS Egress Node: A MPLS edge node in its role in handling traffic 
   as it leaves a MPLS domain. 
    
   MPLS Ingress Node: A MPLS edge node in its role in handling traffic 
   as it enters a MPLS domain. 
    
   MPLS Label: A label carried in a packet header, which represents 
   the packet's FEC. 
    
   MPLS Node: A node running MPLS.  A MPLS node is aware of MPLS 
   control protocols, runs one or more L3 routing protocols, and is 
   capable of forwarding packets based on labels. A MPLS node may 
   optionally be also capable of forwarding native L3 packets. 
    
   MultiProtocol Label Switching (MPLS): An IETF working group and the 
   effort associated with the working group. 
 
   P: Provider Router. A Provider Router is a router in the Service 
   Provider's core network that does not have interfaces directly 
   towards the customer. A P router is used to interconnect the PE 
   routers.  
 
   PE: Provider Edge device. A Provider Edge device is the equipment 
   in the Service Provider's network that interfaces with the 
   equipment in the customer's network. 
 
    
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      6 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
    
   VPN: Virtual Private Network, which restricts communication between 
   a set of sites, making use of an IP backbone shared by traffic not 
   going to or not coming from those sites ([RFC4110]). 
    
   2.2. Acronyms and Abbreviations 
    
      AS        Autonomous System 
      ASBR      Autonomous System Border Router 
      ATM       Asynchronous Transfer Mode 
      BGP       Border Gateway Protocol 
      BFD       Bidirectional Forwarding Detection 
      CE        Customer-Edge device 
      CoS       Class of Service 
      CPU       Central Processor Unit 
      DNS       Domain Name System 
      DoS       Denial of Service 
      FEC       Forwarding Equivalence Class 
      GMPLS     Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
      GRE       Generic Routing Encapsulation 
      ICI       InterCarrier Interconnect 
      ICMP      Internet Control Message Protocol 
      ICMPv6    ICMP in IP Version 6 
      IGP       Interior Gateway Protocol 
      IKE       Internet Key Exchange 
      IP        Internet Protocol 
      IPsec     IP Security 
      IPVPN     IP-based VPN 
      LDP       Label Distribution Protocol 
      L2        Layer 2 
      L2TP      Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol 
      L3        Layer 3 
      LMP       Link Management Protocol 
      LSP       Label Switched Path 
      LSR       Label Switching Router 
      MD5       Message Digest Algorithm 
      MPLS      MultiProtocol Label Switching 
      MP-BGP    Multi-Protocol BGP 
      NTP       Network Time Protocol 
      OAM       Operations, Administration, and Management 
      PCE       Path Computation Element 
      PE        Provider-Edge device 
      PPVPN     Provider-Provisioned Virtual Private Network 
      PSN       Packet-Switched Network 
      PW        Pseudowire 
      QoS       Quality of Service 
      RR        Route Reflector 
      RSVP      Resource Reservation Protocol 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      7 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
      RSVP-TE   Resource Reservation Protocol with Traffic Engineering 
                     Extensions 
      SLA       Service Level Agreement 
      SNMP      Simple Network Management Protocol 
      SP        Service Provider 
      SSH       Secure Shell 
      SSL       Secure Sockets Layer 
      SYN       Synchronize packet in TCP 
      TCP       Transmission Control Protocol 
      TDM       Time Division Multiplexing 
      TE        Traffic Engineering 
      TLS       Transport Layer Security 
      ToS       Type of Service 
      TTL       Time-To-Live 
      UDP       User Datagram Protocol 
      VC        Virtual Circuit 
      VPN       Virtual Private Network 
      WG        Working Group of IETF 
      WSS       Web Services Security 
    
    
3. Security Reference Models 
   This section defines a reference model for security in MPLS/GMPLS 
   networks.  
    
   A MPLS/GMPLS core network is defined here as the central network 
   infrastructure (P and PE routers). A MPLS/GMPLS core network 
   consists of one or more SP networks. All network elements in the 
   core are under the operational control of one or more MPLS/GMPLS 
   SPs. Even if the MPLS/GMPLS core is provided by several SPs, 
   towards the end users it appears as a single zone of trust. 
   However, when several SPs together provide a MPLS/GMPLS core, each 
   SP still needs to secure itself against the other SPs.  
    
   A MPLS/GMPLS end user is a company, institution, or residential 
   client of the SP.  
    
   This document defines each MPLS/GMPLS core in a single domain to be 
   a trusted zone. A primary concern is about security aspects that 
   relate to breaches of security from the "outside" of a trusted zone 
   to the "inside" of this zone. Figure 1 depicts the concept of 
   trusted zones within the MPLS/GMPLS framework.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      8 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
 
                      /-------------\        
   +------------+    /               \         +------------+ 
   | MPLS/GMPLS +---/                 \--------+     MPLS   | 
   | user          |  MPLS/GMPLS Core  |             user   | 
   | site       +---\                 /XXX-----+     site   | 
   +------------+    \               / XXX     +------------+ 
                      \-------------/  | | 
                                       | | 
                                       | +------\ 
                                       +--------/  "Internet" 
    
        MPLS/GMPLS Core with user connections and Internet connection 
    
   Figure 1: The MPLS/GMPLS trusted zone model. 
    
    
   The trusted zone is the MPLS/GMPLS core in a single AS within a 
   single Service Provider.  
    
   The boundaries of a trust domain should be carefully defined when 
   analyzing the security property of each individual network, e.g., 
   the boundaries can be at the link termination, remote peers, areas, 
   or quite commonly, ASes. 
    
   In principle, the trusted zones should be separate; however, 
   typically MPLS core networks also offer Internet access, in which 
   case a transit point (marked with "XXX" in Figure 1) is defined. In 
   the case of MPLS/GMPLS inter-provider connections, the trusted zone 
   of each provider ends at the respective ASBRs (ASBR1 and ASBR2 for 
   Provider A, ASBR3 and ASBR4 for Provider B). 
    
   A key requirement of MPLS and GMPLS networks is that the security 
   of the trusted zone not be compromised by interconnecting the 
   MPLS/GMPLS core infrastructure with another provider's core 
   (MPLS/GMPLS or non-MPLS/GMPLS), the Internet, or end users.  
    
   In addition, neighbors may be trusted or untrusted. Neighbors may 
   be authorized or unauthorized. Even though a neighbor may be 
   authorized for communication, it may not be trusted. For example, 
   when connecting with another provider's ASBRs to set up inter-AS 
   LSPs, the other provider is considered an untrusted but authorized 
   neighbor. 
    
    
    
    
 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      9 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
                 
                +---------------+        +----------------+ 
                |               |        |                | 
                | MPLS/GMPLS   ASBR1----ASBR3  MPLS/GMPLS | 
          CE1--PE1   Network    |        |     Network   PE2--CE2 
                | Provider A   ASBR2----ASBR4  Provider B | 
                |               |        |                | 
                +---------------+        +----------------+ 
                 
        
   For Provider A: 
        Trusted Zone: Provider A MPSL/GMPLS network 
        Trusted neighbors: PE1, ASBR1, ASBR2 
        Authorized but untrusted neighbor: provider B 
        Unauthorized neighbors: CE1, CE2 
 
   Figure 2. MPLS/GMPLS trusted zone and authorized neighbor. 
 
    
   All aspects of network security independent of whether a network is 
   a MPLS/GMPLS network are out of scope. For example, attacks from 
   the Internet to a user's web-server connected through the 
   MPLS/GMPLS network are not considered here, unless the way the 
   MPLS/GMPLS network is provisioned could make a difference to the 
   security of this user's server. 
 
4. Security Threats 
    
   This section discusses the various network security threats that 
   may endanger MPLS/GMPLS networks.  The discussion is limited to 
   those threats that are unique to MPLS/GMPLS networks or that affect 
   MPLS/GMPLS network in unique ways. 
    
   A successful attack on a particular MPLS/GMPLS network or on a SP's 
   MPLS/GMPLS infrastructure may cause one or more of the following 
   ill effects: 
    
    - Observation, modification, or deletion of a provider's or user's 
      data. 
    - Replay of a provider's or user's data. 
    - Injection of inauthentic data into a provider's or user's 
      traffic stream. 
    - Traffic pattern analysis on a provider's or user's traffic. 
    - Disruption of a provider's or user's connectivity. 
    - Degradation of a provider's service quality. 
    


     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      10 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   It is useful to consider that threats, whether malicious or 
   accidental, may come from different categories of sources.  For 
   example they may come from: 
    
    - Other users whose services are provided by the same MPLS/GMPLS  
      core. 
    - The MPLS/GMPLS SP or persons working for it. 
    - Other persons who obtain physical access to a MPLS/GMPLS SP's 
   site. 
    - Other persons who use social engineering methods to influence  
      the behavior of a SP's personnel. 
    - Users of the MPLS/GMPLS network itself, e.g., intra-VPN threats.   
      (Such threats are beyond the scope of this document.) 
    - Others, e.g., attackers from the Internet at large. 
    - Other SPs in the case of MPLS/GMPLS Inter- 
      provider connection. The core of the other provider may or may  
      not be using MPLS/GMPLS. 
    - Those who create, deliver, install, and maintain software for  
      network equipment. 
    
    
   Given that security is generally a tradeoff between expense and 
   risk, it is also useful to consider the likelihood of different 
   attacks occurring.  There is at least a perceived difference in the 
   likelihood of most types of attacks being successfully mounted in 
   different environments, such as: 
    
    - A MPLS/GMPLS core inter-connecting with another provider's core 
    - A MPLS/GMPLS configuration transiting the public Internet  
    
   Most types of attacks become easier to mount and hence more likely 
   as the shared infrastructure via which service is provided expands 
   from a single SP to multiple cooperating SPs to the global 
   Internet.  Attacks that may not be of sufficient likeliness to 
   warrant concern in a closely controlled environment often merit 
   defensive measures in broader, more open environments. In closed 
   communities, it is often practical to deal with misbehavior after 
   the fact: an employee can be disciplined, for example. 
    
   The following sections discuss specific types of exploits that 
   threaten MPLS/GMPLS networks. 
    
   4.1. Attacks on the Control Plane 
    
   This category encompasses attacks on the control structures 
   operated by the SP with MPLS/GMPLS cores. 
    

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      11 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
4.1.1. LSP creation by an unauthorized element 
 
   The unauthorized element can be a local CE or a router in another 
   domain.  An unauthorized element can generate MPLS signaling 
   messages.  At the least, this can result in extra control plane and 
   forwarding state, and if successful, network bandwidth could be 
   reserved unnecessarily. This may also result in theft of service 
   and loss of revenue. 
    
4.1.2. LSP message interception 
    
   This threat might be accomplished by monitoring network traffic, 
   for example, after a physical intrusion. Without physical 
   intrusion, it could be accomplished with an unauthorized software 
   modification. Also many technologies such as terrestrial microwave, 
   satellite, or free-space optical could be intercepted without 
   physical intrusion. If successful, it could provide information 
   leading to label spoofing attacks.  It also raises confidentiality 
   issues. 
    
4.1.3. Attacks against RSVP-TE 
 
   RSVP-TE, described in [RFC3209], is the control protocol used to 
   set up GMPLS and traffic engineered MPLS tunnels. 
    
   There are two major types of Denial of Service (DoS) attacks 
   against a MPLS domain based on RSVP-TE. The attacker may set up 
   numerous unauthorized LSPs or may send a storm of RSVP messages.  
   It has been demonstrated that unprotected routers running RSVP can 
   be effectively disabled by both types of DoS attacks. 
    
   These attacks may even be combined, by using the unauthorized LSPs 
   to transport additional RSVP (or other) messages across routers 
   where they might otherwise be filtered out.  RSVP attacks can be 
   launched against adjacent routers at the border with the attacker, 
   or against non-adjacent routers within the MPLS domain, if there is 
   no effective mechanism to filter them out. 
    
4.1.4. Attacks against LDP 
    
   LDP, described in [RFC3036], is the control protocol used to set up 
   MPLS tunnels without TE. 
    
   There are two significant types of attack against LDP.  An 
   unauthorized network element can establish a LDP session by sending 
   LDP Hello and LDP Init messages, leading to the potential setup of 
   a LSP, as well as accompanying LDP state table consumption.  Even 

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      12 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   without successfully establishing LSPs, an attacker can launch a 
   DoS attack in the form of a storm of LDP Hello messages or LDP TCP 
   Syn messages, leading to high CPU utilization on the target router. 
 
    
4.1.5. Denial of Service Attacks on the Network Infrastructure 
    
   DoS attacks could be accomplished through a MPLS signaling storm, 
   resulting in high CPU utilization and possibly leading to control 
   plane resource starvation. 
    
   Control plane DoS attacks can be mounted specifically against the 
   mechanisms the SPuses to provide various services, or against the 
   general infrastructure of the service provider, e.g., P routers or 
   shared aspects of PE routers.  (An attack against the general 
   infrastructure is within the scope of this document only if the 
   attack can occur in relation with the MPLS/GMPLS infrastructure; 
   otherwise is not a MPLS/GMPLS-specific issue.) 
    
   The attacks described in the following sections may each have 
   denial of service as one of their effects.  Other DoS attacks are 
   also possible. 
    
4.1.6. Attacks on the SP's MPLS/GMPLS Equipment via Management 
Interfaces 
    
   This includes unauthorized access to a SP's infrastructure 
   equipment, for example to reconfigure the equipment or to extract 
   information (statistics, topology, etc.) pertaining to the network. 
 
4.1.7. Social Engineering Attacks on the SP's Infrastructure 
 
   Attacks in which the service provider network is reconfigured or 
   damaged, or in which confidential information is improperly 
   disclosed, may be mounted by manipulation of a SP's personnel. 
   These types of attacks are MPLS/GMPLS-specific if they affect 
   MPLS/GMPLS-serving mechanisms. 
    
    
4.1.8. Cross-Connection of Traffic between Users 
    
   This refers to the event in which expected isolation between 
   separate users (who may be VPN users) is breached.  This includes 
   cases such as: 
    
    - A site being connected into the "wrong" VPN 
    - Traffic being replicated and sent to an unauthorized user 
    - Two or more VPNs being improperly merged together 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      13 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
    - A point-to-point VPN connecting the wrong two points 
    - Any packet or frame being improperly delivered outside the VPN 
      to which it belongs 
    
   Mis-connection or cross-connection of VPNs may be caused by service 
   provider or equipment vendor error, or by the malicious action of 
   an attacker. The breach may be physical (e.g., PE-CE links mis-
   connected) or logical (e.g., improper device configuration). 
    
   Anecdotal evidence suggests that the cross-connection threat is one 
   of the largest security concerns of users (or would-be users). 
    
4.1.9. Attacks against Routing Protocols 
    
   This encompasses attacks against underlying routing protocols that 
   are run by the SP and that directly support the MPLS/GMPLS core.  
   (Attacks against the use of routing protocols for the distribution 
   of backbone routes are beyond the scope of this document.)  
   Specific attacks against popular routing protocols have been widely 
   studied and described in [RFC4593]. 
    
4.1.10. Other Attacks on Control Traffic 
    
   Besides routing and management protocols (covered separately in the 
   previous sections), a number of other control protocols may be 
   directly involved in delivering services by the MPLS/GMPLS core. 
   These include but may not be limited to: 
    
    - MPLS signaling (LDP, RSVP-TE) discussed above in subsections  
      4.1.4 and 4.1.3 
    - PCE signaling 
    - IPsec signaling (IKE and IKEv2) 
    - ICMP and ICMPv6 
    - L2TP 
    - BGP-based membership discovery 
    - Database-based membership discovery (e.g., RADIUS) 
    - Other protocols that may be important to the control  
      infrastructure, e.g., DNS, LMP, NTP, SNMP, and GRE. 
    
   Attacks might subvert or disrupt the activities of these protocols, 
   for example via impersonation or DoS. 
    
    
   4.2. Attacks on the Data Plane 
    
   This category encompasses attacks on the provider's or end user's 
   data.  Note that from the MPLS/GMPLS network end user's point of 
   view, some of this might be control plane traffic, e.g. routing 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      14 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   protocols running from user site A to user site B via a L2 or L3 
   connection, which may be some type of VPN. 
    
    
4.2.1. Unauthorized Observation of Data Traffic 
    
   This refers to "sniffing" provider or end user packets and 
   examining their contents.  This can result in exposure of 
   confidential information.  It can also be a first step in other 
   attacks (described below) in which the recorded data is modified 
   and re-inserted, or simply replayed later. 
    
4.2.2. Modification of Data Traffic 
    
   This refers to modifying the contents of packets as they traverse 
   the MPLS/GMPLS core. 
    
4.2.3. Insertion of Inauthentic Data Traffic: Spoofing and Replay 
    
   Spoofing refers to sending a user or inserting into a data stream 
   packets that do not belong, with the objective of having them 
   accepted by the recipient as legitimate.  Also included in this 
   category is the insertion of copies of once-legitimate packets that 
   have been recorded and replayed. 
    
4.2.4. Unauthorized Deletion of Data Traffic 
    
   This refers to causing packets to be discarded as they traverse the 
   MPLS/GMPLS networks.  This is a specific type of Denial of Service 
   attack. 
    
4.2.5. Unauthorized Traffic Pattern Analysis 
    
   This refers to "sniffing" provider or user packets and examining 
   aspects or meta-aspects of them that may be visible even when the 
   packets themselves are encrypted.  An attacker might gain useful 
   information based on the amount and timing of traffic, packet 
   sizes, source and destination addresses, etc.  For most users, this 
   type of attack is generally considered to be significantly less of 
   a concern than the other types discussed in this section. 
    
4.2.6. Denial of Service Attacks 
    
   Denial of Service (DoS) attacks are those in which an attacker 
   attempts to disrupt or prevent the use of a service by its 
   legitimate users.  Taking network devices out of service, modifying 
   their configuration, or overwhelming them with requests for service 
   are several of the possible avenues for DoS attack. 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      15 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
    
   Overwhelming the network with requests for service, otherwise known 
   as a "resource exhaustion" DoS attack, may target any resource in 
   the network, e.g., link bandwidth, packet forwarding capacity, 
   session capacity for various protocols, CPU power, table size, 
   storage overflows, and so on. 
    
   DoS attacks of the resource exhaustion type can be mounted against 
   the data plane of a particular provider or end user by attempting 
   to insert (spoofing) an overwhelming quantity of inauthentic data 
   into the provider or end user network from the outside of the 
   trusted zone. Potential results might be to exhaust the bandwidth 
   available to that provider or end user or to overwhelm the 
   cryptographic authentication mechanisms of the provider or end 
   user. 
    
   Data plane resource exhaustion attacks can also be mounted by 
   overwhelming the service provider's general (MPLS/GMPLS-
   independent) infrastructure with traffic.  These attacks on the 
   general infrastructure are not usually a MPLS/GMPLS-specific issue, 
   unless the attack is mounted by another MPLS/GMPLS network user 
   from a privileged position.  (E.g., a MPLS/GMPLS network user might 
   be able to monopolize network data plane resources and thus disrupt 
   other users.) 
    
   Many DoS attacks use amplification, whereby the attacker co-opts 
   otherwise innocent parties to increase the effect of the attack. 
   The attacker may, for example, send packets to a broadcast or 
   multicast address with the spoofed source address of the victim, 
   and all of the recipients may then respond to the victim.  
 
 
5. Defensive Techniques for MPLS/GMPLS Networks 
    
   The defensive techniques discussed in this document are intended to 
   describe methods by which some security threats can be addressed.  
   They are not intended as requirements for all MPLS/GMPLS 
   implementations.  The MPLS/GMPLS provider should determine the 
   applicability of these techniques to the provider's specific 
   service offerings, and the end user may wish to assess the value of 
   these techniques to the user's service requirements. The 
   operational environment determines the security requirements. 
   Therefore, protocol designers need to provide a full set of 
   security services, which can be used where appropriate. 
    
   The techniques discussed here include encryption, authentication, 
   filtering, firewalls, access control, isolation, aggregation, and 
   other techniques.  
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      16 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
    
   Often, security is achieved by careful protocol design, rather than 
   by adding a security method. For example, one method of mitigating 
   DoS attacks is to make sure that innocent parties cannot be used to 
   amplify the attack. Security works better when it is "designed in" 
   rather than "added on." 
    
   Nothing is ever 100% secure.  Defense therefore involves protecting 
   against those attacks that are most likely to occur or that have 
   the most direct consequences if successful.  For those attacks that 
   are protected against, absolute protection is seldom achievable; 
   more often it is sufficient just to make the cost of a successful 
   attack greater than what the adversary will be willing or able to 
   expend. 
    
   Successfully defending against an attack does not necessarily mean 
   the attack must be prevented from happening or from reaching its 
   target.  In many cases the network can instead be designed to 
   withstand the attack.  For example, the introduction of inauthentic 
   packets could be defended against by preventing their introduction 
   in the first place, or by making it possible to identify and 
   eliminate them before delivery to the MPLS/GMPLS user's system.  
   The latter is frequently a much easier task. 
    
 
   5.1. Authentication 
    
   To prevent security issues arising from some Denial-of-Service 
   attacks or from malicious or accidental misconfiguration, it is 
   critical that devices in the MPLS/GMPLS should only accept 
   connections or control messages from valid sources.  Authentication 
   refers to methods to ensure that message sources are properly 
   identified by the MPLS/GMPLS devices with which they communicate.  
   This section focuses on identifying the scenarios in which sender 
   authentication is required and recommends authentication mechanisms 
   for these scenarios. 
    
   Cryptographic techniques (authentication, integrity, and 
   encryption) do not protect against some types of denial of service 
   attacks, specifically resource exhaustion attacks based on CPU or 
   bandwidth exhaustion. In fact, the processing required to decrypt 
   or check authentication may, in the case of software-based 
   cryptographic processing, in some cases increase the effect of 
   these resource exhaustion attacks. With a hardware cryptographic 
   accelerator, attack packets can be dropped at line speed without a 
   cost of software cycles. Cryptographic techniques may, however, be 
   useful against resource exhaustion attacks based on exhaustion of 
   state information (e.g., TCP SYN attacks). 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      17 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
    
   The MPLS user plane, as presently defined, is not amenable to 
   source authentication as there are no source identifiers in the 
   MPLS packet to authenticate. The MPLS label is only locally 
   meaningful, and it identifies a downstream semantic rather than an 
   upstream source. 
     
   When the MPLS payload carries identifiers that may be authenticated 
   (e.g., IP packets), authentication may be carried out at the client 
   level, but this does not help the MPLS SP, as these client 
   identifiers belong to an external, untrusted network. 
     

  5.1.1.         Management System Authentication 
 
   Management system authentication includes the authentication of a 
   PE to a centrally-managed network management or directory server 
   when directory-based "auto-discovery" is used.  It also includes 
   authentication of a CE to the configuration server, when a 
   configuration server system is used. 
 

  5.1.2.         Peer-to-Peer Authentication 
 
   Peer-to-peer authentication includes peer authentication for 
   network control protocols (e.g., LDP, BGP, etc.), and other peer 
   authentication (i.e., authentication of one IPsec security gateway 
   by another). 
    

  5.1.3.         Cryptographic techniques for authenticating identity 
    
   Cryptographic techniques offer several mechanisms for 
   authenticating the identity of devices or individuals. These 
   include the use of shared secret keys, one-time keys generated by 
   accessory devices or software, user-ID and password pairs, and a 
   range of public-private key systems. Another approach is to use a 
   hierarchical Certification Authority system to provide digital 
   certificates. 
    
   This section describes or provides references to the specific 
   cryptographic approaches for authenticating identity.  These 
   approaches provide secure mechanisms for most of the authentication 
   scenarios required in securing a MPLS/GMPLS network. 
    
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      18 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
    
   5.2. Cryptographic techniques 
    
   MPLS/GMPLS defenses against a wide variety of attacks can be 
   enhanced by the proper application of cryptographic techniques.  
   These are the same cryptographic techniques that are applicable to 
   general network communications.  In general, these techniques can 
   provide confidentiality (encryption) of communication between 
   devices, can authenticate the identities of the devices, and can 
   ensure that it will be detected if the data being communicated is 
   changed during transit. 
    
   Several aspects of authentication are addressed in some detail in a 
   separate "Authentication" section. 
    
   Cryptographic methods add complexity to a service and thus, for a 
   few reasons, may not be the most practical solution in every case. 
   Cryptography adds an additional computational burden to devices, 
   which may reduce the number of user connections that can be handled 
   on a device or otherwise reduce the capacity of the device, 
   potentially driving up the provider's costs.  Typically, 
   configuring encryption services on devices adds to the complexity 
   of their configuration and adds labor cost. Some key management 
   system is usually needed. Packet sizes are typically increased when 
   the packets are encrypted or have integrity checks or replay 
   counters added, increasing the network traffic load and adding to 
   the likelihood of packet fragmentation with its increased overhead.  
   (This packet length increase can often be mitigated to some extent 
   by data compression techniques, but at the expense of additional 
   computational burden.) Finally, some providers may employ enough 
   other defensive techniques, such as physical isolation or filtering 
   and firewall techniques, that they may not perceive additional 
   benefit from encryption techniques. 
    
   Users may wish to provide confidentiality end to end. Generally, 
   encrypting for confidentiality must be accompanied with 
   cryptographic integrity checks to prevent certain active attacks 
   against the encrypted communications. On today's processors, 
   encryption and integrity checks run extremely quickly, but key 
   management may be more demanding in terms of both computational and 
   administrative overhead. 
    
   The trust model among the MPLS/GMPLS user, the MPLS/GMPLS provider, 
   and other parts of the network is a major element in determining 
   the applicability of cryptographic protection for any specific 
   MPLS/GMPLS implementation. In particular, it determines where 
   cryptographic protection should be applied: 

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      19 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   -  If the data path between the user's site and the 
      provider's PE is not trusted, then it may be used on the 
      PE-CE link. 
   -  If some part of the backbone network is not trusted, 
      particularly in implementations where traffic may travel 
      across the Internet or multiple providers' networks, then 
      the PE-PE traffic may be cryptographically protected. One 
      also should consider cases where L1 technology may be 
      vulnerable to eavesdropping. 
   -  If the user does not trust any zone outside of its 
      premises, it may require end-to-end or CE-CE cryptographic 
      protection. This fits within the scope of this MPLS/GMPLS 
      security framework when the CE is provisioned by the 
      MPLS/GMPLS provider. 
   -  If the user requires remote access to its site from a 
      system at a location that is not a customer location (for 
      example, access by a traveler) there may be a requirement 
      for cryptographically protecting the traffic between that 
      system and an access point or a customer's site. If the 
      MPLS/GMPLS provider supplies the access point, then the 
      customer must cooperate with the provider to handle the 
      access control services for the remote users. These access 
      control services are usually protected cryptographically, 
      as well. 
    
   Access control usually starts with authentication of the 
   entity. If cryptographic services are part of the scenario, 
   then it is important to bind the authentication to the key 
   management. Otherwise the protocol is vulnerable to being 
   hijacked between the authentication and key management. 
    
    
   Although CE-CE cryptographic protection can provide integrity and 
   confidentiality against third parties, if the MPLS/GMPLS provider 
   has complete management control over the CE (encryption) devices, 
   then it may be possible for the provider to gain access to the 
   user's traffic or internal network. Encryption devices could 
   potentially be reconfigured to use null encryption, bypass 
   cryptographic processing altogether, reveal internal configuration, 
   or provide some means of sniffing or diverting unencrypted traffic. 
   Thus an implementation using CE-CE encryption needs to consider the 
   trust relationship between the MPLS/GMPLS user and provider. 
   MPLS/GMPLS users and providers may wish to negotiate a service 
   level agreement (SLA) for CE-CE encryption that provides an 
   acceptable demarcation of responsibilities for management of 
   cryptographic protection on the CE devices. The demarcation may 
   also be affected by the capabilities of the CE devices. For 
   example, the CE might support some partitioning of management, a 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      20 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   configuration lock-down ability, or shared capability to verify the 
   configuration. In general, the MPLS/GMPLS user needs to have a 
   fairly high level of trust that the MPLS/GMPLS provider will 
   properly provision and manage the CE devices, if the managed CE-CE 
   model is used. 
    
    

  5.2.1.         IPsec in MPLS/GMPLS 
 
   IPsec [RFC4301] [RFC4302] [RFC4835] [RFC4306] [RFC2411] is the 
   security protocol of choice for encryption at the IP layer (Layer 
   3).  IPsec provides robust security for IP traffic between pairs of 
   devices.  Non-IP traffic such as IS-IS routing must be converted to 
   IP (e.g., by encapsulation) in order to use IPsec.  
 
   In the MPLS/GMPLS model, IPsec can be employed to protect IP 
   traffic between PEs, between a PE and a CE, or from CE to CE.  CE-
   to-CE IPsec may be employed in either a provider-provisioned or a 
   user-provisioned model.  Likewise, IPsec protection of data 
   performed within the user's site is outside the scope of this 
   document, because it is simply handled as user data by the 
   MPLS/GMPLS core. However, if the SP performs compression, pre-
   encryption will have a major effect on that operation. 
    
   IPsec does not itself specify an encryption algorithm.  It can use 
   a variety of integrity or confidentiality algorithms (or even 
   combined integrity and confidentiality algorithms), with various 
   key lengths, such as AES encryption or AES message integrity 
   checks.  There are trade-offs between key length, computational 
   burden, and the level of security of the encryption.  A full 
   discussion of these trade-offs is beyond the scope of this 
   document.  In practice, any currently recommended IPsec protection 
   offers enough security to reduce the likelihood of its being 
   directly targeted by an attacker substantially; other weaker links 
   in the chain of security are likely to be attacked first.  
   MPLS/GMPLS users may wish to use a Service Level Agreement (SLA) 
   specifying the SP's responsibility for ensuring data integrity and 
   confidentiality, rather than analyzing the specific encryption 
   techniques used in the MPLS/GMPLS service. 
    
   Encryption algorithms generally come with two parameters: mode such 
   as Cipher Block Chaining and key length such as AES-192. (This 
   should not be confused with two other senses in which the word 
   "mode" is used: IPsec itself can be used in Tunnel Mode or 
   Transport Mode, and IKE [version 1] uses Main Mode, Aggressive 

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      21 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   Mode, or Quick Mode). It should be stressed that IPsec encryption 
   without an integrity check is a state of sin. 
    
   For many of the MPLS/GMPLS provider's network control messages and 
   some user requirements, cryptographic authentication of messages 
   without encryption of the contents of the message may provide 
   appropriate security.  Using IPsec, authentication of messages is 
   provided by the Authentication Header (AH) or through the use of 
   the Encapsulating Security Protocol (ESP) with NULL encryption.  
   Where control messages require integrity but do not use IPsec, 
   other cryptographic authentication methods are often available.  
   Message authentication methods currently considered to be secure 
   are based on hashed message authentication codes (HMAC) [RFC2104] 
   implemented with a secure hash algorithm such as Secure Hash 
   Algorithm 1 (SHA-1) [RFC3174]. No attacks against HMAC SHA-1 are 
   likely to play out in the near future, but it is possible that 
   people will soon find SHA-1 collisions. Thus, it is important that 
   mechanisms be designed to be flexible about the choice of hash 
   functions and message integrity checks. Also, many of these 
   mechanisms do not include a convenient way to manage and update 
   keys.  
    
   A mechanism to provide a combination of confidentiality, data 
   origin authentication, and connectionless integrity is the use of 
   AES in CCM (Counter with CBC-MAC) mode (RFC 4309) [RFC4309], with 
   an explicit initialization vector (IV), as the IPsec ESP. Recently, 
   GCM is rapidly replacing CCM as the preferred method: [RFC4103]. 
    
   MPLS and GMPLS, which provide differentiated services based on 
   traffic type, may encounter some conflicts with IPsec encryption of 
   traffic.  Because encryption hides the content of the packets, it 
   may not be possible to differentiate the encrypted traffic in the 
   same manner as unencrypted traffic.  Although DiffServ markings are 
   copied to the IPsec header and can provide some differentiation, 
   not all traffic types can be accommodated by this mechanism. Using 
   IPsec without IKE or IKEv2 (the better choice) is not advisable. 
   IKEv2 provides IPsec Security Association creation and management, 
   entity authentication, key agreement, and key update. It works with 
   a variety of authentication methods including pre-shared keys, 
   public key certificates, and EAP. If DoS attacks against IKEv2 are 
   considered an important threat to mitigate, the cookie-based anti-
   spoofing feature of IKEv2 should be used. IKEv2 has its own set of 
   cryptographic methods, but any of the default suites specified in 
   [RFC4308] or [RFC4869] provides more than adequate security.  

  5.2.2.         Encryption for device configuration and management 
 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      22 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   For configuration and management of MPLS/GMPLS devices, encryption 
   and authentication of the management connection at a level 
   comparable to that provided by IPsec is desirable.   
    
   Several methods of transporting MPLS/GMPLS device management 
   traffic offer security and confidentiality. 
   -  Secure Shell (SSH) offers protection for TELNET [STD-8] or 
      terminal-like connections to allow device configuration. 
   -  SNMPv3 [STD62] provides encrypted and authenticated protection 
      for SNMP-managed devices. 
   -  Transport Layer Security (TLS) [RFC4346] and the closely-related 
      Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) are widely used for securing HTTP-
      based communication, and thus can provide support for most XML- 
      and SOAP-based device management approaches. 
   -  Since 2004, there has been extensive work proceeding in several 
      organizations (OASIS, W3C, WS-I, and others) on securing device 
      management traffic within a "Web Services" framework, using a 
      wide variety of security models, and providing support for 
      multiple security token formats, multiple trust domains, 
      multiple signature formats, and multiple encryption 
      technologies.   
   -  IPsec provides the services with integrity and confidentiality 
      at the network layer. With regards to device management, its 
      current use is primarily focused on in-band management of user-
      managed IPsec gateway devices. 
   -  There are recent work in ISMS WG (Integrated Security Model for 
      SNMP Working Group) to define how to use SSH to secure SNMP, due 
      to the limited deployment of SNMPv3; and the possibility of 
      using Kerberos, particularly for interfaces like TELNET, where 
      client code exists. 
 
Cryptographic Techniques for MPLS Pseudowires 
    

  5.2.3.         5.1.3  Security Considerations for MPLS Pseudowires 
  
   In addition to IP traffic, MPLS networks may be used to transport 
   other services such as Ethernet, ATM, Frame Relay, and TDM. This is 
   done by setting up pseudowires (PWs) that tunnel the native service 
   through the MPLS core by encapsulating at the edges. The PWE 
   architecture is defined in [RFC3985].  
     
   PW tunnels may be set up using the PWE control protocol based on 
   LDP [RFC4447], and thus security considerations for LDP will most 
   likely be applicable to the PWE3 control protocol as well.   
    
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      23 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   PW user packets contain at least one MPLS label (the PW label) and 
   may contain one or more MPLS tunnel labels.  After the label stack 
   there is a four-byte control word (which is optional for some PW 
   types), followed by the native service payload.  It must be 
   stressed that encapsulation of MPLS PW packets in IP for the 
   purpose of enabling use of IPsec mechanisms is not a valid option. 
     
   The PW client traffic may be secured by use of mechanisms beyond 
   the scope of this document.  
    
    
5.2.4. End-to-End versus Hop-by-Hop Protection Tradeoffs in 
MPLS/GMPLS 
 
   In MPLS/GMPLS, cryptographic protection could potentially be 
   applied to the MPLS/GMPLS traffic at several different places.  
   This section discusses some of the tradeoffs in implementing 
   encryption in several different connection topologies among 
   different devices within a MPLS/GMPLS network. 
    
   Cryptographic protection typically involves a pair of devices that 
   protect the traffic passing between them.  The devices may be 
   directly connected (over a single "hop"), or intervening devices 
   may transport the protected traffic between the pair of devices.  
   The extreme cases involve using protection between every adjacent 
   pair of devices along a given path (hop-by-hop), or using 
   protection only between the end devices along a given path (end-to-
   end).  To keep this discussion within the scope of this document, 
   the latter ("end-to-end") case considered here is CE-to-CE rather 
   than fully end-to-end. 
    
   Figure 3 depicts a simplified topology showing the Customer Edge 
   (CE) devices, the Provider Edge (PE) devices, and a variable number 
   (three are shown) of Provider core (P) devices, which might be 
   present along the path between two sites in a single VPN operated 
   by a single service provider (SP). 
    
    
   Site_1---CE---PE---P---P---P---PE---CE---Site_2 
    
   Figure 3: Simplified topology traversing through MPLS/GMPLS core. 
    
    
   Within this simplified topology, and assuming that the P devices 
   are not involved with cryptographic protection, four basic, 


     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      24 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   feasible configurations exist for protecting connections among the 
   devices: 
    
   1) Site-to-site (CE-to-CE) - Apply confidentiality or integrity 
   services between the two CE devices, so that traffic will be 
   protected throughout the SP's network. 
    
   2) Provider edge-to-edge (PE-to-PE) - Apply confidentiality or 
   integrity services between the two PE devices.  Unprotected traffic 
   is received at one PE from the customer's CE, then it is protected 
   for transmission through the SP's network to the other PE, and 
   finally it is decrypted or checked for integrity and sent to the 
   other CE. 
    
   3) Access link (CE-to-PE) - Apply confidentiality or integrity 
   services between the CE and PE on each side or on only one side. 
    
   4) Configurations 2 and 3 above can also be combined, with 
   confidentiality or integrity running from CE to PE, then PE to PE, 
   and then PE to CE. 
    
   Among the four feasible configurations, key tradeoffs in 
   considering encryption include: 
    
   - Vulnerability to link eavesdropping or tampering - assuming an 
   attacker can 
      observe or modify data in transit on the links, would it be 
   protected by encryption? 
    
   - Vulnerability to device compromise - assuming an attacker can get 
   access to a device (or freely alter its configuration), would the 
   data be protected? 
    
   - Complexity of device configuration and management - given the 
   number of sites per VPN customer as Nce and the number of PEs 
   participating in a given VPN as Npe, how many device configurations 
   need to be created or maintained, and how do those configurations 
   scale? 
    
   - Processing load on devices - how many cryptographic operations 
   must be performed given N packets? - This raises considerations of 
   device capacity and perhaps end-to-end delay. 
    
   - Ability of the SP to provide enhanced services (QoS, firewall, 
   intrusion detection, etc.) - Can the SP inspect the data to provide 
   these services? 
    
   These tradeoffs are discussed for each configuration, below: 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      25 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
    
   1) Site-to-site (CE-to-CE) 
    
   Link eavesdropping or tampering - protected on all links 
   Device compromise - vulnerable to CE compromise 
   Complexity - single administration, responsible for one device per 
        site (Nce devices), but overall configuration per VPN scales as 
        Nce**2.  
        Though the complexity may be reduced: 1) In practice, as Nce 
        grows, the number of VPNs falls off from being a full clique; 
        2) If the CEs run an automated key management protocol, then 
        they should be able to set up and tear down secured VPNs 
        without any intervention 
   Processing load - on each of two CEs, each packet is either 
        cryptographically processed (2P), though the protection may be 
        "integrity check only" or "integrity check plus encryption." 
   Enhanced services - severely limited; typically only Diffserv 
        markings are visible to the SP, allowing some QoS services 
    
   2) Provider edge-to-edge (PE-to-PE) 
    
   Link eavesdropping or tampering - vulnerable on CE-PE links; 
        protected on SP's network links 
   Device compromise - vulnerable to CE or PE compromise 
   Complexity - single administration, Npe devices to configure.  
        (Multiple sites may share a PE device so Npe is typically much 
        less than Nce.)  Scalability of the overall configuration 
        depends on the PPVPN type: If the cryptographic protection is 
        separate per VPN context, it scales as Npe**2 per customer VPN.  
        If it is per-PE, it scales as Npe**2 for all customer VPNs 
        combined. 
   Processing load - on each of two PEs, each packet is 
        cryptographically processed (2P). Note that this 2P is a 
        different 2P from case (1), because only PEs are in 
        consideration here. 
   Enhanced services - full; SP can apply any enhancements based on 
        detailed view of traffic 
    
   3) Access link (CE-to-PE) 
    
   Link eavesdropping or tampering - protected on CE-PE link; 
        vulnerable on SP's network links 
   Device compromise - vulnerable to CE or PE compromise 
   Complexity - two administrations (customer and SP) with device 
        configuration on each side (Nce + Npe devices to configure) but 
        because there is no mesh the overall configuration scales as 
        Nce. 

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      26 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   Processing load - on each of two CEs, each packet is 
        cryptographically processed, plus on each of two PEs, each 
        packet is cryptographically processed (4P) 
   Enhanced services - full; SP can apply any enhancements based on 
        detailed view of traffic 
    
   4) Combined Access link and PE-to-PE (essentially hop-by-hop) 
    
   Link eavesdropping or tampering  - protected on all links 
   Device compromise - vulnerable to CE or PE compromise 
   Complexity - two administrations (customer and SP) with device 
        configuration on each side (Nce + Npe devices to configure).  
        Scalability of the overall configuration depends on the PPVPN 
        type: If the cryptographic processing is separate per VPN 
        context, it scales as Npe**2 per customer VPN.  If it is per-
        PE, it scales as Npe**2 for all customer VPNs combined. 
   Processing load - on each of two CEs, each packet is 
        cryptographically processed, plus on each of two PEs, each 
        packet is cryptographically processed twice (6P) 
   Enhanced services - full; SP can apply any enhancements based on 
        detailed view of traffic 
    
   Given the tradeoffs discussed above, a few conclusions can be made: 
    
   - Configurations 2 and 3 are subsets of 4 that may be appropriate 
   alternatives to 4 under certain threat models; the remainder of 
   these conclusions compare 1 (CE-to-CE) versus 4 (combined access 
   links and PE-to-PE). 
    
   - If protection from link eavesdropping or tampering is all that is 
   important, then configurations 1 and 4 are equivalent. 
    
   - If protection from device compromise is most important and the 
   threat is to the CE devices, both cases are equivalent; if the 
   threat is to the PE devices, configuration 1 is better. 
    
   - If reducing complexity is most important, and the size of the 
   network is small, configuration 1 is better.  Otherwise 
   configuration 4 is better because rather than a mesh of CE devices 
   it requires a smaller mesh of PE devices.  Also, under some PPVPN 
   approaches the scaling of 4 is further improved by sharing the same 
   PE-PE mesh across all VPN contexts. The scaling advantage of 4 may 
   be increased or decreased in any given situation if the CE devices 
   are simpler to configure than the PE devices, or vice-versa. 
    
   - If the overall processing load is a key factor, then 1 is better, 
   unless the PEs come with a hardware encryption accelerator and the 
   CEs do not. 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      27 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
    
   - If the availability of enhanced services support from the SP is 
   most important, then 4 is best. 
    
   As a quick overall conclusion, CE-to-CE protection is better 
   against device compromise, but this comes at the cost of enhanced 
   services and at the cost of operational complexity due to the 
   Order(n**2) scaling of a larger mesh.   
    
   This analysis of site-to-site vs. hop-by-hop tradeoffs does not 
   explicitly include cases of multiple providers cooperating to 
   provide a PPVPN service, public Internet VPN connectivity, or 
   remote access VPN service, but many of the tradeoffs will be 
   similar. 
    
   In addition to the simplified models, the following should also be 
   considered:  
   - There are reasons, perhaps, to protect a specific P-to-P or PE-
   to-P. 
   - There may be reasons to do multiple encryptions over certain 
   segments. One may be using an encrypted wireless link under our 
   IPsec VPN to access a SSL-secured web site to download encrypted 
   email attachments: four layers.) 
   - It may be that, for example, cryptographic integrity checks are 
   applied end to end, and confidentiality over a shorter span. 
   - Different cryptographic protection may be required for control 
   protocols and data traffic. 
   - Attention needs to be given to how auxiliary traffic is 
   protected, e.g., the ICMPv6 packets that flow back during PMTU 
   discovery, among other examples. 
    
   5.3. Access Control techniques 
    
   Access control techniques include packet-by-packet or packet-flow-
   by-packet-flow access control by means of filters and firewalls, as 
   well as by means of admitting a "session" for a control, signaling, 
   or management protocol. Enforcement of access control by isolated 
   infrastructure addresses is discussed in another section of this 
   document. 
    
   In this document, we distinguish between filtering and firewalls 
   based primarily on the direction of traffic flow.  We define 
   filtering as being applicable to unidirectional traffic, while a 
   firewall can analyze and control both sides of a conversation.   
    
   The definition has two significant corollaries: 
   - Routing or traffic flow symmetry: A firewall typically requires 
   routing symmetry, which is usually enforced by locating a firewall 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      28 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   where the network topology assures that both sides of a 
   conversation will pass through the firewall.  A filter can operate 
   upon traffic flowing in one direction, without considering traffic 
   in the reverse direction. Beware that this concept could result in 
   a single point of failure. 
   - Statefulness: Because it receives both sides of a conversation, a 
   firewall may be able to interpret a significant amount of 
   information concerning the state of that conversation and use this 
   information to control access.  A filter can maintain some limited 
   state information on a unidirectional flow of packets, but cannot 
   determine the state of the bi-directional conversation as precisely 
   as a firewall. 
    
5.3.1. Filtering 
 
   It is relatively common for routers to filter data packets. That 
   is, routers can look for particular values in certain fields of the 
   IP or higher level (e.g., TCP or UDP) headers. Packets which 
   matching the criteria associated with a particular filter may 
   either be discarded or given special treatment. Today, not only 
   routers, most end hosts today have filters and every instance of 
   IPsec is also a filter [RFC4301]. 
    
   In discussing filters, it is useful to separate the Filter 
   Characteristics that may be used to determine whether a packet 
   matches a filter from the Packet Actions applied to those packets 
   which matching a particular filter.  
    
   o Filter Characteristics 
    
   Filter characteristics or rules are used to determine whether a 
   particular packet or set of packets matches a particular filter.  
    
   In many cases filter characteristics may be stateless. A stateless 
   filter determines whether a particular packet matches a filter 
   based solely on the filter definition, normal forwarding 
   information (such as the next hop for a packet), and the contents 
   of that individual packet. Typically stateless filters may consider 
   the incoming and outgoing logical or physical interface, 
   information in the IP header, and information in higher layer 
   headers such as the TCP or UDP header. Information in the IP header 
   to be considered may for example include source and destination IP 
   addresses, Protocol field, Fragment Offset, and TOS field in IPv4, 
   Next Header, Extension Headers, Flow label, etc. in IPv6. Filters 
   also may consider fields in the TCP or UDP header such as the Port 
   fields, the SYN field in the TCP header, as well as ICMP and ICMPv6 
   type.  
    
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      29 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   Stateful filtering maintains packet-specific state information, to 
   aid in determining whether a filter has been met. For example, a 
   device might apply stateless filters to the first fragment of a 
   fragmented IP packet. If the filter matches, then the data unit ID 
   may be remembered and other fragments of the same packet may then 
   be considered to match the same filter. Stateful filtering is more 
   commonly done in firewalls, although firewall technology may be 
   added to routers. Data unit ID can also be Fragmentation Extension 
   Header in IPv6. 
    
   o Actions based on Filter Results 
    
   If a packet, or a series of packets, matches a specific filter, 
   then a variety of actions which may be taken based on that match. 
   Examples of such actions include: 
    
     - Discard 
    
   In many cases, filters are set to catch certain undesirable 
   packets. Examples may include packets with forged or invalid source 
   addresses, packets that are part of a DOS or Distributed DoS (DDOS) 
   attack, or packets which are trying to access unallowed resources 
   (such as network management packets from an unauthorized source). 
   Where such filters are activated, it is common to discard the 
   packet or set of packets matching the filter silently. The 
   discarded packets may of course also be counted or logged.  
    
     - Set CoS 
    
   A filter may be used to set the Class of Service associated with 
   the packet.  
    
     - Count packets or bytes 
    
     - Rate Limit 
    
   In some cases the set of packets matching a particular filter may 
   be limited to a specified bandwidth. In this case, packets or bytes 
   would be counted, and would be forwarded normally up to the 
   specified limit. Excess packets may be discarded or may be marked 
   (for example by setting a "discard eligible" bit in the IP ToS 
   field or the MPLS EXP field).  
    
     - Forward and Copy 
    
   It is useful in some cases to forward some set of packets normally, 
   but also to send a copy to a specified other address or interface. 
   For example, this may be used to implement a lawful intercept 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      30 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   capability or to feed selected packets to an Intrusion Detection 
   System.  
    
   o Other Issues related to Use of Packet Filters 
    
   Filtering performance may vary widely according to implementation 
   and the types and number of rules. Without acceptable performance, 
   filtering is not useful.  
        
   The precise definition of "acceptable" may vary from SP to SP, and 
   may depend upon the intended use of the filters. For example, for 
   some uses a filter may be turned on all the time to set CoS, to 
   prevent an attack, or to mitigate the effect of a possible future 
   attack. In this case it is likely that the SP will want the filter 
   to have minimal or no impact on performance. In other cases, a 
   filter may be turned on only in response to a major attack (such as 
   a major DDoS attack). In this case a greater performance impact may 
   be acceptable to some service providers.  
    
   A key consideration with the use of packet filters is that they can 
   provide few options for filtering packets carrying encrypted data.  
   Because the data itself is not accessible, only packet header 
   information or other unencrypted fields can be used for filtering. 
    
5.3.2. Firewalls 
    
   Firewalls provide a mechanism for control over traffic passing 
   between different trusted zones in the MPLS/GMPLS model, or between 
   a trusted zone and an untrusted zone.  Firewalls typically provide 
   much more functionality than filters, because they may be able to 
   apply detailed analysis and logical functions to flows, and not 
   just to individual packets.  They may offer a variety of complex 
   services, such as threshold-driven denial-of-service attack 
   protection, virus scanning, acting as a TCP connection proxy, etc. 
    
   As with other access control techniques, the value of firewalls 
   depends on a clear understanding of the topologies of the 
   MPLS/GMPLS core network, the user networks, and the threat model.  
   Their effectiveness depends on a topology with a clearly defined 
   inside (secure) and outside (not secure). 
    
   Firewalls may be applied to help protect MPLS/GMPLS core network 
   functions from attacks originating from the Internet or from 
   MPLS/GMPLS user sites, but typically other defensive techniques 
   will be used for this purpose. 
    
   Where firewalls are employed as a service to protect user VPN sites 
   from the Internet, different VPN users, and even different sites of 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      31 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   a single VPN user, may have varying firewall requirements.  The 
   overall PPVPN logical and physical topology, along with the 
   capabilities of the devices implementing the firewall services, has 
   a significant effect on the feasibility and manageability of such 
   varied firewall service offerings. 
    
   Another consideration with the use of firewalls is that they can 
   provide few options for handling packets carrying encrypted data.  
   Because the data itself is not accessible, only packet header 
   information, other unencrypted fields, or analysis of the flow of 
   encrypted packets can be used for making decisions on accepting or 
   rejecting encrypted traffic. 
    
   Two approaches are to move the firewall outside of the encrypted 
   part of the path or to register and pre-approve the encrypted 
   session with the firewall.  
    
   Handling DoS attacks has become increasingly important. Useful 
   guidelines include the following: 
   1. Perform ingress filtering everywhere. Upstream prevention is 
   better. 
   2. Be able to filter DoS attack packets at line speed. 
   3. Do not allow oneself to amplify attacks. 
   4. Continue processing legitimate traffic. Over provide for heavy 
   loads. Use diverse locations, technologies, etc. 
    
5.3.3. Access Control to management interfaces 
    
   Most of the security issues related to management interfaces can be 
   addressed through the use of authentication techniques as described 
   in the section on authentication.  However, additional security may 
   be provided by controlling access to management interfaces in other 
   ways. 
    
   The Optical Internetworking Forum has done good work on protecting 
   such interfaces with TLS, SSH, Kerberos, IPsec, WSS, etc. See OIF-
   SMI-01.0 "Security for Management Interfaces to Network Elements" 
   [OIF-SMI-01.0], and "Addendum to the Security for Management 
   Interfaces to Network Elements" [OIF-SMI-02.1]. See also the work 
   in the ISMS WG. 
    
    
   Management interfaces, especially console ports on MPLS/GMPLS 
   devices, may be configured so they are only accessible out-of-band, 
   through a system which is physically or logically separated from 
   the rest of the MPLS/GMPLS infrastructure. 
    

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      32 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   Where management interfaces are accessible in-band within the 
   MPLS/GMPLS domain, filtering or firewalling techniques can be used 
   to restrict unauthorized in-band traffic from having access to 
   management interfaces.  Depending on device capabilities, these 
   filtering or firewalling techniques can be configured either on 
   other devices through which the traffic might pass, or on the 
   individual MPLS/GMPLS devices themselves. 
    
   5.4. Use of Isolated Infrastructure 
 
   One way to protect the infrastructure used for support of 
   MPLS/GMPLS is to separate the resources for support of MPLS/GMPLS 
   services from the resources used for other purposes (such as 
   support of Internet services). In some cases this may use 
   physically separate equipment for VPN services, or even a 
   physically separate network.  
    
   For example, PE-based L3 VPNs may be run on a separate backbone not 
   connected to the Internet, or may make use of separate edge routers 
   from those used to support Internet service. Private IP addresses 
   (local to the provider and non-routable over the Internet) are 
   sometimes used to provide additional separation. 
    
    
   5.5. Use of Aggregated Infrastructure 
    
   In general, it is not feasible to use a completely separate set of 
   resources for support of each service. In fact, one of the main 
   reasons for MPLS/GMPLS enabled services is to allow sharing of 
   resources between multiple users, including multiple VPNs, etc. 
   Thus, even if certain services make use of a separate network from 
   Internet services, nonetheless there will still be multiple 
   MPLS/GMPLS users sharing the same network resources. In some cases 
   MPLS/GMPLS services will share the use of network resources with 
   Internet services or other services.  
    
   It is therefore important for MPLS/GMPLS services to provide 
   protection between resources used by different parties. Thus a 
   well-behaved MPLS/GMPLS user should be protected from possible 
   misbehavior by other users. This requires that limits are placed on 
   the amount of resources used by any one VPN. For example, both 
   control traffic and user data traffic may be rate limited. In some 
   cases or in some parts of the network where a sufficiently large 
   number of queues are available, each VPN (and optionally each VPN 
   and CoS within the VPN) may make use of a separate queue. Control-
   plane resources such as link bandwidth as well as CPU and memory 
   resources may be reserved on a per-VPN basis.  

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      33 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
    
   The techniques used to provide resource protection between multiple 
   users served by the same infrastructure can also be used to protect 
   MPLS/GMPLS networks and services from Internet services.  
    
   In general, the use of aggregated infrastructure allows the service 
   provider to benefit from stochastic multiplexing of multiple bursty 
   flows, and also may in some cases thwart traffic pattern analysis 
   by combining the data from multiple users.  
    
   5.6. Service Provider Quality Control Processes 
    
   Deployment of provider-provisioned VPN services in general requires 
   a relatively large amount of configuration by the SP. For example, 
   the SP needs to configure which VPN each site belongs to, as well 
   as QoS and SLA guarantees. This large amount of required 
   configuration leads to the possibility of misconfiguration.  
    
   It is important for the SP to have operational processes in place 
   to reduce the potential impact of misconfiguration. CE-to-CE 
   authentication may also be used to detect misconfiguration when it 
   occurs.  
    
   5.7. Deployment of Testable MPLS/GMPLS Service.   
    
   This refers to solutions that can be readily tested to make sure 
   they are configured correctly.  For example, for a point-point 
   connection, checking that the intended connectivity is working 
   pretty much ensures that there is not connectivity to some 
   unintended site. 
    
 
6. Monitoring, Detection, and Reporting of Security Attacks 
    
   MPLS/GMPLS network and service may be subject to attacks from a 
   variety of security threats.  Many threats are described in another 
   part of this document.  Many of the defensive techniques described 
   in this document and elsewhere provide significant levels of 
   protection from a variety of threats.  However, in addition to 
   silently employing defensive techniques to protect against attacks, 
   MPLS/GMPLS services can also add value for both providers and 
   customers by implementing security monitoring systems to detect and 
   report on any security attacks which occur, regardless of whether 
   the attacks are effective. 
    
   Attackers often begin by probing and analyzing defenses, so systems 
   that can detect and properly report these early stages of attacks 
   can provide significant benefits. 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      34 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
    
   Information concerning attack incidents, especially if available 
   quickly, can be useful in defending against further attacks.  It 
   can be used to help identify attackers or their specific targets at 
   an early stage.  This knowledge about attackers and targets can be 
   used to strengthen defenses against specific attacks or attackers, 
   or improve the defensive services for specific targets on an as-
   needed basis.  Information collected on attacks may also be useful 
   in identifying and developing defenses against novel attack types. 
    
   Monitoring systems used to detect security attacks in MPLS/GMPLS 
   typically operate by collecting information from the Provider Edge 
   (PE), Customer Edge (CE), and/or Provider backbone (P) devices.  
   Security monitoring systems should have the ability to actively 
   retrieve information from devices (e.g., SNMP get) or to passively 
   receive reports from devices (e.g., SNMP notifications).  The 
   specific information exchanged depends on the capabilities of the 
   devices and on the type of VPN technology.  Particular care should 
   be given to securing the communications channel between the 
   monitoring systems and the MPLS/GMPLS devices. Syslog WG is 
   specifying "Logging Capabilities for IP Network Infrastructure". 
   (The specific references will be made only if the draft(s) became 
   RFC before this draft.) 
    
   The CE, PE, and P devices should employ efficient methods to 
   acquire and communicate the information needed by the security 
   monitoring systems.  It is important that the communication method 
   between MPLS/GMPLS devices and security monitoring systems be 
   designed so that it will not disrupt network operations.  As an 
   example, multiple attack events may be reported through a single 
   message, rather than allowing each attack event to trigger a 
   separate message, which might result in a flood of messages, 
   essentially becoming a denial-of-service attack against the 
   monitoring system or the network. 
    
   The mechanisms for reporting security attacks should be flexible 
   enough to meet the needs of MPLS/GMPLS service providers, 
   MPLS/GMPLS customers, and regulatory agencies, if applicable.  The 
   specific reports should depend on the capabilities of the devices, 
   the security monitoring system, the type of VPN, and the service 
   level agreements between the provider and customer. 
 
7. Service Provider General Security Requirements 
    
   This section covers security requirements the provider may have for 
   securing its MPLS/GMPLS network infrastructure including LDP and 
   RSVP-TE specific requirements. 
    
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      35 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   The MPLS/GMPLS service provider's requirements defined here are for 
   the MPLS/GMPLS core in the reference model.  The core network can 
   be implemented with different types of network technologies, and 
   each core network may use different technologies to provide the 
   various services to users with different levels of offered 
   security. Therefore, a MPLS/GMPLS service provider may fulfill any 
   number of the security requirements listed in this section. This 
   document does not state that a MPLS/GMPLS network must fulfill all 
   of these requirements to be secure.   
    
   These requirements are focused on: 1) how to protect the MPLS/GMPLS 
   core from various attacks outside the core including network users, 
   both accidentally and maliciously, 2) how to protect the end users. 
     
   7.1. Protection within the Core Network 
    
7.1.1. Control Plane Protection - General 
    
   - Protocol authentication within the core:  
    
   The network infrastructure must support mechanisms for 
   authentication of the control plane. If MPLS/GMPLS core is used, 
   LDP sessions may be authenticated by use TCP MD5, in addition, IGP 
   and BGP authentication should also be considered. For a core 
   providing Layer 2 services, PE-to-PE authentication may also be 
   performed via IPsec. See the above discussion of protocol security 
   services: authentication, integrity (with replay detection), 
   confidentiality. Protocols need to provide a complete set of 
   security services from which the SP can choose. Also, the hard part 
   is key management. 
    
   With the cost of authentication coming down rapidly, the 
   application of control plane authentication may not increase the 
   cost of implementation for providers significantly, and will help 
   to improve the security of the core. If the core is dedicated to 
   MPLS/GMPLS enabled services and without any interconnects to third 
   parties then this may reduce the requirement for authentication of 
   the core control plane. 
    
 
   - Infrastructure Hiding 
    
   Here we discuss means to hide the provider's infrastructure nodes.  
    
   A MPLS/GMPLS provider may make its infrastructure routers (P and PE 
   routers) unreachable from outside users and unauthorized internal 
   users. For example, separate address space may be used for the 
   infrastructure loopbacks.  
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      36 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
    
   Normal TTL propagation may be altered to make the backbone look 
   like one hop from the outside, but caution needs to be taken for 
   loop prevention. This prevents the backbone addresses from being 
   exposed through trace route; however this must also be assessed 
   against operational requirements for end-to-end fault tracing.  
    
   An Internet backbone core may be re-engineered to make Internet 
   routing an edge function, for example, by using MPLS label 
   switching for all traffic within the core and possibly make the 
   Internet a VPN within the PPVPN core itself. This helps to detach 
   Internet access from PPVPN services. 
    
   Separating control plane, data plane, and management plane 
   functionality in hardware and software may be implemented on the PE 
   devices to improve security. This may help to limit the problems 
   when attacked in one particular area, and may allow each plane to 
   implement additional security measures separately. 
    
   PEs are often more vulnerable to attack than P routers, because PEs 
   cannot be made unreachable from outside users by their very nature. 
   Access to core trunk resources can be controlled on a per user 
   basis by using of inbound rate-limiting or traffic shaping; this 
   can be further enhanced on a per Class of Service basis (see 
   Section 8.2.3)  
 
   In the PE, using separate routing processes for different services, 
   for example, Internet and PPVPN service, may help to improve the 
   PPVPN security and better protect VPN customers. Furthermore, if 
   resources, such as CPU and Memory, can be further separated based 
   on applications, or even individual VPNs, it may help to provide 
   improved security and reliability to individual VPN customers. 
    
7.1.2. Control plane protection with RSVP-TE 
    
   - RSVP Security Tools 
    
   Isolation of the trusted domain is an important security mechanism 
   for RSVP, to ensure that an untrusted element cannot access a 
   router of the trusted domain.  However, isolation is limited by the 
   need to allow ASBR-ASBR communication for inter-AS LSPs.  Isolation 
   mechanisms might also be bypassed by Router Alert IP packets. A 
   solution could consists of disabling the RSVP router alert mode and 
   dropping all IP packets with the router alert option, or also to 
   drop all incoming IP packets on an interface with port 46, which 
   requires an access-list at the IP port level) or spoofed IP packets 
   if anti-spoofing is not otherwise activated. 
    
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      37 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   RSVP security can be strengthened by deactivating RSVP on 
   interfaces with neighbors who are not authorized to use RSVP, to 
   protect against adjacent CE-PE attacks. However, this does not 
   really protect against DoS attacks or attacks on non-adjacent 
   routers.  It has been demonstrated that substantial CPU resources 
   are consumed simply by processing received RSVP packets, even if 
   the RSVP process is deactivated for the specific interface on which 
   the RSVP packets are received.  
    
   RSVP neighbor filtering at the protocol level, to restrict the set 
   of neighbors that can send RSVP messages to a given router, 
   protects against non-adjacent attacks.  However, this does not 
   protect against DoS attacks and does not effectively protect 
   against spoofing of the source address of RSVP packets, if the 
   filter relies on the neighbor's address within the RSVP message.   
    
   RSVP neighbor filtering at the data plane level (with an access 
   list to accept IP packets with port 46, only for specific 
   neighbors). This requires Router Alert mode to be deactivated and 
   does not protect against spoofing. 
    
   - Authentication for RSVP messages 
    
   One of the most powerful tools for protection against RSVP-based 
   attacks is the use of authentication for RSVP messages, based on a 
   secure message hash using a key shared by RSVP neighbors.  This 
   protects against LSP creation attacks, at the expense of consuming 
   significant CPU resources for digest computation.  In addition, if 
   the neighboring RSVP speaker is compromised, it could be used to 
   launch attacks using authenticated RSVP messages. These methods, 
   and certain other aspects of RSVP security, are explained in detail 
   in RFC 4230 [RFC4230]. Key management must be implemented. Logging 
   and auditing as well as multiple layers of crypto protection can 
   help here. IPsec can also be used. 
    
   Another valuable tool is RSVP message pacing, to limit the number 
   of RSVP messages sent to a given neighbor during a given period.  
   This allows blocking DoS attack propagation. 
    
   The trick with DoS is to let the good packet through and keep 
   operating. Rate limiting by itself needs to be selective do this. 
    
   - limit the impact of an attack on control plane resources 
    
    
   To ensure continued effective operation of the MPLS router even in 
   the case of an attack that bypasses packet filtering mechanisms 
   such as Access Control Lists in the data plane, it is important 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      38 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   that routers have some mechanisms to limit the impact of the 
   attack.  There should be a mechanism to rate limit the amount of 
   control plane traffic addressed to the router, per interface.  This 
   should be configurable on a per-protocol basis, (and, ideally, on a 
   per-sender basis) to avoid letting an attacked protocol or a given 
   sender blocking all communications.  This requires the ability to 
   filter and limit the rate of incoming messages of particular 
   protocols, such as RSVP (filtering at the IP protocol level), and 
   particular senders.  In addition, there should be a mechanism to 
   limit CPU and memory capacity allocated to RSVP, so as to protect 
   other control plane elements.  To limit the memory allocation, it 
   will probably be necessary to limit the number of LSPs that can be 
   set up. 
    
    
 
7.1.3. Control plane protection with LDP 
 
   The approaches to protect MPLS routers against LDP-based attacks 
   are similar to those for RSVP, including isolation, protocol 
   deactivation on specific interfaces, filtering of LDP neighbors at 
   the protocol level, filtering of LDP neighbors at the data plane 
   level (access list that filter the TCP & UDP LDP ports), 
   authentication with message digest, rate limiting of LDP messages 
   per protocol per sender and limiting all resources allocated to 
   LDP-related tasks. 
    
       
7.1.4. Data Plane Protection 
    
   IPsec can provide authentication, integrity, confidentiality, and 
   replay detection for provider or user data. It also has an 
   associated key management protocol. 
    
   In today's MPLS/GMPLS, ATM, or Frame Relay networks, encryption is 
   not provided as a basic feature. Mechanisms described in section 5 
   can be used to secure the MPLS data plane traffic carried over MPLS 
   core. Both the Frame Relay Forum and the ATM Forum standardized 
   cryptographic security services in the late 1990s, but these 
   standards are not widely implemented. 
    
   7.2. Protection on the User Access Link 
 
   Peer or neighbor protocol authentication may be used to enhance 
   security. For example, BGP MD5 authentication may be used to 
   enhance security on PE-CE links using eBGP. In the case of Inter-
   provider connection, cryptographic protection mechanisms between 
   ASes, such as IPsec, may be used. 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      39 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
    
   If multiple services are provided on the same PE platform, 
   different WAN link layer address spaces may be used for different 
   services (e.g., VPN and non-VPN) to enhance isolation. 
    
   Firewall and Filtering: access control mechanisms can be used to 
   filter any packets destined for the service provider's 
   infrastructure prefix or eliminate routes identified as 
   illegitimate. 
    
   Rate limiting may be applied to the user interface/logical 
   interfaces against DDoS bandwidth attack. This is helpful when the 
   PE device is supporting both multi-services, especially VPN and 
   Internet Services, on the same physical interfaces through 
   different logical interfaces. 
 
7.2.1. Link Authentication 
    
   Authentication can be used to validate site access to the network 
   via fixed or logical connections, e.g. L2TP, IPsec, respectively. 
   If the user wishes to hold the authentication credentials for 
   access to the VPN, then provider solutions require the flexibility 
   for either direct authentication by the PE itself or interaction 
   with a customer authentication server. Mechanisms are required in 
   the latter case to ensure that the interaction between the PE and 
   the customer authentication server is appropriately secured. 
     
7.2.2. Access Routing 
    
   Routing protocol level e.g., RIP, OSPF, or BGP, may be used to 
   provide control access between a CE and PE. Per neighbor and per 
   VPN routing policies may be established to enhance security and 
   reduce the impact of a malicious or non-malicious attack on the PE; 
   the following mechanisms, in particular, should be considered: 
    - Limiting the number of prefixes that may be advertised on 
       a per access basis into the PE. Appropriate action may be 
       taken should a limit be exceeded, e.g., the PE shutting 
       down the peer session to the CE  
    - Applying route dampening at the PE on received routing 
       updates 
    - Definition of a per VPN prefix limit after which 
       additional prefixes will not be added to the VPN routing 
       table. 
    
   In the case of Inter-provider connection, access protection, link 
   authentication, and routing policies as described above may be 
   applied. Both inbound and outbound firewall or filtering mechanism 
   between ASes may be applied. Proper security procedures must be 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      40 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   implemented in Inter-provider VPN interconnection to protect the 
   providers' network infrastructure and their customers' VPNs. This 
   may be custom designed for each Inter-Provider VPN peering 
   connection, and must be agreed upon by both providers. 
 
7.2.3. Access QoS 
    
   MPLS/GMPLS providers offering QoS-enabled services require 
   mechanisms to ensure that individual accesses are validated against 
   their subscribed QOS profile and as such gain access to core 
   resources that match their service profile.  Mechanisms such as per 
   Class of Service rate limiting or traffic shaping on ingress to the 
   MPLS/GMPLS core are one option for providing this level of control.  
   Such mechanisms may require the per Class of Service profile to be 
   enforced either by marking, or remarking or discard of traffic 
   outside of the profile. 
    
7.2.4. Customer service monitoring tools  
    
   End users requiring specific statistics on the core, e.g., routing 
   table, interface status, or QoS statistics, requirements for 
   mechanisms at the PE both to validate the incoming user and limit 
   the views available to that particular user.  Mechanisms should 
   also be considered to ensure that such access cannot be used a 
   means of a DoS attack (either malicious or accidental) on the PE 
   itself. This could be accomplished through either separation of 
   these resources within the PE itself or via the capability to rate-
   limit on a per physical or logical connection basis such traffic. 
 
    
   7.3. General Requirements for MPLS/GMPLS Providers 
    
   MPLS/GMPLS providers must support users' security requirements as 
   listed in Section 7. Depending on the technologies used, these 
   requirements may include: 
 
   - User control plane separation - routing isolation 
   - Protection against intrusion, DoS attacks and spoofing 
   - Access Authentication 
   - Techniques highlighted through this document that identify 
      methodologies for the protection of resources and the 
      MPLS/GMPLS infrastructure.  
    
   Hardware or software errors in equipment leading to breaches in 
   security are not within the scope of this document. 
 
 

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      41 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
8. Inter-provider Security Requirements 
 
   This section discusses security capabilities that are important at 
   the MPLS/GMPLS Inter-provider connections and at devices (including 
   ASBR routers) supporting these connections. The security 
   capabilities stated in this section should be considered as 
   complementary to security considerations addressed in individual 
   protocol specifications or security frameworks. 
    
   Security vulnerabilities and exposures may be propagated across 
   multiple networks because of security vulnerabilities arising in 
   one peer's network. Threats to security originate from accidental, 
   administrative, and intentional sources. Intentional threats 
   include events such as spoofing and Denial of Service (DoS) 
   attacks. 
   The level and nature of threats, as well as security and 
   availability requirements, may vary over time and from network to 
   network. This section therefore discusses capabilities that need to 
   be available in equipment deployed for support of the MPLS 
   InterCarrier Interconnect (MPLS-ICI). Whether any particular 
   capability is used in any one specific instance of the ICI is up to 
   the service providers managing the PE equipment offering/using the 
   ICI services.  
    
   8.1. Control Plane Protection 
    
   This section discusses capabilities for control plane protection, 
   including protection of routing, signaling, and OAM capabilities.   
 
8.1.1. Authentication of Signaling Sessions 
 
   Authentication is needed for signaling sessions (i.e., BGP, LDP and 
   RSVP-TE) and routing sessions (e.g., BGP) as well as OAM sessions 
   across domain boundaries. Equipment must be able to support 
   exchange of all protocol messages over a single IPsec tunnel, with 
   NULL encryption and authentication, between the peering ASBRs. 
   Support for TCP MD5 authentication for LDP and BGP and for RSVP-TE 
   authentication must also be provided. Manual keying of IPsec should 
   not be used. IKEv2 with pre-shared secrets or public key methods 
   should be used. Replay detection should be used. 
 
   Mechanisms to authenticate and validate a dynamic setup request 
   MUST be available. For instance, if dynamic signaling of a TE-LSP 
   or PW is crossing a domain boundary, there must be a way to detect 
   whether the LSP source is who it claims to be and that he is 
   allowed to connect to the destination. 
    

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      42 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   MD5 authentication support for all TCP-based protocols within the 
   scope of the MPLS-ICI (i.e., LDP signaling and BGP routing) and MD5 
   authentication for the RSVP-TE Integrity Object MUST be provided to 
   interoperate with current practices. 
   Equipment SHOULD be able to support exchange of all signaling and 
   routing (LDP, RSVP-TE, and BGP) protocol messages over a single 
   IPSec security association pair in tunnel or transport mode with 
   authentication but with NULL encryption, between the peering ASBRs. 
   IPSec, if supported, must be supported with HMAC-MD5 and optionally 
   SHA-1.  It is expected that authentication algorithms will evolve 
   over time and support can be updated as needed. 
    
   OAM Operations across the MPLS-ICI could also be the source of 
   security threats on the provider infrastructure as well as the 
   service offered over the MPLS-ICI. A large volume of OAM messages 
   could overwhelm the processing capabilities of an ASBR if the ASBR 
   is not properly protected. Maliciously generated OAM messages could 
   also be used to bring down an otherwise healthy service (e.g., MPLS 
   Pseudo Wire), and therefore affect service security. MPLS-ping does 
   not support authentication today, and that support should be 
   subject for future considerations. Bidirectional Forwarding 
   Detection (BFD), however, does have support for carrying an 
   authentication object. It also supports Time-To-Live (TTL) 
   processing as an anti-replay measure. Implementations conformant 
   with this MPLS-ICI should support BFD authentication using MD5 and 
   must support the procedures for TTL processing.  
    
8.1.2. Protection against DoS attacks in the Control Plane 
 
   Implementation must have the ability to prevent signaling and 
   routing DoS attacks on the control plane per interface and 
   provider. Such prevention may be provided by rate-limiting 
   signaling and routing messages that can be sent by a peer provider 
   according to a traffic profile and by guarding against malformed 
   packets. 
    
   Equipment MUST provide the ability to filter signaling, routing, 
   and OAM packets destined for the device, and MUST provide the 
   ability to rate limit such packets. Packet filters SHOULD be 
   capable of being separately applied per interface, and SHOULD have 
   minimal or no performance impact. For example, this allows an 
   operator to filter or rate-limit signaling, routing, and OAM 
   messages that can be sent by a peer provider and limit such traffic 
   to a given profile.  
    
   During a control plane DoS attack against an ASBR, the router 
   SHOULD guarantee sufficient resources to allow network operators to 

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      43 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   execute network management commands to take corrective action, such 
   as turning on additional filters or disconnecting an interface 
   under attack. DoS attacks on the control plane SHOULD NOT adversely 
   affect data plane performance.  
   Equipment running BGP MUST support the ability to limit the number 
   of BGP routes received from any particular peer. Furthermore, in 
   the case of IPVPN, a router MUST be able to limit the number of 
   routes learned from a BGP peer per IPVPN. In the case that a device 
   has multiple BGP peers, it SHOULD be possible for the limit to vary 
   between peers.  
    
8.1.3. Protection against Malformed Packets 
 
   Equipment SHOULD be robust in the presence of malformed protocol 
   packets. For example, malformed routing, signaling, and OAM packets 
   should be treated in accordance to the relevant protocol 
   specification.  
    
8.1.4. Ability to Enable/Disable Specific Protocols 
 
   Ability to drop any signaling or routing protocol messages when 
   these messages are to be processed by the ASBR but the 
   corresponding protocol is not enabled on that interface.  
    
   Equipment must allow an administrator to enable or disable a 
   protocol (default protocol is disabled unless administratively 
   enable) on an interface basis. 
    
   Equipment MUST be able to drop any signaling or routing protocol 
   messages when these messages are to be processed by the ASBR but 
   the corresponding protocol is not enabled on that interface. This 
   dropping SHOULD NOT adversely affect data plane or control plane 
   performance.  
    
8.1.5. Protection Against Incorrect Cross Connection 
 
   The capability of detecting and locating faults in a LSP cross-
   connect MUST be provided. Such faults may cause security violations 
   as they result in directing traffic to the wrong destinations. This 
   capability may rely on OAM functions. 
    
   Equipment MUST support MPLS LSP ping [RFC4379]. This MAY be used to 
   verify end to end connectivity for the LSP (e.g., PW, TE Tunnel, 
   VPN LSP, etc.), and to verify PE-to-PE connectivity for L3 VPN 
   services.  
    


     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      44 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   When routing information is advertised from one domain to the 
   other, operators must be able to guard against situations that 
   result in traffic hijacking, black-holing, resource stealing (e.g., 
   number of routes), etc. For instance, in the IPVPN case, an 
   operator must be able to block routes based on associated route 
   target attributes. In addition, mechanisms must exist to verify 
   whether a route advertised by a peer for a given VPN is actually a 
   valid route and whether the VPN has a site attached or reachable 
   through that domain. 
 
   Equipment (ASBRs and Route Reflectors (RRs)) supporting operation 
   of BGP MUST be able to restrict which Route Target attributes are 
   sent to and accepted from a BGP peer across an ICI. Equipment 
   (ASBRs, RRs) SHOULD also be able to inform the peer regarding which 
   Route Target attributes it will accept from a peer, because sending 
   an incorrect Route Target can result in incorrect cross-connection 
   of VPNs. Also, sending inappropriate route targets to a peer may 
   disclose confidential information. Further Security Consideration 
   for inter-provider BGP/MPLS IPVPN operations are discussed in the 
   IPVPN Annex.  
    
8.1.6. Protection Against Spoofed Updates and Route Advertisements 
 
   Equipment MUST support route filtering of routes received via a BGP 
   peer sessions by applying policies that include one or more the 
   following: AS path, BGP next hop, standard community or extended 
   community. 
    
8.1.7. Protection of Confidential Information 
 
   Ability to identify and prohibit messages that can reveal 
   confidential information about network operation (e.g., performance 
   OAM messages or MPLS-ping messages) is required. Service Providers 
   must have the flexibility of handling these messages at the ASBR.  
    
   Equipment SHOULD provide the ability to identify and restrict where 
   it sends messages or that can reveal confidential information about 
   network operation (e.g., performance OAM messages, LSP Traceroute 
   messages). Service Providers must have the flexibility of handling 
   these messages at the ASBR. For example, equipment supporting LSP 
   Traceroute MAY limit to which addresses replies can be sent.  
   Note: This capability should be used with care. For example, if a 
   service provider chooses to prohibit the exchange of LSP ping 
   messages at the ICI, it may make it more difficult to debug 
   incorrect cross-connection of LSPs or other problems.  
   A provider may decide to progress these messages if they are 
   incoming from a trusted provider and are targeted to specific 

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      45 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   agreed-on addresses. Another provider may decide to traffic police, 
   reject, or apply policies to these messages. Solutions must enable 
   providers to control the information that is relayed to another 
   provider about the path that a LSP takes. For example, in RSVP-TE 
   record route object or MPLS-ping trace, a provider must be able to 
   control the information contained in corresponding messages when 
   sent to another provider. 
    
8.1.8. Protection Against over-provisioned number of RSVP-TE LSPs 
and bandwidth reservation 
    
   In addition to the control plane protection mechanisms listed in 
   the previous section on Control plane protection with RSVP-TE, the 
   ASBR must be able both to limit the number of LSPs that can be set 
   up by other domains and to limit the amount of bandwidth that can 
   be reserved. A provider's ASBR may deny a LSP set up request or a 
   bandwidth reservation request sent by another provider's whose the 
   limits have been reached. 
    
   8.2. Data Plane Protection 
    
8.2.1. Protection against DoS in the Data Plane 
    This is described earlier in this document. 
 
8.2.2. Protection against Label Spoofing 
 
   Verification that a label received across an interconnect was 
   actually assigned to the provider across the interconnect. If the 
   label was not assigned to the provider, the packet MUST be dropped. 
    
   Equipment MUST be able to verify that a label received across an 
   interconnect was actually assigned to a LSP arriving from the 
   provider across that interconnect. If the label was not assigned to 
   a LSP which arrives at this router from the correct neighboring 
   provider, the packet MUST be dropped.  This verification can be 
   applied to the top label only. The top label is the received top 
   label and every label that is exposed by label popping to be used 
   for forwarding decisions.  
    
   Equipment MUST provide the capability of dropping MPLS-labeled 
   packets if all labels in the stack are not processed.  This lets 
   carriers guarantee that every label that enters its domain from 
   another carrier was actually assigned to that carrier.  
 
   The following requirements are not directly reflected in this 
   document but must be used as guidance for addressing further work. 
    

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      46 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   Solutions MUST NOT force operators to reveal reachability 
   information to routers within their domains. <note: It is believed 
   that this requirement is met via other requirements specified in 
   this section plus the normal operation of IP routing, which does 
   not reveal individual hosts.> 
    
   Mechanisms to authenticate and validate a dynamic setup request 
   MUST be available. For instance, if dynamic signaling of a TE-LSP 
   or PW is crossing a domain boundary, there must be a way to detect 
   whether the LSP source is who it claims to be and that he is 
   allowed to connect to the destination. 
    
8.2.3. Protection using ingress traffic policing and enforcement 
    
   The following simple diagram illustrates a potential security issue 
   on the data plane issue across a MPLS interconnect: 
    
   SP2 - ASBR2 - labeled path - ASBR1 - P1 - SP1's PSN - P2 - PE1 
   |         |                   |                          | 
   |<  AS2  >|<MPLS interconnect>|<             AS1              >| 
    
   Traffic flow direction is from SP2 to SP1 
    
   Usually, the transit label used by ASBR2 is allocated by ASBR1,  
   which in turn advertises it to ASB2 (downstream unsolicited or on-
   demand), and this label is used for a service context (VPN label, 
   PW VC label, etc.), and this LSP is normally terminated at a 
   forwarding table belonging to the service instance on PE (PE1) in 
   SP1. 
    
   In the example above, ASBR1 would not know whether the label of an 
   incoming packet from ASBR2 over the interconnect is a VPN label or 
   PSN label for AS1. So it is possible (though rare) that ASBR2 can 
   be accidentally or intentionally configured such that the incoming 
   label could match a PSN label (e.g., LDP) in AS1. Then, this LSP 
   would end up on the global plane of an infrastructure router (P or 
   PE1), and this could invite a unidirectional attack on that P or 
   PE1 where the LSP terminates. 
 
   To mitigate this threat, implementations SHOULD be able to do a 
   forwarding path look-up for the label on an incoming packet from an 
   interconnect in a Label Forwarding Information Base (LFIB) space 
   that is only intended for its own service context or provide a 
   mechanism on the data plane that would ensure the incoming labels 
   are what ASBR1 has allocated and advertised. 
    
   A similar concept has been proposed in "Requirements for Multi-
   Segment Pseudowire Emulation Edge-to-Edge (PWE3)" [PW-REQ]. 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      47 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
    
    
    
9. Security Considerations 
 
    
   Security considerations constitute the sole subject of this memo 
   and hence are discussed throughout.  Here we recap what has been 
   presented and explain at a high level the role of each type of 
   consideration in an overall secure MPLS/GMPLS system. 
    
   The document describes a number of potential security threats.  
   Some of these threats have already been observed occurring in 
   running networks; others are largely theoretical at this time.   
    
   DoS attacks and intrusion attacks from the Internet against service 
   providers' infrastructure have been seen.  DoS "attacks" (typically 
   not malicious) have also been seen in which CE equipment overwhelms 
   PE equipment with high quantities or rates of packet traffic or 
   routing information.  Operational or provisioning errors are cited 
   by service providers as one of their prime concerns. 
    
   The document describes a variety of defensive techniques that may 
   be used to counter the suspected threats.  All of the techniques 
   presented involve mature and widely implemented technologies that 
   are practical to implement. 
    
   The document describes the importance of detecting, monitoring, and 
   reporting attacks, both successful and unsuccessful.  These 
   activities are essential for "understanding one's enemy", 
   mobilizing new defenses, and obtaining metrics about how secure the 
   MPLS/GMPLS network is.  As such, they are vital components of any 
   complete PPVPN security system. 
    
   The document evaluates MPLS/GMPLS security requirements from a 
   customer's perspective as well as from a service provider's 
   perspective.  These sections re-evaluate the identified threats 
   from the perspectives of the various stakeholders and are meant to 
   assist equipment vendors and service providers, who must ultimately 
   decide what threats to protect against in any given configuration 
   or service offering. 
    
    
10.     IANA Considerations 
   TBD. 
    
    

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      48 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
11.     Normative References 
    
   [RFC3031] E. Rosen, A. Viswanathan, R. Callon, "Multiprotocol Label 
   Switching Architecture", RFC 3031, January 2001. 
    
   [RFC3945] E. Mannie, "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
   (GMPLS) Architecture", RFC 3945, October 2004. 
 
   [RFC3036] Andersson, et al., "LDP Specification", January 2001. 
    
   [RFC3209] Awduche, et al., "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP 
   Tunnels", December 2001. 
    
   [RFC4301] S. Kent, K. Seo, "Security Architecture for the Internet 
   Protocol," December 2005. 
    
   [RFC4302] S. Kent, "IP Authentication Header," December 2005. 
    
   [RFC4835] V. Manral, "Cryptographic Algorithm Implementation 
   Requirements for Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) and 
   Authentication Header (AH)", April 2007. 
    
   [RFC4306] C. Kaufman, "Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2) 
   Protocol",December 2005.  
    
   [RFC4309] Housley, R., "Using Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) 
   CCM Mode with IPsec Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP)", December 
   2005. 
    
   [RFC4346] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla, "The Transport Layer Security 
   (TLS) Protocol, Version 1.1," April 2006.  
 
   [RFC4379] K. Kompella and G. Swallow, "Detecting Multi-Protocol 
   Label Switched (MPLS) Data Plane Failures", February 2006. 
    
   [RFC4447] Martini, et al., "Pseudowire Setup and Maintenance Using 
   the Label Distribution Protocol (LDP)", April 2006. 
 
   [STD62] "Simple Network Management Protocol, Version 3,", December 
   2002. 
    
   [STD-8] J. Postel and J. Reynolds, "TELNET Protocol Specification", 
   STD 8, May 1983. 
    
 
12.     Informational References 
 

     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      49 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
    
    
    
   [RFC 2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
 
   [OIF-SMI-01.0] Renee Esposito, "Security for Management Interfaces 
   to Network Elements", Optical Internetworking Forum, Sept. 2003. 
    
   [OIF-SMI-02.1] Renee Esposito, "Addendum to the Security for 
   Management Interfaces to Network Elements", Optical Internetworking 
   Forum, March 2006. 
    
    
   [RFC2104] H. Krawczyk, M. Bellare, R. Canetti, "HMAC: Keyed-Hashing 
   for Message Authentication," February 1997. 
    
   [RFC2411] R. Thayer, N. Doraswamy, R. Glenn, "IP Security Document 
   Roadmap," November 1998. 
    
   [RFC3174] D. Eastlake, 3rd, and P. Jones, "US Secure Hash Algorithm 
   1 (SHA1)," September 2001. 
    
   [RFC3562] M. Leech, "Key Management Considerations for the TCP MD5 
   Signature Option", July 2003. 
    
   [RFC3631] S. Bellovin, C. Kaufman, J. Schiller, "Security 
   Mechanisms for the Internet," December 2003. 
    
   [RFC3985] S. Bryant and P. Pate, "Pseudo Wire Emulation Edge-to-
   Edge (PWE3) Architecture", March 2005. 
    
   [RFC4103] G. Hellstrom and P. Jones, "RTP Payload for Text 
   Conversation", June 2005. 
    
    
   [RFC4107] S. Bellovin, R. Housley, "Guidelines for Cryptographic 
   Key Management", June 2005. 
 
   [RFC4110]  R. Callon and M. Suzuki, "A Framework for Layer 3 
   Provider-Provisioned Virtual Private Networks (PPVPNs)", July 2005. 
    
    
   [RFC4111] L. Fang, "Security Framework of Provider Provisioned 
   VPN", RFC 4111, July 2005. 
    
   [RFC4230] H. Tschofenig and R. Graveman, "RSVP Security 
   Properties", December 2005. 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      50 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
    
   [RFC4308] P. Hoffman, "Cryptographic Suites for IPsec", December 
   2005. 
    
   [RFC4593] A. Barbir, S. Murphy, Y. Yang, "Generic Threats to Routing 
   Protocols", October 2006. 
 
    
   [RFC4808] S. Bellovin, "Key Change Strategies for TCP-MD5", March 
   2007. 
    
   [RFC4869] L. Law and J. Solinas, "Suite B Cryptographic Suites for 
   IPsec", April 2007. 
    
    
   [MFA MPLS ICI] N. Bitar, "MPLS InterCarrier Interconnect Technical 
   Specification", mpls2007.017, August 2006. 
    
   [opsec efforts] C. Lonvick and D. Spak, "Security Best Practices 
   Efforts and Documents", draft-ietf-opsec-efforts-06.txt, June 2007. 
    
   [PW-REQ] N. Bitar, M. Bocci, L. Martini, "Requirements for Multi-
   Segment Pseudowire Emulation Edge-to-Edge", draft-ietf-pwe3-ms-pw-
   requirements-05.txt, March 2007. 
 
    
 
13.     Author's Addresses 
    
   Luyuan Fang 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   300 Beaver Brook Road 
   Boxborough, MA 01719 
   USA 
    
   Email: lufang@cisco.com 
    
   Michael Behringer 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   Village d'Entreprises Green Side 
   400, Avenue Roumanille, Batiment T 3 
   06410 Biot, Sophia Antipolis 
   FRANCE 
    
   Email: mbehring@cisco.com 
    
   Ross Callon 
   Juniper Networks 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      51 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
   10 Technology Park Drive 
   Westford, MA 01886 
   USA 
    
   Email: rcallon@juniper.net 
    
   Jean-Louis Le Roux 
   France Telecom   
   2, avenue Pierre-Marzin   
   22307 Lannion Cedex   
   FRANCE  
    
   Email: jeanlouis.leroux@francetelecom.com  
    
   Raymond Zhang 
   British Telecom 
   2160 E. Grand Ave. El Segundo, CA 90025 
   USA 
    
   Email: raymond.zhang@bt.com 
    
   Paul Knight 
   Nortel 
   600 Technology Park Drive 
   Billerica, MA 01821 
    
   Email: paul.knight@nortel.com 
 
   Yaakov (Jonathan) Stein 
   RAD Data Communications 
   24 Raoul Wallenberg St., Bldg C 
   Tel Aviv  69719 
   ISRAEL 
    
   Email: yaakov_s@rad.com  
    
   Nabil Bitar 
   Verizon 
   40 Sylvan Road 
   Waltham, MA 02145 
   Email: nabil.bitar@verizon.com 
    
   Richard Graveman 
   RFG Security 
   15 Park Avenue 
   Morristown, NJ  07960 
   Email: rfg@acm.org 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      52 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
 
   Monique Morrow 
   Glatt-com 
   CH-8301 Glattzentrum 
   Switzerland 
   Email: mmorrow@cisco.com 
    
   Adrian Farrel 
   Old Dog Consulting 
   EMail:  adrian@olddog.co.uk 
    
    
 
    
Intellectual Property 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 
    
    
Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 
    
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 
 
 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      53 
    
    
   MPLS/GMPLS Security framework                                       
   November 2007 
    
 
 
 
 
 
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
Intellectual Property 
 
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 
    
    
14.     Acknowledgements 
    
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF 
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA). 
    
   The authors and contributors would also like to acknowledge the 
   helpful comments and suggestions from Sam Hartman and Dimitri 
   Papadimitriou. 
   . 
     
   Fang, et al.                  Informational                      54 
    
