


IETF AUTOCONF                                         Shubhranshu Singh
Internet-Draft                                        JaeHoon Kim
Expires:April 07, 2006                                 SAMSUNG AIT
                                                      Charles E. Perkins
                                                    Nokia Research Center
                                                           Pedro M. Ruiz
                                                    University of Murcia
                                                         Thomas Clausen
                                                     Ecole polytechnique
                                                         October 06, 2005


   Ad hoc network autoconfiguration: terminology and problem statement
                      draft-singh-autoconf-adp-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 5, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   A Mobile Ad Hoc NETwork (MANET) is formed by the association of



Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


   mobile devices, usually wireless and capable of multi-hop
   communication among themselves even if there is no networking
   infrastructure available. The autonomous nature of these networks
   requires the existence of an autoconfiguration mechanism. This
   document explains terminologies, problem statement and solution 
   requirements for ad hoc network autoconfiguration.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Problem statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.1   Stand-alone ad hoc network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.2   Ad hoc network at the edge of infra-structure network  . .  8
     4.3   Temporarily hybrid ad hoc network  . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.4   Dealing with network mergers and partitions . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   A.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 14





























Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


1.  Introduction

   A Mobile Ad Hoc NETwork (MANET) is formed by the association of
   mobile devices, usually wireless and capable of multi-hop
   communication among themselves even if there is no networking
   infrastructure available.  However, it is generally expected that, if
   some MANET nodes are connected to external networks (e.g.  Internet)
   some of them might act as gateways towards those networks.

   There are a number of solutions on interconnecting ad hoc networks to
   the Internet[4][5][7].  Most of the solutions are tightly related to
   the issue of discovering Internet gateways and auto-configuring
   global addresses that are routable within the Internet.  Usually,
   autoconfiguration of addresses in MANET is also required even when
   the MANET is isolated from external networks.

   Currently there is no standard definition for commonly used ad hoc
   network autoconfiguration related terminologies such as standalone
   MANET, MANET local addresses, etc.  This document provides definition
   of such terminologies, in addition to problem statement and solution
   requirements for address autoconfiguration in MANET.






























Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


2.  Terminology

   The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119 [5].

   Mobile Ad hoc Network (MANET) Mobile Ad hoc Network (MANET) -  A
      network formed by a set of mobile devices equipped with one or
      more wireless interfaces.  Nodes are characterized by random
      mobility and run ad hoc routing protocols for multi-hop
      communication.

   MANET Node -  A device with one or more wireless interfaces and
      associated IPv address(es) which is used by the MANET routing
      protocol in use.

   MANET local address -  An IP address configured on a MANET node,
      which is valid for communication among manet nodes that are part
      of the same ad hoc network.  Nodes MUST NOT communicate with other
      nodes outside the MANET using this address.

   Global address -  An IPv4 or IPv6 address configured on a MANET node,
      which is valid for communication with the nodes located in the
      Internet.  These addresses can also be used for communication with
      nodes within the MANET.

   Internet gateway -  A node connected to ad hoc network as well as to
      the Internet and capable of providing global addressing and
      bidirectional connectivity to MANET nodes.  Internet gateways
      should provide topologically correct IPv6 prefixes.  This process
      can be done in a reactive, proactive or hybrid manner.  Internet
      gateway mostly runs ad hoc routing protocols as well as
      infrastructure network protocols such as OSPF.

   Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) -  The process by which a node
      confirms the uniqueness of an address it wishes to configure or
      has already configured.  A node already equipped with an IP
      address participates in DAD in order to protect its IP address
      from being used by another node.

   Standalone ad hoc network -  A network consisting of a group of MANET
      nodes capable of spontaneously creating a multi-hop ad hoc network
      without any connection (either direct of via gateways) to other IP
      networks such as the Internet.







Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


   Hybrid ad hoc network -  A network formed by a group of MANET nodes,
      capable of spontaneously forming a multi-hop ad hoc network, in
      which one or more of the nodes act as Internet Gateways providing
      access to other IP networks.  They can be envisioned as a
      standalone MANET with one or more Internet Gateways taking part
      both in the MANET and in the external network.

   Network merger -  The process by which two or more ad hoc networks
      (either standalone or hybrid), previously disjoint, get connected.
      In general, this proccess happens as a consequence of the mobility
      of the nodes.

   Network partitioning -  The process by which an ad hoc network
      (either standalone or hybrid) which was previously connected,
      splits into two or more disconnected ad hoc networks.  In general,
      this proccess happens as a consequence of the mobility of the
      nodes.  When this happens, some of the routes in MANET nodes
      become invalid hence some nodes may become unreachable.

   Network merger detection -  The process by which ad hoc nodes detect
      the merger of two or more initially isolated MANETs.

   Network partition detection -  The process by which ad hoc nodes
      detect the partition of a single MANET into two or more networks.



























Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


3.  Assumptions

    o Routes between nodes in the ad hoc network MUST NOT leak into the
      Internet.

   o  Network routes (those valid for an entire network prefix instead
      of just a single node) require reachability to every node which
      exists within the prefix, just as within the Internet.

   o  A gateway can be treated as a default router for the Internet.

   o  A gateway SHOULD maintain active routes for all nodes within the
      MANET which are actively engaged in communications with their
      partners in the Internet.

   o  Nodes within the Internet cannot distinguish whether or not a
      gateway offers connectivity to an ad hoc network or some other
      sort of stub network.

   o  If two gateways advertise connectivity to the same routing prefix,
      then those two gateways MUST coordinate their routing tables so
      that they exhibit equal reachability for all nodes within that
      routing prefix.

   o  Multiple gateways may offer several different routing prefixes.  A
      node may choose which gateway's routing prefix to use for
      autoconfiguration according to any convenient criterion; the
      methods for making the determination are not constrained to be
      only those specified within a MANET autoconfiguration protocol
      specification.

   o  Autoconfigured addresses are likely to have lifetimes associated
      with them, and after the lifetime expires use of the address
      should be immediately discontinued.

   o  When duplicate addresses are detected, the node which has had the
      address for the least amount of time MUST discontinue.
      Alternatively, BOTH nodes MUST discontinue using this address.













Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


4.  Problem statement

  There are Specifications for address autoconfiguration in the 
  traditional IPv6 networks e.g. RFC 2462,RFC 2461, etc. However,
  due to the challenges presented by MANET (as defined and understood
  by the IETF MANET WG), these specifications need to be extended 
  for MANET environment. Unlike in the traditional IP networks, each 
  ad hoc node, besides being traffic end-point, should be capable of 
  forwarding traffic destined for other hosts i.e each ad hoc node 
  normally acts as a "router" as well as a "host". Additionally, the notion
  of all nodes being able to access a shared communication medium fails 
  in MANET: since all nodes in a MANET do not share the same physical  
  link. A single transmission does not suffice for a broadcast or 
  link-local multicast to reach all nodes. Transmissions which are  
  otherwise not supposed to be forwarded by routers, such as limited 
  broadcast and link-local multicast, should be forwarded by the nodes 
  in order to reach all the MANET nodes. In other words, nodes constituting 
  an ad-hoc network do not share access to a single multicast-capable 
  link for signaling. Many protocol specifications used in the traditional 
  IP networks e.g. RFCs 2462, 2461 etc. do, however, assume that 
  subnet-local signals (e.g. link-local multicast signal) are received by 
  each of the hosts on the particular subnet without being forwarded by 
  the routers defining the subnet boundary.

   There is a growing requirement for address autoconfiguration
   solutions in the MANET environment - to be used by the ad hoc nodes
   constituting standalone networks as well as edge networks.  However,
   the solutions should be designed with a minimal modification and
   should be compliant with the specifications that are widely used in
   the traditional IP networks.

   Ad hoc networks can either be deployed as an standalone MANET or as
   an edge network, attached to the Internet.  Indeed, IETF MANET WG has
   this point of view for developing the MANET routing protocols.

   The autoconfiguration protocol has to carefully distinguish between
   cases when a gateway offers a routing prefix, from the case when a
   "local" prefix has to be used since no routing prefix is available
   for the purpose.  In this way, a single addressing solution is
   obtained, but just as within the Internet there are different kinds
   of addresses.  Some parallels can be drawn between the "manet local"
   addressing and the "zeroconf" solution devised within the IETF
   working group of the same name.  However, there may be differences
   which are discovered as more development occurs towards the
   specification of the address autoconfiguration protocol.

4.1  Stand-alone ad hoc network

   Examples of standalone ad hoc networks are conference-room networks,
   battlefield networks, surveillance networKs, etc.  For these
   networks, IPv4 and/or IPv6 address auto-configuration mechanism is
   needed.

   These addresses should be routable only within the particular ad hoc



Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


   network and should be unique even in situations where two or more
   networks, initially isolated, merge together to form a single
   network.  Network merger can occur anytime and makes the address
   uniqueness maintenance quite challenging in such situations.

4.2  Ad hoc network at the edge of infra-structure network

   Fig.1. shows an ad hoc network deployed at the edge of the Internet.

                                            H1
                                            |
                                     +---------------+
                                     |   Internet    |
                                     +---------------+
                                       *           *
                                       *           *
                                    GW1*           *
                                     |            GW2
                                     |             |
                                  ---N1            |
                                 /    |            |
                               N4     |           N2--- N5
                                      |            |
                                      N3-----------+

              Fig. 1: Hybrid ad hoc network connected to Internet.

   Hybrid networks can be envisioned as an standalone network connected
   to the Internet via one or more Internet Gateways.  These gateways
   are located between the two networks and are capable of providing
   globally routable addresses as well as bi-directional connectivity to
   the ad hoc nodes connected to it either directly (1-hop) or via one
   or more intermediate nodes.  These gateways may either be fixed or
   mobile, single or multiple, equipped with wired and/or wireless
   interfaces.

   Ad hoc nodes may use Internet gateway for global prefix allocation
   and configuration of globally routable addresses.  However, it
   introduces issues such as how MANET nodes receive and/or Internet
   gateway provides globally routable prefixes, etc.  Hence, for such
   network sufficient but limited detail about Internet gateway
   discovery and operation is required, along with an address
   autoconfiguration solution.

4.3  Temporarily hybrid ad hoc network

   Temporarily hybrid ad hoc network scenario arise due to the situation
   where an ad hoc network may be sometimes stand-alone and sometimes



Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


   connected to the Internet e.g. a car or subway network connected
   while parked or at station and disconnected otherwise.

   Basically, the problems in this case are similar to those introduced
   in the above two cases.  However, in this case, ad hoc nodes should
   detect the lack of reachability to the Internet and SHOULD maintain
   their allocated addresses for the lifetime which has been assigned
   during the autoconfiguration process.  For local addresses, no such
   lifetime is necessary, but could anyway be assigned as a minimal
   protection against partitioning.

4.4 Dealing with network merges and partitions

   By the nature of MANET, two or more ad hoc networks which are
   initially isolated, can merge together or a single ad hoc network can
   get partitioned into two or more separate networks, at any moment in
   time.  While network partitioning may not cause any severe problem in
   the MANET's operation, it may be needed that network partitioning is
   detected so that the resources (e.g. limited number of addressed) can
   be re-used among the nodes.  Network merger introduces challenges to
   maintain the address uniqueness. Normally, once an address is
   allocated to a node, it continues using it and at the same time
   defending its own addresses from being allocated to any other node.
   However, since initially isolated ad hoc networks allocates 
   addresses independent with each other, there remains some probability 
   of more than one node using same address once two/more independent 
   ad hoc networks merge.























Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


5.  Requirements

   In order to offer a lightweight but interoperable auto-configuration
   mechanism a number of requirements SHOULD be satisfied.  These
   requirements include:

   Extensibility -  The mechanism SHOULD be able to accomodate future
      extensions and optimizations.

   Efficiency -  Given that network resources tend to be scarce in
      MANETs, autoconfiguration mechanisms SHOULD be lightweight in
      nature, and avoid making an excessive use of the network
      resources.

   Independence from ad hoc routing protocols -  Autoconfiguration
      mechanisms SHOULD be able to operate with different proactive and
      reactive routing protocols.

   Interoperable with fixed IP networks -  When there are one or more
      Internet gateways within a MANET, the address autoconfiguration
      approach should provide global addresses to MANET nodes in such a
      way that they MUST be able to interoperate with any IP host in the
      Internet, using standard protocols.

   Resilience and robustness -  Given the dynamic nature of MANETs,
      autoconfiguration mechanisms SHOULD be resilient and roubust to
      packet losses, network partitions, network merges as well as
      disconnections from fixed IP networks or Internet Gateways.

   Validity both for IPv4 and IPv6 -  Autoconfiguration mechanisms
      SHOULD be capable of working both for IPV4 and IPv6
      autoconfiguration.

   Scalable -  MANET autoconfiguration protocols should avoid increasing
      congestion in the MANET as the number of MANET nodes increases, or
      as they travel at higher speeds, or as more communication partners
      launch applications within the ad hoc network, or as the frequency
      of network partitions increases.

   Simplicity -  Autoconfiguration mechanisms should be easy to test and
      deploy.










Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


6.  Security Considerations

   Since this document does not specify any protocol, no additional
   security vulnerabilities are created.  However, experience with other
   address autoconfiguration protocols indicates that it is difficult to
   expect a very high degree of security.  This is especially true in an
   ad hoc network using manet-local addresses, since it may be
   unfeasible to interact with any pre-existing security infrastructure.
   Nevertheless, the protocols should be designed to avoid as many
   security pitfalls as can be avoided.  This may involve using
   collaboration histories and out-of-band mechanisms requiring user
   interventions.





































Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


Appendix A.  Normative References

   o  [1] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
      Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   o  [2] Thomson, S. and T. Narten, "IPv6 Stateless Address
      Autoconfiguration", RFC 2462, December 1998.

   o  [3] Engelstad, P., Tonnesen, A., Hafslund, A. and G. Egeland,
      "Internet Connectivity for Multi-Homed Proactive Ad Hoc Networks",
      First IEEE International Conference on Sensor and Ad hoc
      Communications and Networks, October 2004.

   o  [4] Ryuji Wakikawa et. al.  Global connectivity for IPv6 Mobile Ad
      Hoc Networks, IETF "draft-wakikawa-manet-globalv6-03.txt"

   o  [5] Shubhranshu Singh, Kim, JH., Choi, YG., Kang, KL. and YS.
      Roh, "Mobile multi-gateway support for IPv6 mobile ad hoc
      networks" I-D draft-singh-manet-mmg-00.txt, June 2004.

   o  [6] Perkins, C., Malinen, J., Wakikawa, R. and E. Belding-Royer,
      "IP Address Autoconfiguration for Ad Hoc Networks", I-D
      draft-perkins-manet-autoconf-01.txt, November 2001.

   o  [7] Cha, H., Park, J. and H. Kim, "Extended Support for Global
      Connectivity for IPv6 Mobile Ad Hoc Networks", October 2003.

   o  [8] Jeong, J., Park, J., Kim, H. and D. Kim, "Ad Hoc IP Address
      Autoconfiguration", I-D draft-jeong-adhoc-ip-addr-autoconf-02.txt,
      February 2004.

   o  [9] Paakkonen, P., Rantonen, M. and J. Latvakoski, "IPv6
      addressing in a heterogeneous MANET-network", I-D
      draft-paakkonen-addressing-htr-manet-00.txt, December 2003.

   o  [10] Jelger, C., Noel, T. and A. Frey, "Gateway and address
      autoconfiguration for IPv6 adhoc networks", I-D
      draft-jelger-manet-gateway-autoconf-v6-02.txt, April 2004.

   o  [11] Sun, Y. and E. Belding-Royer, "A study of dynamic addressing
      techniques in mobile ad hod networks", I-D Wireless communication
      and mobile computing, May 2004.

   o  [12] Engelstad, P., Tonnesen, A., Hafslund, A. and G. Egeland,
      "Internet Connectivity for Multi-Homed Proactive Ad Hoc Networks",
      First IEEE International Conference on Sensor and Ad hoc
      Communications and Networks, October 2004.




Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


Authors' Addresses

   Shubhranshu
   Samsung AIT, Comm & Network Lab

   Phone: +82 31 280 9569
   Email: Shubhranshu@gmail.com


   JaeHoon Kim
   Samsung AIT
   Comm & Network Lab

   Phone: +82 31 280 9532
   Email: jaehoonk@samsung.com


   Charles E. Perkins
   Nokia Research Center, 
   Communications Systems Laboratory

   Phone: +1 650 625 2986
   Email: charliep@iprg.nokia.com

   Pedro M. Ruiz
   University of Murcia
   Dept. Information and Communications Eng.
   Facultad de Informatica
   Campus de Espinardo s/n,
   Spain

   Phone: +34 968367646
   Email: pedrom@dif.um.es


   Thomas Heide Clausen
   LIX, Ecole Polytechnique

   Phone: +33 6 6058 9349
   Email: T.Clausen@computer.org
   URI:   http://www.lix.polytechnique.fr/Labo/Thomas.Clausen/

















Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                     February 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Singh, et al.            Expires August 5, 2005                [Page 14]


