
Network Working Group
Internet-Draft                                  Mitchell Erblich
                                                March 2, 2006
Category: Experimental

                Fast Initial OSPFv2 LSDB Synchronization for BMA
         	draft-erblich-fast-init-lsdb-synch-bma-00.txt

   Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   Copyright Notice

        Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). All Rights Reserved.



    ABSTRACT

        This memo documents a feature that significantly decreases
        the initial LSDB synchronization time in Broadcast Multiple
        Access (BMA) environments. This implementation only requires
        a single OSPF speaker per psuedo-node to support this
        functionality. These changes are implicitly supported within
        the OSPFv2 protocol. This memo is not intended to serve as a
        model for any other implementation.

    1.  Introduction

        OSPFv2 BMA environments uses the designated router (DR) to
        increase the efficiency of LSA exchanges. However, OSPFv2
        specifies a RouterDeadInterval second wait time when no DR
        is known and a interface comes up before a DR is elected.

        The wait-time is the bottleneck that restricts initial LSDB
        synchronization. This memo transparently uses a implied
        functionality within the OSPFv2 specification to remove this
        constraint. All other routers without modification within
        the local link must accept this modification.

        The implied assumption of priority and then router-id
        for DR and backup DR (BDR) election assumes that priority
        will be set based on the capability of the router. Then
        after a given time frame all capable routers will have
        booted and generated a hello.

        To support a router's interface entering an existing BMA
        environment where a DR has already been elected, a received
        hello specifying that a DR election has already taken place
        is required to be accepted.

    2.  Changes to the OSPFv2 Implementation

        To extend the OSPFv2 specification, upon interface bringup,
        the interface changes into a passive mode and normally processes
        input hello packets. It uses these hellos to determine whether
	a DR has been specified.

        The passive interface mode has been in other implementations
        and allows snooping while it prevents us to transmit hellos or
        any other OSPF control packets.

        Given hellos that are in the multiple second interval,
        statistically seeing a hello from an existing router within
        a few seconds increases dramatically as the number of  OSPF
        speaking routers increase on an interface.

        If no DR has been seen in the hello field within a configurable
        wait-time, we then assume that no DR has been elected for this
        psuedo-node. We can then safely transmit a hello with the seen
        neighbors and declare ourselves the DR. To allow a deterministic
        means of selecting routers in this manner, each type of router
        should have a different configured priority if more than 1
        router for a link can declare itself DR.

        It is also suggested that no wait-time is actually needed when
        the interface comes up and that re-election will select one of
        two or more DR declared routers by normal DR election. This
        secondary functionally allows a OSPF speaking router to take
        over DR responsibilities.

        However, depending on the current data flow through that part
        of the network, local disruptions can occur. Additionally,
        the DR re-election process will cause additional LSAs to be
        flooded and SPF computations to occur which will effect routing
        outside the link area. However, if a router is introduced into
        a transit network, then a network and router LSAs would be
        flooded anyway, then possible changed DR-other / DR
        adjacency reformations becomes a major concern. The changes
        to minimize these effects are outside the scope of this memo.

   3.  Security Considerations

        The function described in this document does not create any new
        security issues for the OSPF protocol.  Security considerations for
        the base OSPF protocol are covered in [OSPF].

   4.  References

        [OSPF]     Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", RFC 2328, April 1998.

   5.  Author's Address

        Mitchell Erblich
        erblichs@earthlink.net

Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.
