
GSMP Working Group                                           Avri Doria
Internet Draft                                          Kenneth Sundell
Document: <draft-ietf-gsmp-reqs-00.txt>                    Stephen Shew
Category: WG Draft                                      Nortel Networks
 
                                                      Hormunzd Khosravi
                                                                  Intel
 
                                                               July 2001
 
 
         Requirements for adding Optical Switch Support to GSMP 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
      all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 except that the right to 
   produce derivative works is not granted.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress."  
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This memo provides an overview of the requirements on the GSMP 
   protocol for support of optical switching. 
    
    
1. Overview 
    
   This draft is intended to describe the required changes to GSMP for 
   support of optical (non-transparent and all optical), SONET/SDH, and 
   spatial switching of IP packets, L2 frames and TDM data. The mix of 
   possible instantiations include GSMP controllers connected to: 
   photonic cross-connects (optical-optical), transparent optical cross 
   connects (optical-electrical-optical, frame independent), opaque 
   cross connects (optical-electrical-optical, SONET/SDH frames), and 
   traditional TDM switches (all electrical). These could form IP based 
                                                                     1 

Internet Draft     Req. for Optical Support in GSMP          July 2001 

 
   optical routers, optical label switches, wavelength routers, and 
   dynamic optical cross connects. 
    
   There are also several different generic models that might be 
   applied to running IP over WDM [1][2][11]. This document defines the 
   requirements for the separation of control functions from data 
   functions in order to provide a more flexible network 
   architecture.[3]  
    
   In this draft, no position will be taken about the eventual 
   architectural model that will be most appropriate (e.g., single or 
   multiple routing plane instances).  The only assumption is that the 
   ability to separate the control mechanisms from the data switching 
   is as useful for the signaling of optical paths (e.g., GMPLS) as it 
   is for the signaling of L2 paths (e.g., MPLS). 
    
   GSMPv3[6] is well suited for providing the control mechanisms 
   necessary for allowing an IP based controller to direct the 
   activities of an optical switch. In order for GSMP to operate 
   between IP controllers and optical switches and cross connects, 
   support for optical labels and service and resource abstractions 
   must be added to GSMP. 
    
2. Label Types 
    
   New labels are needed to identify the entities that are to be 
   switched in the optical fabric.  These are longer than GSMPv3 labels 
   as they have physical and structural context.  As GMPLS[1][2] has 
   had very similar requirements for label formats alignment with GMPLS 
   is proposed.  This includes support for: 
     - Digital Carrier Hierarchy (e.g., DS-1, E1) 
     - SONET and SDH Hierarchy (e.g., OC-3, STM-1, VT1.5, VC-12) 
     - PDH labels [12] 
     - OTN G.709 labels 
     - Lambdas 
     - Fibers 
    
   GSMP MUST include support for all label types as well as for label 
   hierarchies and label lists as defined by GMPLS. 
  Bundles of the above labels SHOULD also be supported (e.g., 5 OC-
  3s, contiguous wavebands) 

    
    
3. Port and Label Management Issues 
    
   As with routers, it may be useful to recognize bundles of links [13] 
   between optical cross-connects.  This goes beyond knowledge of 
   separate independent ports.  If so, changes to the port management 
   message MAY be needed to describe ports which are part of a link 
   bundle. 
    


Doria et. al.            Expires January 2002                 [Page 2] 

Internet Draft     Req. for Optical Support in GSMP          July 2001 

 
   An updated label range message MUST be provided.  There MUST also be 
   support of multiplexing (e.g. no multiplexing, SONET, Gigabit 
   Ethernet multiplexing etc). 
    
 
4. Statistics messages 
    
   No changes are currently proposed for the statistics messages to 
   support optical switching. 
    
    
5. Configuration Issues 
    
5.1 Switch Configuration 
    
   No changes are currently proposed for the switch configuration 
   messages to support optical switching. 
    
5.2 Port Configuration 
    
   The port configuration message supplies the controller with the 
   configuration information related to a single port.  In order to 
   handle the specific port types in an optical switch, extensive 
   additions will need to be made to this command. 
    
   Port types MUST be added to support the mix of SONET/SDH signals 
   that can operate over a single fiber.  Information that MAY need to 
   be conveyed includes[8]: 
     - wavelengths available per interface 
     - bit rate per wavelength 
     - type of fiber 
      
   Again, it MAY be useful to recognize bundles of links [13] between 
   optical cross-connects.  If so, changes to the port configuration 
   message would be needed to describe ports which are part of a link 
   bundle. 
    
5.3 Service Configuration 
    
   While new capability sets MUST be added to support quality 
   parameters in optical switches, no changes are foreseen to the 
   service configuration message as its role to carry the service 
   information as defined in the applicable service model. The changes 
   related to the service model will be discussed in section 0. 
    
    
6. Service Model Issues 
    
   While one assumption of using optical media is that bandwidth is 
   plentiful, it should be expected that traffic engineering will be 
   necessary in any case[3].  GSMP provides the means for each 
   connection, or in this each light trail, to be created with specific 
   quality attributes. Capability to control re-timing and re-shaping 
   MUST be added. 
Doria et. al.            Expires January 2002                 [Page 3] 

Internet Draft     Req. for Optical Support in GSMP          July 2001 

 
    
   Currently, the default set of service models in GSMP are all based 
   on the services models defined elsewhere, e.g. the Intserv 
   model[5][7],  the Diffserv[4] model, ATM QoS models and the Frame 
   relay forum QoS models. A determination needs to be made of the 
   applicable quality models for optical channel trails. These models 
   MUST then be mapped to the GSMP capability set mechanism. 
    
    
 
7. Encapsulation issues 
    
   The working group needs to decide whether a new encapsulation is 
   required.  In other words, will all optical switches used in either 
   the MPLS over Optics and the IP over optics applications require 
   that IP be implemented on the control channel connecting the GSMP 
   controller and Optical switch (the GSMP target).  If a raw 
   wavelength control connection is to be allowed, a new encapsulation 
   SHOULD be defined. 
    
    
8. MIB Issues 
    
   If a new encapsulation is defined, then the encapsulation group 
   SHOULD be updated.  No other changes should be required. 
    
9. OXC Transaction Model 
    
9.1 Serial Transactions 
    
   Many existing OXCs use a command interface which assumes a serial 
   transaction model.  That is, a new command cannot be issued or 
   processed until the existing command is completed.  Under 
   provisioning control via a network management application, and with 
   non-dynamic path setup, this model has been adequate. 
    
   Moving to a dynamic path setup capability with a distributed control 
   plane, a parallel transaction model is likely required for 
   performance.  This is particularly helpful when the performance of 
   setting up a TDM style connection is much slower than setting up an 
   L2 connection table.  If the OXC is not able to support a parallel 
   transaction model, a GSMP controller MUST be informed of this and 
   adopt serial transaction behaviour. 
    
9.2 Bulk Transactions 
    
   Again due to the time it may take some OXCs to setup TDM connections 
   relative to L2 fabrics (e.g., VC-4/STS-1 SPE fabric in an HOVC/STS 
   switch), support for sending multiple transactions in the same 
   message is a useful optimization.  When an OXC receives a bulk 
   message, the individual transactions are acted upon and a single 
   reply is sent.  If parallel transactions are not supported, bulk 
   messages can improve performance by reducing transaction overhead.  
   Bulk transactions SHOULD be supported. 
Doria et. al.            Expires January 2002                 [Page 4] 

Internet Draft     Req. for Optical Support in GSMP          July 2001 

 
    
    
 
10. OXC Restoration Capabilities 
    
   To achieve fast link protection performance (e.g., 50 ms after 
   failure detection), SONET/SDH and some OXC systems use hardware 
   based protection schemes (e.g., ring protection).  Achieving this 
   level of performance solely using a data control plane such as GMPLS 
   is a serious challenge.  An alternate approach is to utilize fast 
   restoration capabilities of an OXC with a dynamic control plane. 
   An implication of this hybrid approach is that extensions are needed 
   to GSMP to provision the behaviour of an OXC in anticipation of a 
   link failure. 
    
   This differs from the strict master-slave relationship in GSMP for 
   Layer 2 switches in that here the OXC is capable of taking an action 
   independent of the GSMP controller and then informing the controller 
   afterwards. 
    
10.1 Non-Reserved Protection Links 
    
   An example of protection OXC behaviour is that when a link fails, a 
   backup link may be used to protect traffic on.  This backup link 
   could be selected from a set of links, none of which are pre-
   reserved.  A backup link could be shared with one or more "working" 
   links which is a form of 1:n shared protection.  Specifying the set 
   of possible backup links SHOULD be done as an option to the Add-
   Branch message. 
    
   When a backup link is used or the OXC reverts back to the original 
   link, the control plane (i.e., signalling) may need to know about 
   the new path state in order to notify the operator, or take some 
   other OAM action (e.g., billing, SLA monitoring).  An additional 
   GSMP message to inform the controller SHOULD be added to do this. 
    
10.2 Dedicated Protection Links 
    
   A more specialized form of restoration called "1+1" defines a 
   (usually node disjoint) protection path in a transport/optical 
   network for a given working path.  At the ingress node to the path, 
   the traffic signal is sent simultaneously along both working and 
   protection paths.  Under non-failure conditions at the egress node, 
   only the last link of the working path is connected to the client.  
   When any link in the working path fails, traffic on the working path 
   ceases to be received at end of the path.  The egress OXC detects 
   this condition and then switches to use the last link of the 
   protection path without the controller having to issue a Move-Input-
   Branch message.  At no time is the ingress node aware which link the 
   egress node is using.  Selection of the protection path and all of 
   its links is outside the scope of GSMP. 
    


Doria et. al.            Expires January 2002                 [Page 5] 

Internet Draft     Req. for Optical Support in GSMP          July 2001 

 
   Specification of the two output branches at the ingress node can be 
   done with the usual Add-Branch semantics. The ingress node 
   protection link is not shared with any other working link. 
    
   Specification of the two input branches at the egress node should be 
   done when the Add-Branch message is sent.  This SHOULD be an option 
   to that message. The egress node protection link is not shared with 
   any other working link. 
    
   When a protection link is used or the OXC reverts back to the 
   working link, the control plane (i.e., signalling) may need to know 
   about the new path state in order to notify the operator, or take 
   some other OAM action (e.g., billing, SLA monitoring).  An 
   additional GSMP message to inform the controller SHOULD be added to 
   do this. 
    
   If an alternate input port is not specified with an original Add-
   Branch message, it MAY be specified in a subsequent Add-Branch 
   message.  In this case, it is useful to include information about 
   existing users of the output port in that Add-Branch message.  This 
   helps the OXC immediately learn of the association between the new 
   input port and an existing one.  The association is used to enable 
   OXC protection procedures. This capability MUST be added to the add-
   branch message. 
    
   Similar contextual information is needed for a Delete-Branch message 
   so that the OXC can determine if a path becomes unprotected. This 
   capability MUST be added to the Delete-branch message. 
    
10.3 Protection Triggers 
    
   Aside from link or equipment failures, there are a variety of 
   maintenance conditions that could cause the backup/protection 
   link(s) to be used.  These may include: 
    
   -
     Scheduled maintenance of the working link.  Here the network 
     operator deliberately takes a link out of service to perform 
     maintenance. 
   -
     Reconfiguration of fiber/node/network which causes temporary need 
     to use backup links. 
    
   It may be useful to specify these triggers when the 
   backup/protection links are defined with the Add-Branch message.  
   This depends on how the OXC is implemented to be aware of such 
   triggers.  This is for further study. 
    
10.4 Protection Link Capabilities 
    
   When an OXC has the capability to perform protection switching 
   independently from the OCC, it may be useful for the OCC to be 
   informed of these capabilities at switch and/or port configuration.  
   Applications in the GSMP controller could use this information.  For 
   example, signalling clients could define a path protection scheme 
   over multiple GSMP enabled OXCs.  This is for further study. 
Doria et. al.            Expires January 2002                 [Page 6] 

Internet Draft     Req. for Optical Support in GSMP          July 2001 

 
    
    
11. Security Considerations 
    
   The security of GSMP's TCP/IP control channel has been addressed in 
   [10]. Any potential remaining security considerations are not 
   addressed in the current revision of this draft. 
    
 
12. Acknowledgements 
    
   The authors would like to thank Dimitri Papadimitriou for his 
   valuable comments on this draft. 
    
 
    
    
13. References 
    
    
    

     [1]  Ashwood-Smith, D., et. al., "Generalized MPLS - Signaling 
                    Functional Description", Internet Draft draft-
                    ietf-mpls-generalized-signaling-04.txt (work in 
                    progress), May 2001. 


     [2]  Mannie, E., et. al., _Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
                    Switching (GMPLS) Architecture_, draft-ietf-
                    ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt (work in 
                    progress), June 2001  

     [3]  Awduche, D, Rekhter, Y, et. al., "Multi-Protocol Lambda 
                    Switching: Combining MPLS Traffic Engineering 
                    Control with Optical Crossconnects," draft-
                    awduche-mpls-te-optical-02.txt (work in 
                    progress), July, 2000 

     [4]        Blake, S., et. al., _An Architecture for 
                    Differentiated Services_, RFC2475, December 1998 

     [5]  Braden, R., _Integrated Services in the Internet 
                    Architecture: An Overview_, RFC1633, June 1994 

     [6]  Doria, A, Sundell, K, Hellstrand, F, Worster, T, "General     
                    Switch Management Protocol V3," Internet Draft 
                    draft-ietf-gsmp-08.txt (work in progress), 
                    December 2000 





Doria et. al.            Expires January 2002                 [Page 7] 

Internet Draft     Req. for Optical Support in GSMP          July 2001 

 
     [7]        J. Wroclawski, "Specification of the Controlled-Load 
                    Network Element Service," RFC2211, Sep 1997. 

     [8]  Rajagopalan, B., et. al., _IP over Optical Networks: A 
                    Framework_, draft-many-ip-optical-framework-

                    02.txt (work in progress), November 2000 

     [9]  Sjostrand, H, et al, Definitions of Managed Objects for the 
                    General Switch Management Protocol (GSMP)," 
                    Internet-Draft draft-ietf-gsmp-mib-04 (work in 
                    progress), December 2000. 

     [10] Worster, T, et al, "GSMP Packet Encapsulations for ATM, 
                    Ethernet and TCP," Internet-Draft draft-ietf-
                    gsmp-encaps-03 (work in progress), December 2000. 


     [11] G.ASON _Architecture for the Automatic Switched Optical 
                    Network_, Draft v0.5.1, June 2001 

     [12] Sadler, J., Mack-Crane, B., "Generalized Switch Management 
                    Protocol", draft-sadler-gsmp-tdm-labels-00.txt 
                    (work in progress), February 2001 

     [13]
          Kompella, K., et. al., _Link Bundling in MPLS Traffic 
                    Engineering_, draft-kompella-mpls-bundle-05.txt 
                    (work in progress), February 2001 
    
    
    
    
14. Author's Addresses 
    
   Avri Doria 
   Nortel Networks 
   600 Technology Park Drive 
   Billerica MA 01821 
   avri@nortelnetworks.com 
    
   Kenneth Sundell 
   Nortel Networks AB 
   P.O. Box 6701 
   SE-113 85 Stockholm Sweden 
   ksundell@nortelnetworks.com 
    
   Stephen Shew 
   Nortel Networks 
   PO Box 3511 Station C 
   Ottawa, ON 
   K1Y 4H7 
   sdshew@nortelnetworks.com 
    
Doria et. al.            Expires January 2002                 [Page 8] 

Internet Draft     Req. for Optical Support in GSMP          July 2001 


   Hormuzd Khosravi 
   Intel 
   2111 NE 25th Avenue 
   Hillsboro, OR 97124 USA 
   Phone: +1 503 264 0334 
   hormuzd.m.khosravi@intel.com 
    















































Doria et. al.            Expires January 2002                 [Page 9] 

Internet Draft     Req. for Optical Support in GSMP          July 2001 

 
    
 
Full Copyright Statement 

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society 2001. All Rights Reserved. This 
   document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into 
    





































Doria et. al.            Expires January 2002                [Page 10] 


