


Network Working Group                                       S. Josefsson
Internet-Draft                                             March 5, 2004
Expires: September 3, 2004


                     Domain Name System Media Types
                      draft-josefsson-mime-dns-02

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 3, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document register the media types application/dns and text/dns,
   in accordance with RFC 2048 [3]. The application/dns media type is
   used to identify data on the detached Domain Name System (DNS) format
   described in RFC 2540 [4]. The text/dns media type is used to
   identify master files as described in RFC 1035 [2].











Josefsson              Expires September 3, 2004                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Domain Name System Media Types           March 2004


Table of Contents

   1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2. MIME type registration of application/dns  . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3. MIME type registration of text/dns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6. Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
      Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . 9







































Josefsson              Expires September 3, 2004                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Domain Name System Media Types           March 2004


1. Introduction

   Domain Name System (DNS) information is traditionally stored in text
   files, so called master files or zone files. The format is described
   in section 5 of RFC 1035 [2].

   DNS data can also be stored in a "detached" format, intended for
   archiving purposes, described in RFC 2540 [4].

   This document register MIME media types for the two data formats,
   following the registration procedures described in RFC 2048 [3].








































Josefsson              Expires September 3, 2004                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Domain Name System Media Types           March 2004


2. MIME type registration of application/dns

   To: ietf-types@iana.org
   Subject: Registration of MIME media type application/dns

   MIME media type name: application

   MIME subtype name: dns

   Required parameters: None.

   Optional parameters: None.

   Encoding considerations: The data format is binary, and data must be
   transfered unmodified. Using encodings intended for textual parts is
   not recommended.

   Security considerations: This media type identify content as being
   detached DNS information, as documented in RFC 2540 [4]. This data
   may be security relevant according to RFC 2538 [7], or secured
   information according to RFC 2535 [6]. Securing the content further
   may be done by standard techniques, such as OpenPGP [5] or CMS [8],
   but this is outside of the scope here.  Further security assessments
   are not available at this point.

   Interoperability considerations: The encoding of detached DNS
   information is, unlike textual master files, well defined. No further
   interoperability considerations are known.

   Published specification: The format of data that could be tagged with
   this media type is documented in RFC 2540 [4].

   Applications which use this media type: DNS related software,
   including software storing and using certificates stored in DNS.

   Additional information:
     Magic number(s): None.
     File extension(s): Unknown.
     Macintosh File Type Code(s): Unknown.

   Person & email address to contact for further information:

   Simon Josefsson simon@josefsson.org

   Intended usage: LIMITED USE

   Author/Change controller: simon@josefsson.org




Josefsson              Expires September 3, 2004                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Domain Name System Media Types           March 2004


3. MIME type registration of text/dns

   To: ietf-types@iana.org
   Subject: Registration of MIME media type text/dns

   MIME media type name: text

   MIME subtype name: dns

   Required parameters: None.

   Optional parameters: None.

   Encoding considerations: The data is textual, and should be
   transfered in a line oriented mode. Text literals may contain CRLF
   within the text. Binary transports is possible between systems that
   use the same end-of-line conventions. Master files are in general
   ASCII, but non-ASCII octet values may occur and are treated as opaque
   values by DNS software (compare RFC 1035 section 5). The master file
   format permits encoding arbitrary octet values using the "\DDD"
   encoding. The use of "\DDD" encoding can be more reliable than
   transporting non-ASCII through MIME transports, if data passes
   through a gateway that re-encode the character data.

   Security considerations: This media type identify content as being
   DNS information in "master file" format, as documented in RFC 1035
   [2]. The DNS data may be security relevant according to RFC 2538 [7],
   or secured information according to RFC 2535 [6]. Securing the
   content further may be done by standard techniques, such as OpenPGP
   [5] or CMS [8], but this is outside of the scope here. Further
   security assessments are not available at this point.

   Interoperability considerations: There are interoperability concerns
   with master files, due to the wide spread use of vendor specific
   extensions. Non-ASCII comments within master files may have been
   encoded in a locally chosen character sets, which may be difficult to
   transport interoperably. Non-ASCII data in general can become
   corrupted by re-encoding gateways. To achieve interoperability, you
   can use the master file format described in the specification and the
   "\DDD" encoding for non-ASCII octets.

   Published specification: The format of data that could be tagged with
   this MIME type is documented in RFC 1035 [2].

   Applications which use this media type: DNS related software,
   including software storing and using certificates stored in DNS.





Josefsson              Expires September 3, 2004                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Domain Name System Media Types           March 2004


   Additional information:
     Magic number(s): None.
     File extension(s): 'soa' and 'zone' are known to be used.
     Macintosh File Type Code(s): Unknown.

   Person & email address to contact for further information:

   Simon Josefsson simon@josefsson.org

   Intended usage: LIMITED USE

   Author/Change controller: simon@josefsson.org







































Josefsson              Expires September 3, 2004                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Domain Name System Media Types           March 2004


4. Security Considerations

   Security considerations are discussed in the security considerations
   clause of the MIME registrations in section 2 and 3.

5. IANA Considerations

   The IANA is asked to register the MIME media types application/dns
   and text/dns using the registration templates in section 2 and 3,
   according to the procedure described in RFC 2048 [3].

6. Acknowledgments

   Thanks to D. Eastlake for suggesting text/dns. Thanks to Keith Moore
   for reviewing earlier versions of this document.  The author
   acknowledges the RSA Laboratories for supporting the work that led to
   this document.

Normative References

   [1]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and facilities", STD
        13, RFC 1034, November 1987.

   [2]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
        specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [3]  Freed, N., Klensin, J. and J. Postel, "Multipurpose Internet
        Mail Extensions (MIME) Part Four: Registration Procedures", BCP
        13, RFC 2048, November 1996.

   [4]  Eastlake, D., "Detached Domain Name System (DNS) Information",
        RFC 2540, March 1999.

Informative References

   [5]  Callas, J., Donnerhacke, L., Finney, H. and R. Thayer, "OpenPGP
        Message Format", RFC 2440, November 1998.

   [6]  Eastlake, D., "Domain Name System Security Extensions", RFC
        2535, March 1999.

   [7]  Eastlake, D. and O. Gudmundsson, "Storing Certificates in the
        Domain Name System (DNS)", RFC 2538, March 1999.

   [8]  Housley, R., "Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS)", RFC 3369,
        August 2002.





Josefsson              Expires September 3, 2004                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Domain Name System Media Types           March 2004


Author's Address

   Simon Josefsson

   EMail: simon@josefsson.org














































Josefsson              Expires September 3, 2004                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Domain Name System Media Types           March 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Josefsson              Expires September 3, 2004                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Domain Name System Media Types           March 2004


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Josefsson              Expires September 3, 2004               [Page 10]


