


Network Working Group                                    J. Klensin, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                         December 21, 2006
Intended status: Informational
Expires: June 24, 2007


               Independent Submissions to the RFC Editor
                 draft-klensin-rfc-independent-05.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 24, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   There is a long-term tradition in the Internet community, predating
   the IETF by many years, of use of the RFC series to publish materials
   that are not rooted in the IETF standards process and its review and
   approval mechanisms.  These documents, known as "independent
   submissions", serve a number of important functions for the Internet
   community, both inside and outside of the community of active IETF
   participants.  This document discusses the independent submission
   model and some reasons why it is important.  It then describes



Klensin                   Expires June 24, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Independent Submissions           December 2006


   editorial and processing norms that can be used for independent
   submissions as the community goes forward into new relationships
   between the IETF community and its primary technical publisher.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Terminology Note . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2.  Context and Philosophical Assumptions  . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  The Role of Independent Submissions  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Document Submission  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  The Review Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.1.  Posting of Draft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.2.  Request for Publication  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.3.  Initial RFC Editor Review  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.4.  Document Rejection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.5.  Review and Evaluation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.6.  Unsolicited Reviews  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.7.  Additional Reviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.8.  Final IESG Review  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.9.  Final Decision and Notification  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.10. Final Editing and Publication  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  The Editorial Review Board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Status and Availability of Reviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.1.  Documents in process or rejected . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.2.  Published Documents and Documents Approved for
           Publication  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  Intellectual Property Rights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   9.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   10. Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   11. Change log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     11.1. Changes between version -02 and version -03  . . . . . . . 12
     11.2. Changes for -04  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     11.3. Changes for -05  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   12. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     12.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     12.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 16










Klensin                   Expires June 24, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Independent Submissions           December 2006


1.  Introduction

   There is a long-term tradition in the Internet community, predating
   the IETF by many years, of use of the RFC series to publish materials
   that are not rooted in the IETF standards process and its review and
   approval mechanisms.  These documents, known as "independent
   submissions", serve a number of important functions for the Internet
   community, both inside and outside of the community of active IETF
   participants.  This document discusses the independent submission
   model and some reasons why it is important.  It then describes
   editorial and processing norms that can be used for independent
   submissions as the community goes forward into new relationships
   between the IETF community and its primary technical publisher.

   To understand the perspective of this document, it is important to
   remember that the RFC-Editor function predates the creation of the
   IETF.  As of the time of this writing, the RFC series goes back 36
   years while the IETF is celebrating its 20th anniversary.  All of the
   documents that were published before the IETF was created, and for
   some years thereafter, would be considered independent submissions
   today.  As the IETF evolved, the IAB and then the IETF itself chose
   to publish IETF documents as RFCs while fully understanding that the
   RFC-Editor function was an independent publication mechanism.  Other
   decisions were possible: e.g., the IETF could have decided to create
   it own publication series.  It was felt that there was considerable
   value in continuing to publish the IETF work in the same series as
   the one used to publish the basic protocols for the Internet.

1.1.  Terminology Note

   This document describes what have historically been referred to as
   "independent submissions".  That term is distinguished from those
   IETF and IAB community documents that originate from formal groups --
   IAB, IRTF, IETF WGs -- and from submissions submitted to the IESG for
   standards-track, informational, or experimental processing.
   Documents produced by individuals, rather than IETF WGs or others
   IETF-affiliated groups, but submitted for publication under Area
   Director sponsorship, have been known historically as "individual
   submissions".

   For convenience and obvious historical reasons, the editor and
   publisher of documents that are not processed through the IETF is
   known below as the "RFC Editor".  The RFC Editor will typically be an
   organization or one or more senior people and associated staff, and
   the term is used collectively below.  That term is not intended to
   predict the future, either in terms of who does the job or what they,
   or the document series, are called.




Klensin                   Expires June 24, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Independent Submissions           December 2006


1.2.  Context and Philosophical Assumptions

   This document contains text that, if agreed to by the community, may
   suggest a reexamination of and a corresponding update to RFC 3932
   [RFC3932].  Those issues, and proposals for changes, are discussed in
   a different document [RFC3932upd], but they are semi-independent of
   the content of this document, which focuses on the review and
   approval process for independent submissions.

   This document complements the discussion and guidelines in [RFC4714],
   which focuses on standards track documents.  It takes a somewhat
   stronger view than the discussions that lead up to that document,
   starting from the belief that independent submissions are most
   valuable if they are, in fact, independent of the IETF process.  From
   the perspective of the IETF, independent submissions are especially
   important as checks on the IETF processes even though such checks are
   not the only, or even a common, reason for them.  That role is
   compromised if IETF-related entities are able to block or deprecate
   such documents to a degree beyond that needed to avoid difficulties
   with the standards process.


2.  The Role of Independent Submissions

   When the RFC series was fairly new, RFCs could be used to publish
   general papers on networking as well as the types of documents we
   would describes as standards today.  Those roles also developed as
   part of the early design and development of the ARPANET, long before
   anyone dreamt of the IETF and when the distinction between, e.g.,
   standards and informational documents was less precisely drawn.  In
   more recent years, independent submissions have become important for
   multiple reasons, some of them relatively new.  They include:

   o  Discussion of Internet-related technologies that are not part of
      the IETF agenda.
   o  Introduction of important new ideas as a bridge publication venue
      between academia and IETF engineering.
   o  Informational discussions of technologies, options, or experience
      with protocols.
   o  Informational publication of vendor-specific protocols.
   o  Critiques and discussions of alternatives to IETF standards-track
      protocols.  The potential for such critiques provides an important
      check on the IETF's standards processes and should be seen in that
      light.
   o  Documents considered by IETF Working Groups but not standardized.
      While many documents of this type are published via the IESG
      approval path (see RFC 3932, Section 1 [RFC3932]), the independent
      submission path has traditionally been open to them.  Because of



Klensin                   Expires June 24, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Independent Submissions           December 2006


      their intimate connection to the IETF Standards Process and WG
      activites and the consequent sensitivity to exact statements of
      relationships and to timing, there is reason to believe that all
      such documents should be published only at IESG request.  In any
      event, these documents are published for the historical record.
   o  Satirical materials.
   o  Meeting notes and reports (RFC 164 [RFC0164] is the earliest, 1109
      [RFC1109] probably the most important).
   o  Editorials (the best example is IEN-137, not an RFC).
   o  Eulogies (RFC 2441 [RFC2441])
   o  Technical contributions (e.g., RFC 1810 [RFC1810]) and,
      historically,
   o  RFC Editor and, at least prior to the handoff between ISI and
      ICANN and the June 2000 MOU [RFC2860], IANA Policy Statements
      (e.g., [RFC2223] and RFC 1591 [RFC1591]).

   It should be clear from the list above that, to be effective, the
   review and approval process for independent submissions should be
   largely independent of the IETF.  As a important principle that has
   been applied historically, the RFC Editor should seek advice from the
   IESG about possible relationships and conflicts with IETF work.  The
   IESG may ask that, as a courtesy, publication of particular documents
   be deferred because their untimely publication could cause confusion
   or other harm with proposals under consideration for standardization.
   Absent compelling arguments to the contrary, the RFC Editor will
   honor such requests.  Similarly, any submission that constitutes an
   alternative to, or is in conflict with, an IETF Standard or proposal
   for standards-track adoption must clearly indicate that relationship.
   The IESG may identify such conflicts as part of its review.  If the
   IESG identifies issues, it may recommend explanatory or qualifying
   text for the RFC Editor to include in the document if it is
   published.

   The specific procedures to be followed in review are described in
   Section 4.


3.  Document Submission

   Independent submissions are submitted directly to the RFC Editor.
   They must first be posted as Internet Drafts, so the submission is
   typically simply a note requesting that the RFC Editor consider a
   particular Internet Draft for publication.  The process is described
   in more detail in [RFC2223] and a working draft of an update to it
   [RFC2223bis].

   Any document that meets the requirements of this specification, of
   [RFC2223] and its successors, and of any intellectual property or



Klensin                   Expires June 24, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Independent Submissions           December 2006


   other conditions that may be established from time to time, may be
   submitted to the RFC Editor for consideration as an Independent
   Submission.  However, the RFC Editor prefers that documents created
   through IETF processes (e.g., working group output) be considered by
   the IESG and submitted using this path only if a working group, or
   the IESG, decline to publish it.  In the latter cases, the review
   process is likely to be more efficient if the authors provide a
   history of consideration and reviews of the document at the time of
   submission.


4.  The Review Process

   While this document is consistent with the broad outline of
   independent submission and review as practiced over the years, it
   specifies some new arrangements in RFC Editor processing that will
   improve the balance between openness and independent decisions.

   In general, the steps in the review process are identified in the
   subsections below.  Any of them may be iterated and, at the
   discretion of the RFC Editor, steps after the first may be taken out
   of order.

4.1.  Posting of Draft

   The author(s) or editor(s) of a document post it as an Internet
   Draft.

4.2.  Request for Publication

   After the normal opportunity for community review and feedback
   provided by the submission of the I-D and the I-D repository
   announcement thereof, the author or editor sends a request for
   consideration for publication to the RFC Editor at
   rfc-editor@rfc-editor.org.  That request should note any community
   discussion or reviews of the document that have occurred before
   submission.

4.3.  Initial RFC Editor Review

   RFC Editor Staff perform an initial check on the document.  If they
   believe there is a high likelihood of conflicts or other interactions
   with IETF efforts (including believing that the document is one that
   the IESG should probably process), they may forward it to the IESG,
   or relevant ADs, for preliminary evaluation and comment.






Klensin                   Expires June 24, 2007                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Independent Submissions           December 2006


4.4.  Document Rejection

   If the document does not appear publishable, the RFC Editor may
   reject a submitted document at any point in the process specified
   here.  Such rejection would normally be based on the conclusion that
   the submission does not meet the technical or editorial standards of
   the RFC Series or is not relevant to the areas that the series
   covers.  Alternatively, the RFC Editor Staff may, at their
   discretion, iterate with the author on the document to improve its
   quality.  If a document is rejected by the RFC Editor, the author may
   request an additional review from the IAB, as described below, but
   the IAB is not obligated to do that review, nor is the RFC Editor
   obligated to publish even with a favorable IAB review.

4.5.  Review and Evaluation

   The RFC Editor arranges for one or more reviews of the document.
   This may include Editorial Board (see Section 5) reviews or
   evaluation of reviews by others.

4.6.  Unsolicited Reviews

   Unsolicited reviews from parties independent of the author are
   welcome at any time and will be handled as above.  Unsolicited
   reviews will be shared with the author including the identity of the
   reviewer.

4.7.  Additional Reviews

   If the author is unsatisfied with the review(s), the author may
   request that the RFC Editor solicit additional reviews.  In
   exceptional circumstances, the author may request that the IAB review
   the documents.  Such requests to the IAB, and any reviews the IAB
   chooses to perform, will occur according to procedures of the IAB's
   choosing.  However, the IAB is not required to initiate a review or
   comply with a request for one: a request to the IAB for a review is
   not an appeal process.  The RFC Editor is expected to consider all
   competent reviews carefully, and in the absence of some unusual
   circumstance, a preponderance of favorable reviews should lead to
   publication.

4.8.  Final IESG Review

   Once the RFC Editor has made a tentative decision to publish, the
   document is forwarded to the IESG for evaluation with a relatively
   short timeout.

   The IESG evaluation is not a technical one.  Instead, it covers the



Klensin                   Expires June 24, 2007                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Independent Submissions           December 2006


   issues listed in RFC 3932 or its successors, presumably from the
   perspective outlined above in Section 1.2.  That is, the evaluation
   should focus exclusively on conflicts or confusion with IETF process
   and attempts to subvert ("end run") working group activities.

   At the time the document is forwarded to the IESG, the RFC Editor
   will post an indication on its web pages that the document is under
   IESG review and that comments on conflicts can be sent to the IESG
   with copies to the RFC Editor.  Additional mechanisms may be
   developed from time to time to inform a community that a document is
   entering formal prepublication review.  Comments not directly related
   to IETF procedures or conflicts may be sent directly to the author(s)
   and RFC Editor.

   In addition to the IESG review for conflict with IETF work,
   individuals in the IESG, or in the broader IETF community, are free
   to review a draft and, if they have comments of any kind --including
   the extreme case of believing that the proposal is damaging to the
   Internet as a whole-- these comments should be directed to the
   authors and the RFC Editor.

   If the IESG, after completing its review, concludes that publication
   of the document should be delayed for a reasonable period of time,
   the RFC Editor will grant that request.  The current agreement
   between the RFC Editor and the IESG on requested delays is expected
   to continue.  That agreement permits the IESG to ask for a delay of
   up to six months and, if necessary, to renew that request twice, for
   a total possible delay of 18 months.

   If the IESG concludes that the document should not be published as an
   RFC, it will request that the RFC Editor not publish and provide
   appropriate justification for that request.  The RFC Editor will
   consider the request to not publish the document.

   The RFC Editor or the author may request that the IAB review the
   IESG's request to delay or not publish the document and request that
   the IAB provide an additional opinion.  Such a request will be made
   public via the RFC Editor web site.  As with the IESG review itself,
   the IAB's opinion, if any, will be advisory.  And, as with author
   requests for an IAB technical review (see Section 4.7), the IAB is
   not obligated to perform this type of review and may decline the
   request.

4.9.  Final Decision and Notification

   In all cases, the ultimate decision to publish or not publish, and
   with what language, rests with the RFC Editor.




Klensin                   Expires June 24, 2007                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Independent Submissions           December 2006


   Information about the IESG requested publication delay or request to
   not publish a document will be posted to the RFC Editor web site to
   supplement document status information.

4.10.  Final Editing and Publication

   Once a document is approved for publication, it is handled in a
   fashion similar to other RFCs, with principles about priorities
   worked out with the IAB as appropriate.


5.  The Editorial Review Board

   The RFC Editor appoints and maintains an Editorial Review Board
   which, much like the Editorial Boards of professional journals and
   publishers, provides the RFC Editor with both advice and reviews of
   particular proposed publications and general and strategic policy
   advice.  The membership list of the Editorial Review Board is public
   and can be found at http://www.rfc-editor.org/edboard.html.
   Editorial Board members serve at the pleasure of the RFC Editor.
   From time to time, the RFC Editor will solicit suggestions for new
   appointees from the IAB and other sources and will seek IAB comments
   on those to be appointed and on the effectiveness of the review
   process and the quality of documents being published and criteria
   applied.  However, to ensure the independence of the independent
   submission process, the final decision to appoint (or not appoint)
   Editorial Board members rests with the RFC Editor.


6.  Status and Availability of Reviews

   The RFC Editor will conduct the reviews discussed above with the
   intent of balancing fairness to authors, transparancy of the review
   process to the general community, protection of reviewers from
   possible retaliation or undue pressure, and the interest of the
   community in having any significant dissents from published documents
   available to the community with the same degree of scrutiny that the
   original documents received.  To this end, reviews and information
   about reviewers will be made public under the following
   circumstances.  In special cases in which other considerations apply,
   the RFC Editor may adopt special provisions after reviewing the
   circumstances and proposed action with the IAB.

   Any reviewer participating in the process outlined in this document
   does so on condition of giving consent to handling of the reviews as
   outlined in this section.  In special cases, individual arrangements
   may be worked out in advance with the RFC Editor.




Klensin                   Expires June 24, 2007                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           Independent Submissions           December 2006


6.1.  Documents in process or rejected

   For documents in process, reviews may be made public and posted on
   the RFC Editor web site at the request of the author.  The names of
   reviewers associated with each review will normally accompany their
   reviews, but may be withheld at the request of the reviewer.

   If the RFC Editor declines to publish a document, the document author
   may request that reviews be made public, as above, However, that
   request must be timely, generally within thirty days of the author's
   notification that the document would not be published.

   With or without a document author request, the RFC Editor may post
   the full set of reviews associated with a document in process or
   rejected for publication if they conclude that doing so would be in
   the best interest of the community.  The author will be notified that
   this action is about to be taken and may optionally request that the
   request to publish the document be withdrawn and the reviews kept
   private.  Under normal circumstances, the RFC Editor will honor that
   request.

6.2.  Published Documents and Documents Approved for Publication

   For documents that are published, either the author or any reviewer
   may request that reviews be made public.  The RFC Editor may, but is
   not required to, do so.  In considering whether to make review
   materials public, the RFC Editor is expected to note, first, that the
   best way to comment on, or dissent from, an RFC is generally another
   RFC; that reviews critical of a document are not themselves reviewed
   and that the author generally does not have the right to publish a
   refutation to an unfavorable review; and that a reviewer who feels
   strongly about a subject about which a review has already been
   written often would not need to do significant additional work to
   produce an RFC-format document from that review.

   Nothing in this section or the subsections above precludes private
   communications between reviewers, the Editorial Board, and the RFC
   Editor; such communications will remain confidential.  At minimum,
   the author of either an accepted or rejected document shall receive a
   written summary of the review(s).


7.  Intellectual Property Rights

   The following material was extracted from the relevant sections of
   BCP 78 [RFC3978] [RFC4748] in order to get all independent submission
   information for technical publications produced under the auspices of
   the IETF, IASA or the IETF Trust, or ISOC into a single place and to



Klensin                   Expires June 24, 2007                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           Independent Submissions           December 2006


   initialize the process of separating discussions of independent
   submissions from those about standards-track or other IETF documents.
   Note that the text that follows uses the term "RFC Editor
   Contribution" to describe the same type of document referred to as an
   "independent submission" elsewhere in this document.  The RFC Editor
   may change these provisions from time to time after obtaining the
   advice and consent of the IETF Trust in its capacity as the formal
   publisher of RFCs.

   By submission of an RFC Editor Contribution, each person actually
   submitting the RFC Editor Contribution, and each named co-
   Contributor, is deemed to agree to the following terms and
   conditions, and to grant the following rights, on his or her own
   behalf and on behalf of the organization the Contributor represents
   or is sponsored by (if any) when submitting the RFC Editor
   Contribution.

   a.  For Internet Drafts that are to expected be submitted as RFC
       Editor Contributions: To the extent that an RFC Editor
       Contribution or any portion thereof is protected by copyright and
       other rights of authorship, the Contributor, and each named co-
       Contributor, and the organization he or she represents or is
       sponsored by (if any) grant an irrevocable, non-exclusive,
       royalty-free, world-wide right and license to the ISOC, the IETF
       Trust, and the IETF under all intellectual property rights in the
       RFC Editor Contribution for at least the life of the Internet-
       Draft, to copy, publish, display, and distribute the RFC Editor
       Contribution as an Internet-Draft.
   b.  For an RFC Editor Contribution submitted for publication as an
       RFC, and to the extent described above, the Contributor, each
       named co-Contributor, and the organizations represented above
       grant the same license to those organizations and to the
       community as a whole to copy, publish, display, and distribute
       the RFC Editor Contribution irrevocably and in perpetuity and,
       also irrevocably and in perpetuity, grant the rights listed below
       to those organizations and entities and to the community
       A.  to prepare or allow the preparation of translations of the
           RFC into languages other than English.
       B.  unless explicitly disallowed in the notices contained in an
           RFC Editor Contribution, to prepare derivative works (other
           than translations) that are based on or incorporate all or
           part of the RFC Editor Contribution, or comment upon it.  The
           license to such derivative works shall not grant the ISOC,
           the IETF, or other party preparing a derivative work any more
           rights than the license to the original RFC Editor
           Contribution, and





Klensin                   Expires June 24, 2007                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           Independent Submissions           December 2006


       C.  to reproduce any trademarks, service marks or trade names
           which are included in the RFC Editor Contribution solely in
           connection with the reproduction, distribution or publication
           of the RFC Editor Contribution and derivative works thereof
           as permitted by this paragraph.  Any entity reproducing RFC
           Editor Contributions will, as a condition of permission of
           such reproduction, preserve trademark and service mark
           identifiers used by the Contributor of the RFC Editor
           Contribution, including (TM) and (R) where appropriate.
       D.  The Contributor grants the IETF Trust, ISOC, and the RFC
           Editor permission to reference the name(s) and address(es) of
           the Contributor(s) and of the organization(s) s/he represents
           or is sponsored by (if any).


8.  Security Considerations

   This document specifies an RFC Editor (and, indirectly, IETF)
   administrative and publication procedure.  It has no specific
   security implications.


9.  IANA Considerations

   This document requires no actions by the IANA.


10.  Acknowledgments

   Special thanks are due to Bob Hinden and Craig Partridge, who made
   several suggestions for improved text in earlier versions of this
   document and to Stewart Bryant, Scott Bradner, Brian Carpenter, Vint
   Cerf, Leslie Daigle, and Olaf Kolkman who made a number of useful
   suggestions about the organization and content of subsequent
   versions.  We also express our appreciation to the IETF and Scott
   Bradner, Editor, for the material extracted from BCP 78 [RFC3978] and
   used in Section 7.


11.  Change log

   [[anchor18: RFC Editor: please remove this section before
   publication]]

11.1.  Changes between version -02 and version -03

   This section summarizes changes between version -02 and version -03.




Klensin                   Expires June 24, 2007                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           Independent Submissions           December 2006


   o  Removed material suggesting specific revisions to RFC 3932.  There
      is still a forward pointer to a proposal for those revisions, but
      it is not normative.
   o  Added new text questioning whether documents considered by, but
      rejected in, WGs should be processed as independent submissions or
      via the IESG (and, implicitly, subject to normal appeal procedures
      if rejected there).
   o  Clarified that the order of actions in Section 4 is not a binding
      requirement.
   o  Indicated that authors should submit notes on existing discussion
      and reviews along with the request for publication itself.
   o  Brian Carpenter's suggested text about technical reviews was
      incorporated (approximately) into Section 4.8.
   o  Clarified the status of review privacy on documents accepted for
      publication.
   o  Added text to Section 5 to indicate that the RFC Editor will
      solicit inputs about effectiveness and quality in addition to
      names of individuals.
   o  Several small editorial and textual changes for clarity and
      correctness.

11.2.  Changes for -04

   This section summarizes changes between version -03 and version -04.

   o  Removed the material on public reviews and public authors to a
      separate section and revised the rules somewhat.  The reader may
      wish to note that, in addition to the often-repeated arguments
      about standard practices in professional journals, no IETF-related
      management body makes transcripts of its internal discussions
      public, In particular, the IESG has repeatedly declined (for good
      reason as far as this editor is concerned) to make its mailing
      list contents public and and has also declined to permit general
      access to its conference calls.  There appear to be strong
      analogies between those precedents and reasonable confidentiality
      of reviews.  In particular, an author should always have the
      option of withdrawing a document rather than having reviews made
      public.
   o  The relationship between WG-produced documents, and documents
      considered as part of WG processes, has been further clarified.
   o  At IETF 67, the IPR WG decided that IPR rules for independent
      submissions were not the responsibility of that WG and would not
      be covered in future versions of BCP 78 [RFC3978].  To facilitate
      that transition, the material on that subject from RFC 3978 has
      been incorporated directly into this document.
   o  Several small editorial changes





Klensin                   Expires June 24, 2007                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           Independent Submissions           December 2006


11.3.  Changes for -05

   This section summarizes changes between version -04 and version -05.

   o  Updated the IPR text to reflect RFC 4748
   o  Removed a spurious empty subsection from that section.


12.  References

12.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [RFC2223]  Postel, J. and J. Reynolds, "Instructions to RFC Authors",
              RFC 2223, October 1997.

   [RFC2223bis]
              Reynolds, J., Ed. and R. Braden, Ed., "Instructions to
              Request for Comments (RFC) Authors", <http://www.ietf.org/
              internet-drafts/draft-rfc-editor-rfc2223bis-08.txt>.

   [RFC3932]  Alvestrand, H., "The IESG and RFC Editor Documents:
              Procedures", BCP 92, RFC 3932, October 2004.

   [RFC3932upd]
              Klensin, J., Ed., "IESG Notes on Independent Submissions
              to the RFC Editor".

   [RFC3978]  Bradner, S., "IETF Rights in Contributions", BCP 78,
              RFC 3978, March 2005.

   [RFC4748]  Bradner, S., "RFC 3978 Update to Recognize the IETF
              Trust", BCP 78, RFC 4748, October 2006.

12.2.  Informative References

   [RFC0164]  Heafner, J., "Minutes of Network Working Group meeting,
              5/16 through 5/19/71", RFC 164, May 1971.

   [RFC1109]  Cerf, V., "Report of the second Ad Hoc Network Management
              Review Group", RFC 1109, August 1989.

   [RFC1591]  Postel, J., "Domain Name System Structure and Delegation",
              RFC 1591, March 1994.

   [RFC1810]  Touch, J., "Report on MD5 Performance", RFC 1810,



Klensin                   Expires June 24, 2007                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           Independent Submissions           December 2006


              June 1995.

   [RFC2441]  Cohen, D., "Working with Jon Tribute delivered at UCLA,
              October 30, 1998", RFC 2441, November 1998.

   [RFC2860]  Carpenter, B., Baker, F., and M. Roberts, "Memorandum of
              Understanding Concerning the Technical Work of the
              Internet Assigned Numbers Authority", RFC 2860, June 2000.

   [RFC4714]  Mankin, A. and S. Hayes, "Requirements for IETF Technical
              Publication Service", RFC 4714, October 2006.


Author's Address

   John C Klensin (editor)
   1770 Massachusetts Ave, #322
   Cambridge, MA  02140
   USA

   Phone: +1 617 491 5735
   Email: john-ietf@jck.com





























Klensin                   Expires June 24, 2007                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft           Independent Submissions           December 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Klensin                   Expires June 24, 2007                [Page 16]


