






      
      
     Network Working Group                             Eric Gray, Editor 
     Internet Draft                                             Ericsson 
     Expires: December, 2006 
      
                                                           June 26, 2006 
                                         
      
                                         
                The Architecture of an RBridge Solution to TRILL 
                      draft-gray-trill-rbridge-arch-01.txt 


     Status of this Memo 

        By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that       
        any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is       
        aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she       
        becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of       
        BCP 79. 

        Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet 
        Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working 
        groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working 
        documents as Internet-Drafts. 

        Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
        months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
        documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
        Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work 
        in progress." 

        The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
             http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

        The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
             http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

        This Internet-Draft will expire on December 26, 2006. 

         

     Abstract 

        RBridges are link layer (L2) devices that use routing protocols 
        as a control plane. They combine several of the benefits of the 
        link layer with network layer routing benefits. RBridges use 
        existing link state routing to provide higher RBridge to RBridge 
        cross-section bandwidth, fast convergence on reconfiguration, 
      
      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006             [Page 1] 
      






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        and more robustness under link interruption than an equivalent 
        set of conventional bridges using existing spanning tree 
        forwarding. They are intended to apply to similar L2 network 
        sizes as conventional bridges and are intended to be backward 
        compatible with those bridges as both ingress/egress and 
        transit. They also attempt to retain as much 'plug and play' as 
        is already available in existing bridges. This document proposes 
        an RBridge system as a solution to the TRILL problem. It also 
        defines the RBridge architecture, defines its terminology, and 
        describes basic components and desired behavior. One or more 
        separate documents specify the protocols and mechanisms that 
        satisfy the architecture presented herein. 



































      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006             [Page 2] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

     Table of Contents 

         
        1. Introduction................................................4 
        2. Background..................................................6 
           2.1. Existing Terminology...................................6 
           2.2. RBridge Terminology...................................10 
        3. Components.................................................13 
           3.1. RBridge Device........................................13 
           3.2. RBrdige Data Model....................................14 
              3.2.1. CFT..............................................14 
              3.2.2. CFT-IRT..........................................14 
              3.2.3. CTT..............................................16 
        4. Functional Description.....................................16 
           4.1. CRED Auto-configuration...............................16 
           4.2. RBridge Peer Discovery................................19 
           4.3. Tunneling.............................................20 
           4.4. RBridge General Operation.............................21 
           4.5. Ingress/Egress Operations.............................22 
           4.6. Transit Forwarding Operations.........................24 
              4.6.1. Unicast..........................................24 
              4.6.2. Broadcast, Multicast and Flooding................24 
                 4.6.2.1. Broadcast...................................25 
                 4.6.2.2. Multicast...................................26 
                 4.6.2.3. Flooding....................................27 
           4.7. Routing Protocol Operation............................28 
           4.8. Other Bridging and Ethernet Protocol Operations.......29 
        5. How RBridges Address TRILL.................................29 
        6. Conclusions................................................29 
        7. Security Considerations....................................30 
        8. IANA Considerations........................................30 
        9. Acknowledgments............................................31 
        10. References................................................31 
           10.1. Normative References.................................31 
           10.2. Informative References...............................31 
        Author's Addresses............................................32 
        Intellectual Property Statement...............................32 
        Disclaimer of Validity........................................33 
        Copyright Statement...........................................33 
        Acknowledgment................................................33 
         






      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006             [Page 3] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

     1. Introduction 

        This document describes an architecture that addresses the TRILL 
        problem and applicability statement [2]. This architecture is 
        composed of a set of devices called RBridges that cooperate 
        together within an Ethernet network to provide a layer two 
        delivery service that makes efficient use of available links 
        using a link state routing protocol. The service provided is 
        analogous to creation of a single, virtual device composed of an 
        overlay of tunnels, constructed between RBridge devices, using 
        link state routing. RBridges thus support increased RBridge to 
        RBridge bandwidth and fault tolerance, when compared to 
        conventional Ethernet bridges (which forward frames via a 
        spanning tree), while still being compatible with bridges and 
        hubs. 

        The principal objectives of this architecture is to provide an 
        overview of the use of these RBridges in meeting the following 
        goals: 

          1) Provide a form of optimized layer two delivery service. 

          2) Use existing technology as much as possible. 

          3) Allow for configuration free deployment. 

        In providing a (optimized) layer two (L2) service, key factors 
        we want to maintain are: transparency to higher layer (layer 3 
        and above) delivery services and mechanisms, and use of location 
        independent addressing. Optimization of the L2 delivery service 
        consists of: use of all available paths and support for pruning 
        of multicast traffic delivery paths. 

        To accomplish the goal of using existing technologies as much as 
        possible, we intend to specify minimal extensions (if required) 
        to one or more existing link-state routing protocols, as well as 
        defining the specific sub-set of existing bridging technologies 
        this architecture makes use of.  

        The extent to which routing protocol extensions may be required 
        depends on the closeness of the "fit" of any chosen routing 
        protocol to RBridge protocol requirements. See [6] for further 
        information on these requirements. The use of a specific routing 
        protocol - along with appropriate extensions and enhancements - 
        will be defined in corresponding RBridge protocol specifications 
        (see [3] for example). 

      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006             [Page 4] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        Specific protocol specifications will also describe the details 
        of interactions between the RBridge protocol and specific L2 
        technologies - i.e. - Virtual Local Area Networking (VLAN), L2 
        Multicast, etc. 

        As an overview, however, the intention is to use a link-state 
        routing protocol to accomplish the following: 

          1) Discover RBridge peers. 

          2) Determine RBridge link topology. 

          3) Advertise L2 reachability information. 

          4) Establish L2 delivery using shortest path (verses STP). 

        There are additional RBridge protocol requirements - above and 
        beyond those addressed by any existing routing protocol - that 
        are identified in this document and need to be addressed in 
        corresponding RBridge protocol specifications. 

        To allow for configuration free deployment, specific protocol 
        specifications need to explicitly define the conditions under 
        which RBridges may - and may not - be deployed as-is (plug and 
        play), and the mechanisms that are required to allow this. For 
        example, the first requirement any RBridge protocol must meet is 
        to derive information required by link-state routing protocol(s) 
        for protocol start-up and communications between peers - such as 
        higher-layer addressing and/or identifiers, encapsulation header 
        information, etc. 

        At the abstract level, RBridges need to maintain the following 
        information: 

          1) Peer information, 

          2) Topology information, 

          3) Forwarding information -  

               a. unicast,  

               b. flooded, and  

               c. multicast. 


      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006             [Page 5] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        Peer information may be acquired via the routing protocol, or 
        may be discovered as a result of RBridge-specific peer discovery 
        mechanisms.  Topology information is expected to be acquired 
        exclusively via the link-state routing protocol. 

        Forwarding information is derived from the combination of bridge 
        learning, snooping of multicast-related protocols (e.g. - IGMP), 
        and routing advertisements and path computations using the link-
        state routing protocol. 

        The remainder of this document outlines the TRILL architecture 
        of an RBridge-based solution and describes RBridge components, 
        interactions and functions. Note that this document is not 
        intended to represent the only solution to the TRILL problem 
        statement, nor does it specify the protocols that instantiate 
        this architecture - or that only one such set of protocols is 
        prescribed. The former may be contained in other architecture 
        documents and the latter would be contained in separate 
        specification documents (see - e.g. - [3]). 

     2. Background 

        This architecture is based on the RBridge system described in an 
        Infocom paper [1]. That paper describes the RBridge system as a 
        specific instance; this document abstracts architectural 
        features only. The remainder of this section describes the 
        terminology of this document, which may differ from that of the 
        original paper. 

     2.1. Existing Terminology 

        The following terminology is defined in other documents. A brief 
        definition is included in this section for convenience and - in 
        some cases - to remove any ambiguity in how the term may be used 
        in this document, as well as derivative documents intended to 
        specify components, protocol, behavior and encapsulation 
        relative to the architecture specified in this document. 

        o  802: IEEE Specification for Ethernet, i.e., including hubs 
           and switches. 

        o  802.1D: IEEE Specification for bridged Ethernet, including 
           the BPDUs used in spanning tree protocol (STP) [5]. 




      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006             [Page 6] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        o  ARP: Address Resolution Protocol - a protocol used to find an 
           address of form X, given a corresponding address of form Y. 
           In this document, ARP refers to the well-known protocol used 
           to resolve L2 (MAC) addresses, using a given L3 (IP) address. 

        o  Bridge: an Ethernet (L2, 802.1D) device with multiple ports 
           that receives incoming frames on a port and transmits them on 
           some or all of the other ports; bridges support both bridge 
           learning and STP. Transparent bridges do not modify the L2 
           PDU being forwarded. 

        o  Bridge Learning: process by which a switch or bridge 
           determines on which single outgoing port to transmit (forward 
           or copy) an incoming frame. This process depends on 
           consistent forwarding as "learning" uses the source MAC 
           address of frames received on each interface. Layer 2 (L2) 
           forwarding devices "learn" the location of L2 destinations by 
           peeking at layer 2 source addresses during frame forwarding, 
           and store the association of source address and receiving 
           interface.  L2 forwarding devices use this information to 
           create "filtering database" entries and - gradually - 
           eliminate the need for flooding. 

        o  Bridge Protocol Data Unit (BPDU): the frame type associated 
           with bridge control functions (for example: STP/RSTP). 

        o  Bridge Spanning Tree (BST): an Ethernet (L2, 802.1D) 
           forwarding protocol based on the topology of a spanning tree. 

        o  Broadcast Domain: the set of (layer 2) devices that must be 
           reached (or reachable) by any (layer 2) broadcast traffic 
           injected into the domain. 

        o  Broadcast Traffic: traffic intended for receipt by all 
           devices in a broadcast domain.  

        o  Ethernet: See "802" above. 

        o  Filtering Database - database containing association 
           information of (source layer 2 address, arrival interface).  
           The interface that is associated with a specific layer 2 
           source address, is the same interface which is used to 
           forward frames having that address as a destination.  When a 
           layer 2 forwarding device has no entry for the destination 
           layer 2 address of any frame it receives, the frame is 
           "flooded". 

      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006             [Page 7] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        o  Flooded Traffic - traffic forwarded on all interfaces, except 
           those on which it was received, within the same broadcast 
           domain. Flooding is the mechanism by which traffic is 
           delivered to a destination that is currently "unknown" (i.e. 
           - either not yet "learned", or aged out of the "filtering 
           database"). 

        o  Flooding - the process of forwarding traffic to ensure that 
           frames reach all possible destinations when the destination 
           location is not known.  In "flooding", a layer 2 forwarding 
           device forwards a   frame for any destination not "known" 
           (i.e. - not in the filtering database) on every active 
           interface except that one on which it was received. See also 
           VLAN flooding. 

        o  Frame: in this document, frame refers to an Ethernet (L2) 
           unit of transmission (PDU), including header, data, and 
           trailer (or payload and envelope). 

        o  Hub: an Ethernet (L2, 802) device with multiple ports which 
           transparently transmits frames arriving on any port to all 
           other ports.  This is a functional definition, as there are 
           devices that combine this function with certain bridge-like 
           functions that may - under certain conditions - be referred 
           to as "hubs". 

        o  IGP: Interior Gateway Protocol - any of the potential (link-
           state) routing protocols candidates considered as potentially 
           useful RBridge routing protocols. 

        o  IS-IS: Intermediate System to Intermediate System routing 
           protocol. See [8] for further information on IS-IS. 

        o  LAN: Local Area Network. A LAN is an L2 forwarding domain. 
           This term is synonymous with Ethernet Subnet in the context 
           of this document. 

        o  MAC: Media Access Control - mechanisms and addressing for L2 
           frame forwarding.  

        o  Multicast Forwarding: forwarding methods that apply to frames 
           with broadcast or multicast destination MAC addresses. 

        o  Node: a device with an L2 (MAC) address that sources and/or 
           sinks L2 frames. 


      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006             [Page 8] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        o  OSPF: Open Shortest Path First routing protocol. See [7] and 
           [9] for further information on OSPF. 

        o  Packet: in this document, packet refers to L3 (or above) data 
           transmission units (PDU - e.g. - an IP Packet (RFC791 [4]), 
           including header and data. 

        o  PDU: Protocol Data Unit - unit of data to be transmitted by a 
           protocol. To distinguish L2 and L3 PDUs, we refer to L2 PDUs 
           as "frames" and L3 PDUs as "packets" in this (and related) 
           document(s). 

        o  Router: a device that performs IP (L3) forwarding (the 
           "routing function"); RBridges typically do not span routers 
           (i.e. - provide a connection from one router interface to 
           another router interface on the same router). 

        o  Routing Function: in this document, the "routing function" 
           consists of forwarding IP packets between L2 broadcast 
           domains, based on L3 addressing and forwarding information. 
           In the process of performing the "routing function", devices 
           (typically routers) usually forward packets from one L2 
           broadcast domain to another (one, or more in the IP multicast 
           case) - distinct - L2 broadcast domain(s). RBridges cannot 
           span the routing function. 

        o  Segment: an Ethernet link, either a single physical link or 
           emulation thereof (e.g., via hubs) or a logical link or 
           emulation thereof (e.g., via bridges).  

        o  Spanning Tree Protocol (STP): an Ethernet (802.1D) protocol 
           for establishing and maintaining a single spanning tree among 
           all the bridges on a local Ethernet segment. Also, Rapid 
           Spanning Tree Protocol (RSTP). In this document, STP and RSTP 
           are considered to be the same. 

        o  Spanning Tree Table (STT): a table containing port activation 
           status information as determined during STP. 

        o  SPF: Shortest Path First - the algorithm name associated with 
           routing, used to determine a shortest path graph traversal. 






      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006             [Page 9] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        o  Subnet, Ethernet: a single segment, or a set of segments 
           interconnected by a CRED; in the latter case, the subnet may 
           or may not be equivalent to a single segment. Also a subnet 
           may be referred to as a broadcast domain or LAN. By 
           definition, all nodes within an Ethernet Subnet (broadcast 
           domain or LAN) must have L2 connectivity with all other nodes 
           in the same Ethernet subnet. 

        o  Switch: an Ethernet (L2, 802) device with multiple point-to-
           point ports which transmits (forwards or copies) frames that 
           arrive on one port to one or more other ports. Switches may 
           include bridge learning. Switches may also exclude STP/RSTP. 

        o  TRILL: Transparent Interconnect over Lots of Links - the 
           working group and working name for the problem domain to be 
           addressed in this document. 

        o  Unicast Forwarding: forwarding methods that apply to frames 
           with unicast destination MAC addresses. 

        o  Unknown Destination - a destination for which a receiving 
           device has no filtering database entry.  Destination (layer 
           2) addresses are typically "learned" by (layer 2) forwarding 
           devices via a process commonly referred to as "bridge 
           learning". 

        o  VLAN: Virtual Local Area Network. VLANs in general fall into 
           two categories: link (or port) specific VLANs and tagged 
           VLANs. In the former case, all frames forwarded and all 
           directly connected nodes are assumed to be part of a single 
           VLAN.  In the latter case, VLAN tagged frames are used to 
           distinguish which VLAN each frame is intended for. 

        o  VLAN Flooding: flooding as described previously, except that 
           frames are only forwarded on those interfaces configured for 
           participation in the applicable VLAN. 

     2.2. RBridge Terminology 

        The following terms are defined in this document and intended 
        for use in derivative documents intended to specify components, 
        protocol, behavior and encapsulation relative to the 
        architecture specified in this document. 

        o  CRED: Cooperating RBridges and Encapsulation Tunnels - a 
           topological construct consisting of a set of cooperating 
           RBridges, and the forwarding tunnels connecting them.  
      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006            [Page 10] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        o  CRED Forwarding Table (CFT): the per-hop forwarding table 
           populated by the RBridge Routing Protocol; forwarding within 
           the CRED is based on a lookup of the CRED Transit Header 
           (CTH) encapsulated within the outermost received L2 header, 
           rather than that encapsulating L2 header. The outermost L2 
           encapsulation in this case includes the source MAC address of 
           the immediate upstream RBridge transmitting the frame and 
           destination MAC address of the receiving RBridge for use in 
           the unicast forwarding case. 

        o  CFT-IRT: a forwarding table used for propagation of 
           broadcast, multicast or flooded frames along the Ingress 
           RBridge Tree (IRT). 

        o  CRED Transit Header (CTH): a 'shim' header that encapsulates 
           the ingress L2 frame and persists throughout the transit of a 
           CRED, which is further encapsulated within a hop-by-hop L2 
           header (and trailer). The hop-by-hop L2 encapsulation in this 
           case includes the source MAC address of the immediate 
           upstream RBridge transmitting the frame and destination MAC 
           address of the receiving RBridge - at least in the unicast 
           forwarding case. 

        o  CRED Transit Table (CTT): a table that maps ingress frame L2 
           destinations to egress RBridge addresses, used to determine 
           encapsulation of ingress frames for transit of the CRED. 

        o  Cooperating RBridges - those RBridges within a single 
           Ethernet Subnet (broadcast domain or LAN) not having been 
           configured to ignore each other. By default, all RBridges 
           within a single Ethernet subnet will cooperate with each 
           other. It is possible for implementations to allow for 
           configuration that will restrict "cooperation" between an 
           RBridge and an apparent neighboring RBridge.  One reason why 
           this might occur is if the trust model that applies in a 
           particular deployment imposes a need for configuration of 
           security information.  By default no such configuration is 
           required however - should it be used in any specific scenario 
           - it is possible (either deliberately or inadvertently) to 
           configure neighboring RBridges so that they do not cooperate.  
           In the remainder of this document, all RBridges are assumed 
           to be in a cooperating (default) configuration. 





      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006            [Page 11] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        o  Designated RBridge (DR): the RBridge associated with ingress 
           and egress traffic to a particular Ethernet link having 
           shared access among multiple RBridges; that RBridge is such a 
           link's "Designated RBridge". The Designated RBridge is 
           determined by an election process among those RBridges having 
           shared access via a single Segment. 

        o  Edge RBridge (edge of a CRED): describes RBridges that serve 
           to ingress frames into the CRED and egress frames from the 
           CRED. L2 frames transiting an RBridge CRED enter, and leave, 
           it via an edge RBridge. 

        o  Egress RBridge: for any specific frame, the RBridge through 
           which that frame leaves the CRED. For frames transiting a 
           CRED, the egress RBridge is an edge RBridge where RBridge 
           encapsulation is removed from the transit frames prior to 
           exiting the CRED. 

        o  Forwarding Tunnels: in this document, CRED Forwarding Tunnels 
           (or Forwarding Tunnels) is used to refer to the paths for 
           forwarding transit frames, encapsulated at an RBridge ingress 
           and decapsulated at an RBridge egress. 

        o  Ingress RBridge: for any specific frame, the RBridge through 
           which that frame enters the CRED. For frames transiting a 
           CRED, the ingress RBridge is the edge RBridge where RBridge 
           encapsulation is added to the transit traffic entering the 
           CRED. 

        o  Ingress RBridge Tree: a tree computed for each edge RBridge - 
           and potentially for each VLAN in which that RBridge 
           participates - for delivery of broadcast, multicast and 
           flooded frames from that RBridge to all relevant egress 
           RBridges. This is the point-to-multipoint delivery tree used 
           by an ingress RBridge to deliver multicast, broadcast or 
           flooded traffic.  The tree consists of a set of one or more 
           next-hops to be used when the ingress RBridge receives a 
           multicast or broadcast frame (frame with a multicast or 
           broadcast destination address), or frame with unknown 
           destination addresses.  If forwarding frames hop-by-hop, next 
           hop RBridges will, in turn, have a similar set of one or more 
           next-hops to be used for forwarding these frames - when 
           received from an upstream, or ingress, RBridge.  This 
           progression continues until frames arrive at egress RBridges.  

        o  LPT: Learned Port Table. See Filtering Database. 

      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006            [Page 12] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        o  RBridge: a logical device as specified in this document, 
           which incorporate both routing and bridging features, thus 
           allowing for the achievement of TRILL Architecture goals. A 
           single RBridge device which can aggregate with other RBridge 
           devices to create a CRED. 

     3. Components 

        A CRED is composed of RBridge devices and the forwarding tunnels 
        that connect them; all other Ethernet link subnet devices, such 
        as bridges, hubs, and nodes, operate conventionally in the 
        presence of an RBridge. 

     3.1. RBridge Device 

        An RBridge is a bridge-like device that forwards frames on an 
        Ethernet link segment. It has one or more Ethernet ports which 
        may be wired or wireless; the particular physical layer is not 
        relevant. An RBridge is defined more by its behavior than its 
        structure, although it contains three tables which distinguish 
        it from conventional bridges. 

        Conventional bridges contain a learned port table (LPT), or 
        filtering database, and a spanning tree table (STT). The LPT 
        allows a bridge to avoid flooding all received frames, as is 
        typical for a hub or repeater. The bridge learns which nodes are 
        accessible from a particular port by assuming bi-directional 
        consistency: the source addresses of incoming frames indicate 
        that the incoming port is to be used as output for frames 
        destined to that address. Incoming frames are checked against 
        the LPT and forwarded to the particular port if a match occurs, 
        otherwise they are flooded out all ports except the incoming 
        port. 

        The STT indicates the ports used in the spanning tree. Details 
        of STP operation are out of scope for this document, however the 
        result of STP is to disable ports which would otherwise result 
        in more than one path traversal of the spanning tree. 

        RBridges, by comparison, have a CRED Forwarding Table (CFT - 
        used for unicast forwarding of RBridge encapsulated frames 
        across the CRED), CFT-IRT (used for flooding, broadcast or 
        multicast forwarding of RBridge encapsulated frames across the 
        CRED) and a CRED Transit Table (CTT - used by the ingress 
        RBridge to determine what encapsulation to use for frames 
        received as un-encapsulated from non-RBridge devices), described 
        in the following sections. 
      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006            [Page 13] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

     3.2. RBrdige Data Model 

        The following tables represent the logical model of the data
        required by RBridges in forwarding unicast and multicast data
        across a CRED. 

     3.2.1. CFT 

        The CFT is a forwarding table for unicast traffic within the 
        CRED, allowing tunneled traffic to transit the CRED from ingress 
        to egress. The size of a fully populated CFT at each RBridge is 
        maximally bounded by the product of the number of directly 
        connected RBridge peers (where "directly connected" in this 
        context refers to RBridges connected to each other without 
        transiting one or more additional RBridges) and VLANs. RBridges 
        may have separate CFTs for each VLAN, if this is supported by 
        configuration. The CFT is continually maintained by RBridge 
        routing protocol (see Section 4.7). 

        The CFT contains data specific to RBridge forwarding for unicast 
        traffic. The specific fields contained in this table are to be 
        defined in RBridge protocol specifications. In the abstract, 
        however, the table should contain forwarding direction and 
        encapsulation associated with an RBridge encapsulated frame 
        received - determined by the "shim" header destination and VLAN 
        (if applicable). 

     3.2.2. CFT-IRT 

        The CFT-IRT consists of a special-case set of forwarding entries 
        used for support of Ingress RBridge Trees (IRT). The CFT-IRT may 
        be part of the CFT, or instantiated as a separate table. 

        In discussing entries to be included in the CFT-IRT, the 
        following entities are temporarily defined, or further 
        qualified: 

        o  Ingress RBridge - the RBridge that is the head end of an IRT. 
           All RBridges within a CRED are potential ingress RBridges. 

        o  Egress RBridge - an RBridge that is the tail end of a path 
           corresponding to a specific CFT-IRT entry. All RBridges 
           within a CRED are potential egress RBridges. Not all RBridges 
           within a CRED will be on the shortest path between any 
           ingress RBridge and any other egress RBridge. 


      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006            [Page 14] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        o  Local RBridge - the RBridge that forms and maintains the CFT-
           IRT entry (or entries) under discussion. The local RBridge 
           may be an Ingress RBridge, or an egress RBridge with respect 
           to any set of entries in the CFT-IRT. 

        o  RBridge CRED Egress Interface - an interface on any RBridge 
           where a transit RBridge encapsulated frame would be 
           decapsulated prior to forwarding. With respect to such an 
           interface, the local RBridge is the egress RBridge. 

        Each local RBridge will maintain a set of entries for at least 
        the following - corresponding to a subset of all possible 
        forwarding paths: 

        o  Zero or more entries grouped for each ingress RBridge - keyed 
           by the ingress RBridge identifier - used to determine 
           downstream forwarding of broadcast, multicast, and flooded 
           frames originally RBridge encapsulated by that ingress within 
           the CRED. 

        o  Corresponding to each of these entry groups, one entry for 
           each of zero or more egress RBridge - where the local RBridge 
           is on the shortest path toward that egress RBridge. 

        o  Corresponding to each of these entry groups, one entry for 
           each of zero or more CRED egress interfaces. 

        Each entry would contain an indication of which single interface 
        a broadcast, multicast or flooded frame would be forwarded for 
        each (ingress RBridge, egress RBridge) pair - as well as any 
        required encapsulation information, etc. required for forwarding 
        on that interface, toward the corresponding specific egress 
        RBridge. 

        A local RBridge could maintain a full set of entries from every 
        RBridge to every other RBridge, however - depending on topology 
        - only a subset of these entries would ever be used.  In 
        addition, a topology change that changed selection of shortest 
        paths would also very likely change other elements of the 
        entries, negating possible benefits from having pre-computed 
        CFT-IRT entries. 

        CFT-IRT entries should also include VLAN identification 
        information relative to each set of ingress RBridge, to allow 
        scoping of broadcast, multicast and flooding forwarding by 
        configured VLANs. 

      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006            [Page 15] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        CFT-IRT entries should also include Multicast-Group Address 
        specific information relative to each egress RBridge that is a 
        member of a given well-known multicast group, to allow scoping 
        of multicast forwarding by multicast group. 

        Implicit in this data model is the assumption that the "shim" 
        header encapsulation will contain information that explicitly 
        identifies the CRED ingress RBridge for any broadcast, multicast 
        or flooded frame. 

        How the CFT-IRT is maintained will be defined in appropriate 
        protocol specifications used to instantiate this architecture. 
        The protocol specification needs to include mechanisms and 
        procedures required to establish and maintain the CFT-IRT in 
        consideration of potential SPF recomputations resulting from 
        network topology changes. 

     3.2.3. CTT 

        The CTT determines how arriving traffic will be encapsulated, 
        for forwarding to the egress RBridge, via the CRED. The CTT can 
        be considered a version of the LPT that treats the CRED, as a 
        whole, as another port. It becomes configured in much the same 
        way as the LPT: by snooping incoming traffic, and assuming bi-
        directional consistency (see Section 0). The information is 
        learned at the egress RBridge and propagated to all other 
        RBridges in the CRED via the RBridge routing protocol (also 
        Section 0). The CTT may be as large as the number of nodes on 
        the Ethernet subnet, across all VLANs. RBridges may have 
        separate CTTs for each VLAN, if separate VLANs are supported by 
        configuration. 

        The CTT essentially determines the tunnel encapsulation used to 
        transport each specific frame across the CRED. 

     4. Functional Description 

        The RBridge Architecture is largely defined by RBridge behavior; 
        the logical components are minimal, as outlined in Section 3.  

     4.1. CRED Auto-configuration 

        Cooperating RBridges self-organize to compose a single CRED 
        system. Consider first a set of bridges on a single Ethernet 
        link subnet (Figure 1). Here bridges are shown as 'b', hubs as 
        'h', and nodes as 'N'; bridges and hubs are numbered. Note that 
        the figure does not distinguish between types of nodes, i.e., 
      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006            [Page 16] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        hosts and routers; both are end nodes at the link layer, and are 
        otherwise indistinguishable to L2 forwarding devices. Bridges in 
        this topology organize into a single spanning tree, as shown by 
        double lines ('=', '||', and '//') in the figure. 

                                  N       N---b3---N             
                                  |           ||                        
                                  |           ||                     
                             N---h1--b4===b5==h2==b6  
                                     |   //   |   ||                
                                     |  //    N   ||                 
                                     | //         ||                    
                                 N---b7====b8-----b9-----N             
                                           |      |\                  
                                           |      | \                
                                           N      N  N               
                                                                           
              Figure 1 Conventionally bridged Ethernet link subnet 

        It is useful to note that hubs are relatively transparent to 
        bridges, both for traffic from nodes to bridges (h1) and for 
        traffic between bridges (h2). Also note that the same hub can 
        support traffic between bridges and from a host to a bridge 
        (h2), but that the spanning tree is exclusively between bridges. 
        Bridges are thus compatible with hubs, both as transits and 
        ingress/egress. 

        A CRED operates similarly, and can be viewed as a variant of the 
        way bridges self-organize. Figure 2 shows the same topology 
        where some of the bridges are replaced by RBridges. In this 
        figure, stars ('*') represent the paths the RBridge is capable 
        of utilizing, due to the use of link state routing. RBridges can 
        tunnel directly to each other (r4-r5), or through hubs (h2) or 
        bridges (b8). 













      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006            [Page 17] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

                                  N       N---b3---N             
                                  |           ||                         
                                  |           ||                      
                             N---h1--r4***r5**h2**r6  
                                     *   *    |   *                 
                                     *  *     N   *                  
                                     * *          *                     
                                 N---r7****b8*****r9-----N             
                                           |      |\                  
                                           |      | \                
                                           N      N  N               
                                                                           
                     Figure 2 RBridged Ethernet link subnet 

        Every node in a CRED is considered to have a primary point of 
        attachment to the CRED, as defined by the Designated RBridge. 
        Each Ethernet link segment attached to a CRED has a single 
        Designated RBridge; that RBridge is where all traffic that 
        transits the CRED enters and exits. In Figure 2, it is easy to 
        see that the nodes off of h1 must attach at r4; the nodes off of 
        b3, however, attach at either r5 or r6, depending on which is 
        the Designated RBridge. 

        Without loss of generality, an RBridge topology can be 
        reorganized (ignoring link length) such that all nodes, hubs, 
        and bridges are arranged around the periphery, and all RBridges 
        are considered directly connected by their tunnels (Figure 3). 
        Note that this view ignores the ways in which hubs and bridges 
        may serve both on the ingress/egress and for transit, hence this 
        view is not useful for traffic analysis. Using this view, it is 
        easy to distinguish between RBridge to RBridge traffic and other 
        traffic on shared devices, such as h2 and b8, because RBridge to 
        RBridge traffic content is hidden from non RBridge devices by 
        the RBridge encapsulation. 













      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006            [Page 18] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

                                  N       N---b3---N             
                                  |           ||                         
                                  |           ||  
                                  |           h2 
                                  |          /| \ 
                                  |         / N  \ 
                                  |        /      \               
                             N---h1--r4***r5******r6  
                                     *   *        *                 
                                     *  *         *                  
                                     * *          *                     
                                 N---r7***********r9-----N             
                                      \          /|\                  
                                       \        / | \                
                                        \      /  N  N   
                                         \    / 
                                          \  / 
                                           b8   
                                           | 
                                           N 
         
               Figure 3 Reorganized RBridge Ethernet link subnet 

     4.2. RBridge Peer Discovery 

        Proper operation of the TRILL solution using RBridges depends on 
        the existence of a mechanism for discovering peer RBridges and 
        the RBridge topology. An accurate determination of RBridge 
        topology is required in order to determine how traffic frames 
        will flow in the topology and thus avoid the establishment of 
        persistent loops in frame forwarding. 

        The discovery mechanisms must use protocol messages which will 
        be propagated throughout the LAN, or broadcast domain, in order 
        to ensure that all RBridges in the same broadcast domain are 
        discovered and to allow for accurate determination of RBridge 
        topology. 

        These protocol messages should be distinguished in a manner that 
        is consistent with the chosen RBridge routing protocol, or any 
        other discovery mechanism used. It is very likely that peer 
        discovery will actually be done as part of the RBridge routing 
        protocol's peer discovery; however this is to be determined by 
        specific RBridge protocol specification(s). 

        An RBridge intercepts protocol messages that it recognizes as 
        being of this type (peer discovery), performs any processing 
      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006            [Page 19] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        required and forwards these messages as required by the 
        discovery protocol. For example, a receiving RBridge may first 
        determine if it has seen this message before and insert itself 
        in a list of RBridges traversed by this message prior to 
        forwarding the message on at least all interfaces other than the 
        one on which it was received. 

        Note that forwarding the modified message on all interfaces in 
        the example above is safe, if somewhat wasteful. 

        RBridges must forward all other protocol messages in a manner 
        consistent with L2 addressing and forwarding - as would be done 
        by a typical 802.1D bridge. This includes any frames of the same 
        type that are - for one reason or another - not recognized by 
        the receiving RBridge. 

        Note that forwarding unrecognized messages - even when of the 
        same type - has the effect of providing some degree of 
        robustness in the solution against configuration errors and 
        against future variations of the discovery protocol. 

        Handling of 802.1D BPDUs is as determined in section 0.  

     4.3. Tunneling 

        RBridges pass encapsulated frame traffic to each other 
        effectively using tunnels. These tunnels use an Ethernet link 
        layer header, together with a shim header. 

        Specifics of encapsulation are to be defined in appropriate 
        protocol/encapsulation specifications.  

        It is the combination of the encapsulation that distinguishes 
        RBridge to RBridge traffic from other traffic. The link header 
        includes source and destination addresses, which typically 
        identify the ingress and egress RBridges. For incoming multicast 
        and broadcast traffic, one of these addresses may represent the 
        multicast group or broadcast address. Additionally, these 
        addresses may be VLAN-specific, i.e., such that each ingress and 
        egress address have per-VLAN addresses. 

        The additional shim header is required to support loop 
        prevention for traffic within the CRED; traffic loops in 
        forwarding between RBridges and non-RBridge nodes, as well as 
        across non-RBridge devices between RBridges, is prevented by 
        loop prevention mechanisms that are beyond the scope of this 
        document (but may include a TTL-like mechanism, mechanisms to 
      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006            [Page 20] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        establish a loop free topology - such as STP/RSP - or both) on 
        the applicable LAN segments.  

        The shim header and encapsulation: 

        o  must clearly identify the traffic as RBridge traffic - the 
           outer Ethernet header may, for instance, use a protocol 
           number unique to RBridges;  

        o  should also identify a specific (egress) RBridge - the shim 
           header may, for example, include an identifier unique to the 
           egress RBridge; 

        o  should include the RBridge transit route, a hopcount, or a 
           timestamp to prevent indefinite looping of a frame. 

     4.4. RBridge General Operation 

        Operations that apply to all RBridges include peer and topology 
        discovery (which may include negotiation of RBridge 
        identifiers), Designated RBridge election, link-state routing, 
        SPF computation and advertising reach-ability for specific L2 
        (MAC Ethernet destination) addresses within a broadcast domain. 

        In addition, all RBridges will compute Ingress RBridge Trees for 
        delivery of (potentially VLAN scoped) broadcast, multicast and 
        flooded frames to each peer RBridge. Setting up these trees 
        early is important as there is otherwise no means for frame 
        delivery across the CRED during the learning phase. Because it 
        is very likely to be impossible (at an early stage) for RBridges 
        to determine which RBridges are edge RBridges, it is preferable 
        that each RBridge compute these trees for all RBridges as early 
        as possible - even if some entries will not be used. 

        The initial phase is the peer and topology discovery phase. This 
        should continue for a sufficient amount of time to reduce the 
        amount of re-negotiation (Designated RBridge and - possibly - 
        identifiers) and re-computation that will be triggered by 
        discovery of new peers. The timer values selected for delaying 
        the next phase should take into account the time required for 
        local STP and availability of segment connectivity between 
        RBridge peers. 

        The next phase is election of Designated RBridges for all shared 
        access segments. This phase cannot complete before completion of 
        peer and topology discovery. In parallel, RBridge routing 
        protocol should begin the process of building the link-state 
      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006            [Page 21] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        information - assuming this was not done during the peer and 
        topology discovery phase. 

        At about this time, RBridges should establish ingress RBridge 
        trees.  

        Once RBridges have established Ingress RBridge Trees, the 
        learning and forwarding phase may begin. In this phase, RBridges 
        initially forward frames by flooding them via Ingress RBridge 
        Tree(s). Also during this phase, RBridges begin "learning" MAC 
        address locations from local segments and propagating L2 reach-
        ability information via the RBridge routing protocol to all 
        other RBridges.  Gradually, the CFT will be built up for all 
        RBridges, and fewer frames will require flooding via the Ingress 
        RBridge Tree(s).  

        The learning phase typically does not complete. Consequently, 
        the learning phase is also the operational phase. During the 
        combined learning and operational phase, all RBridges maintain 
        both an Ingress RBridge Tree and a CFT. RBridges not elected as 
        Designated RBridge may be required to become one in the event 
        that the DR goes off-line. 

     4.5. Ingress/Egress Operations 

        Operation specific to edge RBridges involves RBridge learning, 
        advertisement, encapsulation (at ingress RBridges) and 
        decapsulation (at egress RBridges). 

        As described elsewhere, RBridge learning is similar to typical 
        bridge learning - i.e. - all RBridges listen promiscuously to L2 
        Frames on a local LAN segment and acquire location information 
        associated with source MAC addresses in L2 frames they observe. 

        By convention, a Designated RBridge election always occurs. In 
        the degenerate case - where only one RBridge is connected to a 
        specific Ethernet segment - obviously that RBridge will "win" 
        the election and become the designated RBridge. 

        With this convention, only the Designated RBridge performs 
        RBridge learning for interface(s) connected to that segment. 

        As each RBridge learns segment-local MAC source addresses, it 
        creates an entry in its LPT that associates that MAC source 
        address with the interface on which it was learned.   


      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006            [Page 22] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        Periodically, as determined by the RBridge routing protocol, 
        each RBridge advertises this learned information to its RBridge 
        peers. 

        These advertisements propagate to all edge RBridges (as 
        potentially scoped by associated VLAN information for each 
        advertisement). Each edge RBridge incorporates this information 
        in the form of a CFT entry.  

        RBridges also discover that they are an edge RBridge as a result 
        of receiving un-encapsulated frames that require forwarding. If 
        an RBridge is the Designated RBridge for a segment, and it has 
        not previously learned that the MAC destination for a frame is 
        local (this will be the case - for instance - for the very first 
        frame it observes), then the RBridge would be required to 
        forward (or flood) the frame via the CRED to all other RBridges 
        (potentially within a VLAN scope).  

        The RBridge in this case would flood the frame unless it has 
        already created a unicast CFT entry for the frame's MAC 
        destination address.  If it has a corresponding CFT, then it 
        would use that.  This RBridge would be an ingress RBridge with 
        respect to the frame being forwarded. 

        The encapsulation used by this ingress RBridge would be 
        determined by the CFT - if one exists -  or the CFT-equivalent 
        entry for the Ingress RBridge Tree. The encapsulation - as 
        discussed elsewhere - should include (in the shim header) 
        information to identify the egress RBridge (for example, the 
        RBridge identifier negotiated previously during the peer and 
        topology discovery phase). 

        When the encapsulated frame arrives at egress RBridge(s), it is 
        decapsulated and forwarded via the egress interface(s) onto the 
        local segment. 

        Note that an egress RBridge will be the Designated RBridge on 
        the local segment accessed via its egress interface(s). If the 
        received frame does not correspond to a learned MAC destination 
        address at an egress interface, it will forward the frame on all 
        interfaces for which it is either the designated - or only - 
        RBridge. If the received frame does correspond to a learned MAC 
        destination address at an egress interface, the RBridge will 
        forward the frame via that interface only. 



      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006            [Page 23] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

     4.6. Transit Forwarding Operations 

        There two models for transit forwarding within a CRED: unicast 
        frame forwarding for known destinations, and everything else.  
        The difference between the two is in how the encapsulation is 
        determined. Exactly one of these models will be selected - in 
        any instantiation of this architecture- for each of the 
        following forwarding modes: 

        o  Unicast frame forwarding 
        o  Forwarding of non-unicast frames 
           o  Broadcast frame forwarding 
           o  Multicast frame forwarding 
           o  Frame flooding 

     4.6.1. Unicast 

        In unicast forwarding, the shim header is specific to the egress 
        RBridge and MAC destination in the outer Ethernet encapsulation 
        is specific to the next hop RBridge.  

        Prior to preparing the frame for forwarding to the next hop 
        RBridge, the MAC source address is examined and - if the MAC 
        source address is an address of the local RBridge, the frame is 
        discarded.  

        As the frame is prepared for transmission at each RBridge, the 
        next hop MAC destination information is determined at that local 
        RBridge using a corresponding CFT based on the "shim" header.  
        In addition, prior to re-writing the outer MAC destination 
        address, the next hop MAC destination address is compared to the 
        MAC source address of the outer Ethernet header and the frame is 
        discarded if the two are equivalent. 

     4.6.2. Broadcast, Multicast and Flooding 

        Ingress RBridge Trees are used for forwarding of broadcast, 
        multicast and unknown destination frames across the CRED. In a 
        simple implementation, it is possible to use the CFT-IRT entries 
        for all frames of these types.  

        However, this approach results in potentially extreme 
        inefficiencies in the multicast and unknown destination flooding 
        cases. 

        As a consequence, instantiations of this architecture should 
        allow for local optimizations on a hop by hop basis. 
      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006            [Page 24] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        Examples of such optimizations are included in the sections 
        below. 

     4.6.2.1. Broadcast 

        The path followed in transit forwarding of broadcast frames will 
        have been established through actions initiated by each RBridge 
        (as any RBridge is eligible to subsequently become an ingress 
        RBridge) in the process of computing CFT-IRT entries. Each 
        RBridge assumes that it may be a transit as well as an ingress 
        and egress RBridge and will establish forwarding information 
        relative to itself and each of its peer RBridges, and stored in 
        the CFT-IRT. CFT-IRT entries are computed at each RBridge for 
        paths going toward all other RBridges - at least in cases where 
        the RBridge performing CFT-IRT computations is on the shortest 
        path.  

        Forwarding information is in two forms: transit encapsulation 
        information for interfaces over which the RBridge will forward a 
        broadcast frame to one or more peer RBridges and a decapsulation 
        indication for each interface over which the RBridge may egress 
        frames from the CRED. In each case, the CFT-IRT includes some 
        identification of the interface on which a frame is forwarded 
        toward any specific egress RBridge for frames received from any 
        specific ingress RBridge. 

        Note that an interface over which an RBridge may egress frames 
        is any interface for which the RBridge is a Designated RBridge. 
        RBridges must not wait to determine that one (or more) non-
        RBridge Ethernet nodes is present in an interface before 
        deciding to forward decapsulated broadcast frames on that 
        interface. 

        Forwarding information is selected for each broadcast frame 
        received by any RBridge (based on identifying the ingress 
        RBridge for the frame) for all corresponding CFT-IRT entries. 
        Each RBridge is thus required to replicate one RBridge 
        encapsulated broadcast frame for each interface that is 
        determined from CFT-IRT entries corresponding to the frame's 
        ingress RBridge. This includes decapsulated broadcast frames for 
        each interface for which it is the designated RBridge. 

        Note that frame replication and forwarding should be scoped by 
        VLAN if VLAN support is provided. Also note that a Designated 
        RBridge (DR) may be required to transmit a decapsulated frame on 
        the interface on which it received the RBridge encapsulated 
        frame.  
      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006            [Page 25] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        This approach for broadcast forwarding might be considered to 
        add complexity because replication occurs at all RBridges along 
        the ingress RBridge tree, potentially for both RBridge 
        encapsulated and decapsulated broadcast frames. However, the 
        replication process is similar to replication of broadcast 
        traffic in 802.1D bridges with the exception that additional 
        replication may be required at each interface for egress from 
        the CRED. 

        Note that the additional replication associated with CRED egress 
        may be made to exactly conform to 802.1D bridge broadcast 
        replication in implementations that model a CRED egress as a 
        separate logical interface. 

        Using this approach results in one and only one copy of the 
        broadcast frame being delivered to each egress RBridge. 

     4.6.2.2. Multicast 

        Multicast forwarding is reducible to broadcast forwarding in the 
        simplest (default) case. However implementations may choose - 
        using mechanisms that are out of scope for this document - to 
        optimize multicast forwarding. In order for this to work 
        effectively, however, support for awareness of multicast 
        "interest" is required for all RBridges. 

        Without optimization, multicast frames are injected by the 
        ingress RBridge onto an IRT by - for instance - encapsulating 
        the frame with a MAC destination multicast address, and 
        forwarding it according to its local CFT-IRT. Again, without 
        optimization, each RBridge along the path toward all egress 
        RBridges will similarly forward the frame according to their 
        local CFT-IRT. 

        Using this approach results in one and only one copy of the 
        multicast frame being delivered to appropriate egress RBridges. 
        However, using this approach, multicast delivery is identical to 
        broadcast delivery - hence very inefficient. 

        In any optimization approach, RBridge encapsulated multicast 
        frames will use either a broadcast or a group MAC destination 
        address. In either case, the recognizably distinct destination 
        addressing allows a frame forwarding decision to be made at each 
        RBridge hop. RBridges may thus be able to take advantage of 
        local knowledge of multicast distribution requirements to 
        eliminate the forwarding requirement on interfaces for which 

      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006            [Page 26] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        there is no recipient interested in receiving frames associated 
        with any specific group address. 

        As stated earlier, in order for RBridges to be able to implement 
        multicast optimization, distribution of learned multicast group 
        "interest" information must be provided - and propagated - by 
        all RBridges.  Mechanisms for learning and propagating multicast 
        group participation by RBridges is out of scope in this document 
        but may be defined in RBridge protocol specification(s). 

        Note that, because the multicast optimization would - in 
        principle - further scope and reduce broadcast traffic, two 
        things may be said: 

        o  It is not necessary that all implementations in a deployment 
           implement the optimization (though all must support the data 
           required to implement it in RBridge peers) in order for any 
           local multicast optimization (consistent with the above 
           description) to work; 
        o  Introduction of a multicast optimization will not result in 
           potential forwarding loops where broadcast forwarding would 
           not do so. 

        In the simplest case, the ingress RBridge for a given multicast 
        frame will re-use the MAC destination group address of a 
        received multicast frame.  However this may not be required as 
        it is possible that the mechanisms specified to support 
        multicast will require examination of the decapsulated MAC 
        destination group address at each RBridge that implements the 
        optimization. 

     4.6.2.3. Flooding 

        Flooding is similarly reducible to broadcast forwarding in the 
        simplest (default) case - with the exception that a frame being 
        flooded across the CRED is typically a unicast frame for which 
        no CFT exists at the ingress RBridge. This is not a minor 
        distinction, however, because it impacts the way that addressing 
        may be used to accomplish flooding within the CRED. 

        An ingress RBridge that does not have a CFT entry for a received 
        frame MAC destination address, will inject the frame onto the 
        ingress RBridge Tree by - for instance - encapsulating the frame 
        with a MAC destination broadcast address, and forwarding it 
        according to its local CFT-IRT. Without optimization, each 
        RBridge along the path toward all egress RBridges will similarly 
        forward the frame according to their local CFT-IRT. 
      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006            [Page 27] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        Using this approach results in one and only one copy of the 
        flooded frame being delivered to all egress RBridges. 

        However implementations may choose to optimize flooding. A 
        Flooding optimization will only work at any specific RBridge if 
        that RBridge re-evaluates the original (decapsulated) unicast 
        frame.  

        Any flooding optimization would operate similarly to the 
        multicast optimization described above, except that - instead of 
        requiring local information about multicast distribution - each 
        RBridge implementing the optimization will need only to lookup 
        the MAC destination address of the original (decapsulated) frame 
        in its local CFT. If an entry is found, the frame could then be 
        forwarded only if the specific RBridge is on the shortest path 
        between the originating ingress RBridge and the appropriate 
        egress RBridge.  This could be implemented - for example - as a 
        specialized CFT-IRT entry. 

        Note that, because the flooding optimization would - in 
        principle - further scope and reduce flooded traffic, two things 
        may be said: 

        o  It is not necessary that all implementations in a deployment 
           support the optimization in order for any local flooding 
           optimization (consistent with the above description) to work 
           (hence such an optimization is optional);  
        o  Introduction of the flooding optimization will not result in 
           potential forwarding loops where flooded forwarding would not 
           do so. 

        Because a forwarding decision can be made at each hop, it is 
        possible to terminate flooding early if a CFT for the original 
        MAC destination was in the process of being propagated when 
        flooding for the frame was started.  It is therefore possible to 
        reduce the amount of flooding to some degree in this case.  

     4.7. Routing Protocol Operation 

        The details of routing protocol operation can be determined once 
        a specific routing protocol has been selected.  These details 
        would be defined in appropriate protocol specification(s). 

        Protocol specifications should identify means for determining 
        the content of the CFT, CFT-IRT and CTT.  


      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006            [Page 28] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

     4.8. Other Bridging and Ethernet Protocol Operations 

        In defining this architecture, several interaction models have 
        been considered for protocol interaction between RBridges and 
        other L2 forwarding devices - in particular, 802.1D bridges. 
        Whatever model we adopt for these interactions must allow for 
        the possibility of other types of L2 forwarding devices. Hence, 
        a minimal participation model is most likely to be successful 
        over the long term, assuming that RBridges are used in a L2 
        topology that would be functional if RBridges were replaced by 
        other types of L2 forwarding devices. 

        Toward this end, RBridges - and the CRED as a whole - could (in 
        theory) participate in Ethernet link protocols, notably the 
        spanning tree protocol (STP) on the ingress/egress links using 
        exactly one of the following interaction models: 

        o  Transparent Participation (Transparent-STP) 
        o  Active Participation (Participate-STP) 
        o  Blocking Participation (Block-STP) 

        Only one of these variants would be supported by an instance of 
        this architecture. All RBridges within a single CRED must use 
        the same model for interacting with non-RBridge protocols. 
        Furthermore, it is the explicit intent that only one of these 
        models is ultimately supported - at least as a default mode of 
        compliant implementations. 

        This architecture assumes RBridges block STP. 

     5. How RBridges Address TRILL 

        This section is for further study, after determining the set of 
        TRILL requirements that this architecture document is expected 
        to address. 

     6. Conclusions 

        This document discusses options considered and factors affecting 
        any protocol specific choices that may be made in instantiating 
        the TRILL architecture using RBridges. 

        Specific architectural and protocol instantiations should take 
        these into consideration. In particular, protocol, encapsulation 
        and procedure specifications should allow for potential 
        optimizations described in the architectural document to the 
        maximum extent possible. 
      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006            [Page 29] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        Also, this document addresses considerations relative to 
        interaction with existing technology and "future-proofing" 
        solutions.  For both simplicity in description, and robust long 
        term implementation of the technology, this document recommends 
        the use of clear distinction - at all possible points - of 
        definitions, protocols, procedures, etc. from related (but not 
        identical) specifications and interactions. 

        In particular, this document recommends the use of a 
        "collocation model" in addressing issues with combining RBridge, 
        Router and 802.1D bridge behavior.  

     7. Security Considerations 

        As one stated requirement of this architecture is the need to be 
        able to provide an L2 delivery mechanism that is potentially 
        configuration free, the default operation mode for instances of 
        this architecture should assume a trust model that does not 
        require configuration of security information. This is - in fact 
        - an identical trust model to that used by Ethernet devices in 
        general. 

        In consequence, the default mode does not require - but also 
        does not preclude - the use of established security mechanisms 
        associated with the existing protocols that may be extended or 
        enhanced to satisfy this document's architectural definitions. 

        In general, this architecture suggest the use of a link-state 
        routing protocol - modified as required to support L2 reach-
        ability and link state between RBridges. Any mechanisms defined 
        to support secure protocol exchanges between link-state routing 
        peers may be extended to support this architecture as well. 

        This architecture also suggests use of additional encapsulation 
        mechanisms and - to the extent that any proposed mechanism may 
        include (or be extended to include) secure transmission - it may 
        be desirable to provide such (optional) extensions. 

        To the extent possible, any extensions of protocol or 
        encapsulation should allow for at least one mode of operation 
        that doesn't require configuration - if necessary, for limited 
        use in a physically secure deployment. 

     8. IANA Considerations 

        This document has no direct IANA considerations. It does 
        suggest, that protocols that instantiate the architecture use a 
      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006            [Page 30] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        shim header as a wrapper on the payload for RBridge to RBridge 
        traffic, And this shim header may be identified by a new 
        protocol type in the tunneled Ethernet link header. This 
        protocol type, identified in an 802 header, would be allocated 
        by the IEEE in cooperation with IANA. 

     9.Acknowledgments 

        The initial work for this document was largely done by Joe 
        Touch, based on work he and Radia Perlman completed earlier. 
        Subsequent changes are not to be blamed on them. 

        In addition, the current text has been helped substantially by 
        comments and suggestions from the TRILL working group and from 
        Joel Halpern, Russ White and Ron Bonica in particular.  

     10. References  

     10.1.Normative References 

        None. 

     10.2.Informative References 

        [1]   Perlman, R., "RBridges: Transparent Routing", Proc. 
              Infocom 2005, March 2004. 

        [2]   Touch, J., (ed.) "Transparent Interconnection of Lots of 
              Links (TRILL): Problem and Applicability Statement", work 
              in progress, draft-touch-trill-prob-00.txt, November, 
              2005. 

        [3]   Perlman, R., "RBridges: Base Protocol Specification", work 
              in progress, draft-ietf-trill-rbridge-protocol-00.txt, 
              January, 2006. 

        [4]   Postel, J., "INTERNET PROTOCOL", RFC 791, September, 1981. 

        [5]   802.1D-2004 IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area 
              Networks: Media Access Control (MAC) Bridges 

        [6]   Gray, E., (ed.)"TRILL Routing Requirements in Support of 
              RBridges", work in progress, draft-gray-trill-routing-
              reqs-01.txt, June, 2006 

        [7]   Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", RFC 2328, April, 1998. 

      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006            [Page 31] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        [8]   Callon, R., "Use of OSI IS-IS for Routing in TCP/IP and 
              Dual Environments", RFC 1195, December, 1990. 

        [9]   Coltun, R., D. Ferguson & J. Moy, "OSPF for IPv6", RFC 
              2740, December, 1999. 

     Author's Addresses 

        Editor: 

        Eric Gray 
        Ericsson 
        900 Chelmsford Street 
        Lowell, MA, 01851 
        Phone: +1 (978) 275-7470 
        EMail: Eric.Gray@Ericsson.com 
         
        Contributors: 
         
        Joe Touch 
        USC/ISI 
        4676 Admiralty Way 
        Marina del Rey, CA 90292-6695, U.S.A. 
        Phone: +1 (310) 448-9151 
        EMail: touch@isi.edu 
        URL:   http://www.isi.edu/touch 
         
        Radia Perlman 
        Sun Microsystems 
            
        EMail: Radia.Perlman@sun.com 
         

     Intellectual Property Statement 

        The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of 
        any Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be 
        claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the 
        technology described in this document or the extent to which any 
        license under such rights might or might not be available; nor 
        does it represent that it has made any independent effort to 
        identify any such rights.  Information on the procedures with 
        respect to rights in RFC documents can be found in BCP 78 and 
        BCP 79. 

        Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
        assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006            [Page 32] 
         






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture             June 2006 
         

        attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the 
        use of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
        specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR 
        repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

        The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention 
        any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other 
        proprietary rights that may cover technology that may be 
        required to implement this standard.  Please address the 
        information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

     Disclaimer of Validity 

        This document and the information contained herein are provided 
        on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
        REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND 
        THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, 
        EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY 
        THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY 
        RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
        FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

     Copyright Statement 

        Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). 

        This document is subject to the rights, licenses and 
        restrictions contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth 
        therein, the authors retain all their rights. 

     Acknowledgment 

        Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
        Internet Society. 

         











      
      
     Gray                    Expires December, 2006            [Page 33] 
         
