





Network Working Group                                        S. Bradner
Internet-Draft                                       Harvard University
                                                                 Editor
                                                             April 2003

                       IETF Rights in Submissions

               <draft-ietf-ipr-submission-rights-04.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of Section 10 of RFC 2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

Abstract
   The IETF policies about rights in submissions to the IETF are
   designed to ensure that IETF contributions can be made available to
   the IETF and Internet communities while permitting the authors to
   retain as many rights in the document as possible. This memo details
   the IETF policies on rights in submissions to the IETF. It also
   describes the objectives that the policies are designed to meet. This
   memo updates RFC 2026, and with RFC XXXY, replaces Section 10 of RFC
   2026. [note to RFC editor: replace XXXY with number of IETF IPR]

                Copyright (C) The Internet Society. (2003)

1. Introduction
   Under the laws of most countries and current international treaties
   (for example the "Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and
   Artistic Work" [Berne]), authors obtain numerous rights in the works
   they produce automatically upon producing them.  These rights include
   copyrights, moral rights and other rights.  In many cases, if the



Bradner                                                         [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         IETF Rights in Submissions             April 2003


   author produces a work within the scope of his or her employment,
   most of those rights are usually assigned to the employer, either by
   operation of law or, in many cases, under contract. (The Berne
   Convention names some rights as "inalienable", which means that the
   author retains them in all cases.)


   In order for works to be used within the IETF process, certain
   limited rights in all Contributions must be granted to the IETF and
   Internet Society (ISOC).  In addition, Contributors must make
   representations to IETF and ISOC regarding their ability to grant
   these rights.  These necessary rights and representations have until
   now been laid out in Section 10 of [RFC 2026]. In the years since
   [RFC 2026] was published there have been a number of times when the
   exact intent of Section 10 has been the subject of vigorous debate
   within the IETF community.  The aim of this document is to clarify
   various ambiguities in Section 10 of [RFC 2026] that led to these
   debates and to amplify the policy in order to clarify what the IETF
   is currently doing.

   Sections 2 and 3 of this document address the rights in submissions
   to the IETF previously covered by Section 10 of [RFC 2026] and the
   "Note Well" explanatory text presented at many IETF activities.
   Section 4 gives definitions used in describing these policies.
   Sections 5, 6 and 7 then explain the rationale for these provisions,
   including some of the clarifications that have become understood
   since the adoption of [RFC 2026].  The rules and procedures set out
   in this document are not intended to substantially modify or alter
   the IETF's current policy toward Contributions made to the IETF.

   A companion document [IETF IPR] will deal with rights in technologies
   developed or specified as part of the IETF process.  This document is
   not intended to address those issues.

   The rights addressed in this document fall into the following
   categories:

   o  rights to make use of contributed material
   o  copyrights in IETF documents
   o  rights to produce derivative works
   o  rights to use trademarks

   This document is not intended as legal advice.  Readers are advised
   to consult their own legal advisors if they would like a legal
   interpretation of their rights or the rights of the IETF in any
   Contributions they make.





Bradner                                                         [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         IETF Rights in Submissions             April 2003


2. Rights in IETF Submissions

2.1.  General Policy

   In all matters of copyright and document procedures, the intent is to
   benefit the Internet community and the public at large, while
   respecting the legitimate rights of others.

2.2  Confidentiality Obligations

   No Contribution that is subject to any requirement of confidentiality
   or any restriction on its dissemination may be considered in any part
   of the IETF Standards Process, and there must be no assumption of any
   confidentiality obligation with respect to any such Contribution.
   Each Contributor agrees that any statement in a Contribution, whether
   generated automatically or otherwise, that states or implies that the
   Contribution is confidential or subject to any privilege, can be
   disregarded for all purposes, and will be of no force or effect.

2.3.  Granting of Rights and Permissions

   By submission of a Contribution, each person actually submitting the
   Contribution, and each named co-contributor, is deemed to agree to
   the following terms and conditions, and to grant the following
   rights, on his or her own behalf and on behalf of the organization
   the contributor represents or is sponsored by (if any) when
   submitting the Contribution.

   a. To the extent that the Contribution or any portion thereof is
      protected by copyright and other rights of authorship, the
      Contributor, and each named co-contributor, and the organization
      he or she represents or is sponsored by (if any) grant a
      perpetual, irrevocable, non-exclusive, royalty-free, world-wide
      right and license to the ISOC and the IETF under all intellectual
      property rights in the Contribution:

      (A) to copy, publish, display and distribute the contribution as
         part of the IETF standards process,

      (B) unless explicitly disallowed in the written terms of the
         Contribution [pursuant to one of the notices contained in
         Section 3.3 below], to prepare derivative works that are based
         on or incorporate all or part of the Contribution within the
         IETF standards process, the license to such derivative works to
         be of a scope no wider than the license to the original
         Contribution, and

      (C) to reproduce any trademarks, service marks or trade names



Bradner                                                         [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         IETF Rights in Submissions             April 2003


         which are included in the Contribution solely in connection
         with the reproduction, distribution or publication of the
         Contribution and derivative works thereof as permitted by this
         paragraph. When reproducing Contributions, the IETF will
         preserve trademark and service mark identifiers in the format
         used by the Contributor of the contribution, including (tm) and
         (r) where appropriate.

   b. The Contributor grants the IETF and ISOC permission to reference
      the name(s) and address(es) of the contributor(s) and of the
      organization(s) s/he represents or is sponsored by (if any).

   c.  Every copy of an IETF document made pursuant to the licenses
      granted under paragraph (a)(A) above, and all derivative works
      made pursuant to the licenses granted under paragraph (a)(B)
      above, must include, in unaltered form, the notices included in
      such Contribution pursuant to Section 3 below.

2.4  Representations and Warranties.  With respect to each Contribution,
   each Contributor represents that to the best of his or her knowledge
   and ability:

   a. The contribution properly acknowledges all major Contributors.  A
      major Contributor is any person who has materially or
      substantially contributed to the Contribution.

   b. No information in the Contribution is confidential and the IETF,
      ISOC, and its affiliated organizations may freely disclose any
      information in the Contribution.

   c. There are no limits to the Contributor's ability to make the
      grants, acknowledgments and agreements herein that are reasonably
      and personally known to the Contributor.

   d.  The Contributor has not intentionally included in the
      Contribution any material which is defamatory or untrue or which
      is illegal under the laws of the jurisdiction in which the
      Contributor has his or her principal place of business or
      residence.

   e.  All trademarks, trade names, service marks and other proprietary
      names used in the Contribution and personally and reasonably known
      to the Contributor are clearly designated as such where
      reasonable.

2.5 The Contributor, and each named co-contributor, acknowledges that
   the IETF has no duty to publish or otherwise use or disseminate any
   Contribution.  The IETF reserves the right to withdraw or cease using



Bradner                                                         [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         IETF Rights in Submissions             April 2003


   any Contribution that does not comply with the requirements of
   Sections 2.3 and 2.4 above.

2.6  Contributors, and each named co-contributor, who claim trademark
   rights to terms in their contributions are requested to specifically
   state what conditions apply to implementers of the technology
   relative to the use of any claimed trademarks.  Such statements
   should be submitted in the same way as is done for other intellectual
   property claims. (See [IETF IPR] sec 6.)


3.  Copyright notice required in IETF Documents

   The IETF requires that a copyright notice and disclaimer be
   reproduced verbatim in all IETF Documents.  This requirement protects
   IETF and its participants from liabilities connected with these
   documents.  The copyright notice also alerts readers that the
   document is an IETF document, and that ISOC claims copyright rights
   in certain aspects of the document, such as its layout, the RFC
   numbering convention and the prefatory language of the document.
   This legend is not intended to imply that ISOC has obtained ownership
   of the contribution itself, which is retained by the author(s) or
   remains in the public domain, as applicable.

   Additional copyright notices are not permitted in IETF documents
   except in the case where the document is the product of a joint
   development effort between the IETF and another standards development
   organization.  Such exceptions must be approved on an individual
   basis by the IAB.

3.1 Copyright notice and disclaimer

   One of the following two copyright notice and disclaimers shall be
   included at the end of all IETF documents.

3.1.1 Notice for documents where the right to produce derivative works
   has not been withheld. (See sec 5.3 for a discussion on derivative
   works.)


   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (year). Except as set forth
   below, authors retain all their rights.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are



Bradner                                                         [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         IETF Rights in Submissions             April 2003


   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the  purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for rights
   in submissions defined in the IETF Standards Process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/S HE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE
   INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."

3.1.2 Notice for documents where the right to produce derivative works
   has been withheld. (See sec 5.3 for a discussion on derivative
   works.)

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (year). Except as set forth
   below, authors retain all their rights.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies. However, this document itself may
   not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright notice
   or references to the Internet Society or other Internet
   organizations, except as required to translate it into languages
   other than English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/S HE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE
   INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."


3.2 Notices re. Derivative Works and publication rights.



Bradner                                                         [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         IETF Rights in Submissions             April 2003


   In addition to the foregoing, each IETF Internet-Draft must contain
   one of the following three notices regarding derivative works and
   publication rights on it's first page: (See sec 5.3 for a discussion
   on derivative works.)

   a. This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all
      provisions of section 2 of RFC XXXX. By submitting this Internet-
      Draft, I certify that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
      which I am aware have been disclosed in accordance with RFC XXXY.

   b. This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all
      provisions of Section 2 of RFC XXXX except that the right to
      prepare revised versions of this specification is not granted. By
      submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
      patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed
      in accordance with RFC XXXY.

   c. This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all
      provisions of Section 2 RFC XXXX, but the author does not provide
      the IETF with any rights other than to publish as an Internet-
      Draft.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any
      applicable patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have
      been disclosed in accordance with RFC XXXY.

   [note to the RFC Editor - XXXX above to be replaced with the number
   of this document and XXXY to be replaced the number of [IETF-IPR]]

   The first statement is required for all documents that are submitted
   for Standards Track publication. The primary motivation is that the
   IETF retains change control, thus permitting augmenting the original
   document to clarify or enhance the protocol defined by the document.

   The second statement is used when "republishing" standards produced
   by other (non-IETF) standards organizations, industry consortia or
   individual companies. These are typically published as Informational
   RFCs, and do not require that change control be ceded to the IETF.
   Basically, these documents convey information for the Internet
   community.

   The third statement is used when the document's purpose is to provide
   background information to educate and to facilitate discussions
   within IETF groups and the document is not intended to be published
   as an RFC.


4. Definitions

"Contribution": in the context of this memo, a contribution to the IETF



Bradner                                                         [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         IETF Rights in Submissions             April 2003


   is any submission intended by the contributor for publication as an
   Internet-Draft or RFC and any statements made within the context of
   an IETF process. Such statements include oral statements in IETF
   meetings, as well as written and electronic communications made at
   any time or place, which are addressed to
   o  the IETF plenary session,
   o  any IETF working group or portion thereof,
   o  the IESG, or any member thereof on behalf of the IESG,
   o  the IAB or any member thereof on behalf of the IAB,
   o  any IETF mailing list, including the IETF list itself, any working
      group or design team list, or any other list functioning under
      IETF auspices,
   o  the RFC Editor or the Internet-Drafts function

   Statements made outside of an IETF meeting, mailing list or other
   function, that are clearly not intended to be input to an IETF
   activity, group or function, are not contributions in the context of
   this memo.

"IETF Standards Process": the activities undertaken by the IETF in any
   of the settings described in 4 above.

"Contributors": individuals submitting Contributions

"IETF Documents":  RFCs and Internet-Drafts.

"RFC": the basic publication series for the IETF.  RFCs are published by
   the RFC Editor and once published are never modified.  (See [RFC
   2026] sec 2.1)

"Internet-Draft": temporary documents used in the IETF process.
   Internet-Drafts are published by the IETF Secretariat and have a
   nominal maximum lifetime in the Secretariat's public directory of 6
   months, after which they are removed.  Since Internet-Drafts are
   archived many places on the Internet there is no effective limit on
   their actual lifetime.  Internet-Drafts that are under active
   consideration by the IESG are not removed from the Secretariat's
   public directory until that consideration is complete. In addition,
   the author of an Internet-Draft can request that the lifetime in the
   Secretariat's public directory be extended before the expiration.
   Note that under section 2.3(a) the grant of rights as specified in
   this document is perpetual and irrevocable and thus survives the
   Secretariat's removal of an Internet-Draft from the public directory,
   except as limited by section 2.3(a)(B).  (See [RFC 2026] sections 2.2
   and 8)

"IETF":  In the context of this document, the IETF includes all
   individuals who participate in meetings, working groups, mailing



Bradner                                                         [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         IETF Rights in Submissions             April 2003


   lists, functions and other activities which are organized or
   initiated by ISOC, the IESG or the IAB under the general designation
   of the Internet Engineering Task Force or IETF, but solely to the
   extent of such participation.

"Reasonably and personally known": should be read to refer to something
   the individual knows personally or, because of the job the individual
   holds, would reasonably be expected to know.


5. Exposition of why these procedures are the way they are

5.1 Rights Granted in Contributions

   The IETF/ISOC must obtain the right to publish a Contribution as an
   RFC or an Internet-Draft from the Contributors.

   A primary objective of this policy is to obtain from the document
   authors only the non-exclusive rights that are needed to develop and
   publish IETF documents and to use the Contributions in the IETF
   standards process while leaving all other rights with the authors.

   The non-exclusive rights that the IETF needs are:

   a. the right to publish the document
   b. the right to let the document be freely reproduced in the formats
      that the IETF publishes it in
   c. the right to let third parties translate it into languages other
      than English
   d. except where explicitly excluded (see sec 3.2), the right to make
      derivative works within the IETF process.

   The authors retain all other rights, but cannot withdraw the above
   rights from the IETF/ISOC.

5.2 Rights to use Contributed Material

   Because, under the laws of most countries and applicable
   international treaties, copyright rights come into existence whenever
   a work of authorship is created (but see Section 6 below regarding
   public domain documents), and IETF cannot make use of Contributions
   if it does not have sufficient rights with respect to these copyright
   rights, it is important that the IETF receive assurances from all
   Contributors that they have the authority to grant the IETF the
   rights that they claim to grant.  Without this assurance, IETF and
   its participants would run a greater risk of liability to the owners
   of these rights.




Bradner                                                         [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         IETF Rights in Submissions             April 2003


   To this end, IETF asks Contributors to give the assurances in Section
   2.4 above.  These assurances are requested, however, only to the
   extent of the Contributor's reasonable and personal knowledge. (See
   Section 4.)


5.3 Right to produce derivative works

   The IETF needs to be able to evolve its documents in response to
   experience gained in the deployment of the technologies described in
   the documents, to incorporate developments in research and to react
   to changing conditions on the Internet and other IP networks.  In
   order to do this the IETF must be able to produce derivatives of its
   documents; thus the IETF must obtain the right from Contributors to
   produce derivative works. Note though that the IETF only requires
   this right for the production of derivative works within the IETF
   standards process.  The IETF does not need, nor does it obtain, the
   right to let derivative works be created outside of the IETF process.

   The right to produce derivative works is required for all IETF
   standards track documents and for most non-standards track documents.
   There are two exceptions to this requirement:  documents describing
   proprietary technologies and documents that are republications of the
   work of other standards organizations.

   The right to produce derivative works must be granted (i.e., an
   Internet-Draft must be published with boilerplate "a" from sec 3.2)
   before an IETF working group can accept a document as a working group
   document or otherwise work on it.  Note: a working group can discuss
   any Internet-Draft with the aim to decide if it should become a
   working group document, whether or not the right to produce
   derivative works has been yet granted.  For independent submissions,
   the right to produce derivative works must be granted for all
   standards track documents before the IESG will issue an IETF Last-
   Call and, for most non-standards track documents, before the IESG
   will consider the Internet-Draft for publication.

   The IETF has historically encouraged organizations to publish details
   of their technologies, even where the technologies are proprietary
   ones, because understanding how existing technology is being used
   helps when developing new technology.  But organizations that publish
   information about proprietary technologies are frequently not willing
   to have the IETF produce revisions of the technologies and then claim
   that the IETF version is the "new version" of the organization's
   technology. Organizations which feel this way can specify that the
   document can be published following the other provisions of this
   section but withhold the right to produce derivative works.




Bradner                                                        [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         IETF Rights in Submissions             April 2003


   In addition, IETF documents frequently make normative references to
   standards or recommendations developed by other standards
   organizations.  Since the publications of some standards
   organizations are not public documents it can be quite helpful to the
   IETF to republish, with the permission of the other standards
   organization, some of these documents as IETF documents so that the
   IETF community can have open access to them to better understand what
   they are referring to.  In these cases the IETF documents can be
   published without the right for the IETF to produce derivative works.

   In both of the above cases in which the production of derivative
   works is excluded, the Contributor must include a special legend in
   the Contribution, as specified in section 3.2, in order to notify
   IETF participants about this restriction.

5.4  Rights to use trademarks

   Contributors may wish to seek trademark or service mark protection on
   any terms that are coined or used in their Contributions.  IETF makes
   no judgment about the validity of any such trademark rights.
   However, the IETF requires each Contributor, under the licenses
   described in Section 2.3.a above, to grant IETF a perpetual license
   to use any such trademarks or service marks solely in exercising its
   rights to reproduce, publish and modify the Contribution.  This
   license does not authorize any IETF participant to use any trademark
   or service mark in connection with any product or service offering,
   but only in the context of IETF documents and discussions.



5.5  Who does this apply to?

   Rights and licenses granted to the IETF are granted to all
   individuals noted in section 4, irrespective of their employment or
   institutional affiliation.  However, these licenses do not extend
   broadly to the employers, sponsors or institutions of such
   individuals, nor do they authorize the individuals to exercise any
   rights outside the specific context of the IETF standards process.


6. Contributions Not Subject to Copyright

   Certain documents, including those produced by the U.S. government
   and those which are in the public domain, may not be protected by the
   same copyright and other legal rights as other documents.
   Nevertheless, we ask each Contributor to grant to the IETF the same
   rights as he or she would grant, and to make the same
   representations, as though the Contribution were a proprietary



Bradner                                                        [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         IETF Rights in Submissions             April 2003


   document.  We ask for these grants and representations only to the
   extent that the Contribution may be protected. We believe they are
   necessary to protect the IETF, the standards process and all IETF
   participants, and also because the IETF does not have the resources
   or wherewithal to make any independent investigation as to the actual
   proprietary status of any document submitted to it.

7. Inclusion of legal notice

   Section three above defines a copyright notice to be included on IETF
   documents and in derivative works.  The full copyright notice does
   not need to be included in some specific types of derivative works.

   a/ in MIBs, PIBs and similar material commonly extracted from IETF
      documents, the following copyright notice should be included in
      the body of the material that will be extracted "Copyright (C)
      <year> The Internet Society. This version of this MIB module is
      part of RFC xxxx; see the RFC itself for the full legal notices."
      (Substitute "PIB" for "MIB" in the statement for PIBs.)  In the
      case of MIBs and PIBs this statement should be placed in the
      DESCRIPTION clause of the MODULE-IDENTITY macro.

   b/ short excerpts of IETF documents presented in electronic help
      systems, for example, the DESCRIPTION clauses for MIB variables,
      do not need to include a copyright notice.


8  Security Considerations

   This memo relates to IETF process, not any particular technology.
   There are security considerations when adopting any technology,
   whether IPR-protected or not.  A working group should take those
   security considerations into account as one part of evaluating the
   technology, just as IPR is one part, but they are not issues of
   security with IPR procedures.


9. References

9.1 Normative references

   [RFC 2026]  Bradner, S.[ed], "The Internet Standards Process --
      Revision 3", RFC 2026, October 1996
   [IETF IPR] Bradner, S.[ed] "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF
      Technology", work in progress: draft-iprwg-technology-00.txt

9.2 Informative references
   [Berne] "Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic



Bradner                                                        [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         IETF Rights in Submissions             April 2003


      Work", http://www.wipo.int/treaties/ip/berne/index.html

10.  Acknowledgements

   The editor would like to acknowledge the help of the IETF ipr Working
   Group and, in particular the help of Jorge Contreras of Hale and Dorr
   for his careful legal reviews of this and other IETF IPR-related and
   process documents.

11. Editor's Address

   Scott Bradner
   Harvard University
   29 Oxford St.
   Cambridge MA, 02138

   sob@harvard.edu
   +1 617 495 3864

12. Full copyright statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  Except as set forth
   below, authors retain all their rights.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the  purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for rights
   in submissions defined in the IETF Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/S HE
   REPRESENTS (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



Bradner                                                        [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         IETF Rights in Submissions             April 2003


12. change log

   note to RFC Editor - remove this section before publication

   ver 00 to ver 01
   misc grammar changes throughout text
   sec 2.2 - add note about automatic disclaimers
   sec 2.3a - add "or is sponsored by"      remove "unlimited"
   sec 2.3 B - reword to 'of a scope no wider than the license"
   sec 2.4a - add deff of major contributor
   sec 2.6 - 2nd paragraph from sec 5.4 moved here
   sec 3 - truncate heading
   sec 3.1 5th pp - add OR IS SPONSORED BY
   sec 3.1.2 - new section with copyright notice for use where
   derivative works right are withheld
   sec 3.2 - added usage guidelines for boilerplates
   sec 4.1 - add "intended by the contributor"
   sec 4.6 - add "actual" before lifetime
   sec 4.8 - reword
   sec 5.3 - insert "standards" in front of "process"      last pp - add
   "with permission" phrase after "republish"
   sec 5.4 - change "we require" to "the IETF requires"
   sec 7/a - add PIBs
   sec 8 - redo security considerations
   sec 9.1 - remove IPR ID as normative reference
   sec 9.2 - add IPR ID as informative reference
   sec 12 - add changes section

   ver 01 to 02
   abstract - add note about updating 2026
   sec 3.2 - add patent pledge

   ver 02 to 03
   misc copy edits throughout document
   sec 4 - "personally and reasonably known" - remove detail

   ver 03 to 04
   sec 4 - added note to the definition of Internet-Draft













Bradner                                                        [Page 14]
