



Service Function Chaining (sfc)                        M. Boucadair, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                    Orange
Intended status: Informational                              May 11, 2016
Expires: November 12, 2016


Service Function Chaining (SFC) Control Plane Components & Requirements
                    draft-ietf-sfc-control-plane-05

Abstract

   This document describes requirements for conveying information
   between Service Function Chaining (SFC) control elements and SFC data
   plane functional elements.  Also, this document identifies a set of
   control interfaces to interact with SFC-aware elements to establish,
   maintain or recover service function chains.  This document does not
   specify protocols nor extensions to existing protocols.

   This document exclusively focuses on SFC deployments that are under
   the responsibility of a single administrative entity.  Inter-domain
   considerations are out of scope.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 12, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents



Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     1.3.  Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   2.  Generic Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.1.  Generic Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.2.  SFC Control Plane Bootstrapping . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.3.  Coherent Setup of an SFC-enabled Domain . . . . . . . . .   7
   3.  SFC Control Plane: Reference Architecture & Interfaces  . . .   7
     3.1.  Reference Architecture  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.2.  Centralized vs. Distributed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     3.3.  Interface Reference Points  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
       3.3.1.  C1: Interface between SFC Control Plane & SFC
               Classifier  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
       3.3.2.  C2: Interface between SFC Control Plane & SFF . . . .  12
       3.3.3.  C3: Interface between SFC Control Plane & SFC-aware
               SFs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
       3.3.4.  C4: Interface between SFC Control Plane & SFC Proxy .  14
   4.  Additional Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     4.1.  Discovery of the SFC Control Element  . . . . . . . . . .  15
     4.2.  SF Symmetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     4.3.  Pre-deploying SFCs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     4.4.  Withdraw a Service Function (SF)  . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     4.5.  SFC/SFP Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     4.6.  Unsolicited (Notification) Messages . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     4.7.  Liveness Detection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     4.8.  Monitoring & Counters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
     4.9.  Validity Lifetime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
     4.10. Considerations Specific to the Centralized Path
           Computation Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
       4.10.1.  Service Function Path Adjustment . . . . . . . . . .  18
       4.10.2.  Head End Initiated SFP Establishment . . . . . . . .  19
       4.10.3.  (Regional) Restoration of Service Functions  . . . .  19
       4.10.4.  Fully Controlled SFF/SF Sequence for a SFP . . . . .  20
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
     5.1.  Secure Communications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
     5.2.  Pervasive Monitoring  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
     5.3.  Privacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
     5.4.  Denial-of-Service (DoS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
     5.5.  Illegitimate Discovery of SFs and SFC Control Elements  .  22



Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
   7.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
   8.  Contributors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
     9.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
     9.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27

1.  Introduction

   The dynamic enforcement of a service-derived forwarding policy for
   packets entering a network that supports advanced Service Functions
   (SFs) has become a key challenge for operators.  Typically, many
   advanced Service Functions (e.g., Performance Enhancement Proxies
   ([RFC3135]), NATs [RFC3022][RFC6333][RFC6146], firewalls
   [I-D.ietf-opsawg-firewalls], etc.) are solicited for the delivery of
   value-added services, particularly to meet various service objectives
   such as IP address sharing, avoiding covert channels, detecting and
   protecting against ever increasing Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks,
   etc.

   Because of the proliferation of such advanced service functions
   together with complex service deployment constraints that demand more
   agile service delivery procedures, operators need to rationalize
   their service delivery logics and master their complexity while
   optimising service activation time cycles.  The overall problem space
   is described in [RFC7498].  A more in-depth discussion on use cases
   can be found in [I-D.ietf-sfc-use-case-mobility] and
   [I-D.ietf-sfc-dc-use-cases].

   [RFC7665] presents a model addressing the problematic aspects of
   existing service deployments, including topological dependence and
   configuration complexity.  It also describes an architecture for the
   specification, creation, and ongoing maintenance of Service Function
   Chains (SFC) within a network.  That is, how to define an ordered set
   of Service Functions and ordering constraints that must be applied to
   packets and/or frames and/or flows selected as a result of
   classification.

1.1.  Scope

   While [RFC7665] focuses on data plane considerations, this document
   describes requirements for conveying information between SFC control
   elements and SFC data plane functional elements.  Also, this document
   identifies a set of control interfaces to interact with SFC-aware
   elements to establish, maintain or recover service function chains.





Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


   Both distributed and centralized control plane schemes to install
   SFC-related state and influence forwarding policies are discussed.

   This document does not make any assumption on the deployment use
   cases.  In particular, the document implicitly covers fixed, mobile,
   data center networks, and any combination thereof.

   This document does not make any assumption about which control
   protocol to use, whether one or multiple control protocols are
   required, or whether the same or distinct control protocols will be
   invoked for each of the control interfaces.  It is out of scope of
   this document to specify a profile for an existing protocol, to
   define protocol extensions, or to select a protocol.

   Considerations related to the chaining of Service Functions (SFs)
   that span domains owned by multiple administrative entities are out
   of scope.

   It is out of scope of this document to discuss SF-specific control
   and policy enforcement schemes; only SFC considerations are
   elaborated, regardless of the various connectivity services that may
   be supported in the SFC-enabled domain.  Likewise, only the control
   of SFC-aware elements is discussed.

   Service catalogue (including guidelines for deriving service function
   chains) is out of scope.

1.2.  Terminology

   The reader should be familiar with the terms defined in [RFC7498] and
   [RFC7665].

   The document makes use of the following terms:

   o  SFC data plane functional element: Refers to SFC-aware Service
      Function, Service Function Forwarder (SFF), SFC proxy, or
      classifier as defined in the SFC data plane architecture
      [RFC7665].

   o  SFC Control Element: A logical entity that instructs one or more
      SFC data plane functional elements on how to process packets
      within an SFC-enabled domain.

   o  SFC Classification rule: Refers to a rule maintained by a
      classifier that reflects the policies for binding an incoming
      flow/packet to a given SFC and Service Function Path (SFP).
      Actions are associated with matching criteria.  The set of




Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


      classification entries maintained by a classifier are referred to
      as in the classification policy table.

   o  SFP Forwarding Policy Table: this table reflects the SFP-specific
      traffic forwarding policy enforced by SFF components for every
      relevant incoming packet that is associated to one of the existing
      SFCs.  The SFP Identifier (SFP-id) is used as a lookup key to
      determine forwarding action regardless of whether the SFC is fully
      constrained, partially constrained, or not constrained at all.
      Additional information such as a flow identifier, Service Index
      (SI), and/or other characteristics (e.g., the 5-tuple transport
      coordinates of the original packet) may be used for lookup
      purposes.  The set of information to use for lookup purposes may
      be instructed by the control plane.

1.3.  Assumptions

   This document adheres to the assumptions listed in Section 1.2 of
   [RFC7665].

   As a reminder, a Service Function Path (SFP) designates a subset of
   the collection designated by the SFC.  For some SFPs, in some
   deployments, that will be a set of 1.  For other SFPs (in the same or
   other deployments) it may be a larger set.  For some SFPs in some
   deployments the SFP may designate the same set of choices as the SFC.
   This document accommodates all those deployments.

   This document does not make any assumptions about the co-location of
   SFC data plane functional elements; this is deployment-specific.
   This document can accommodate a variety of deployment contexts such
   as (but not limited to):

   o  A Service Function Forwarder (SFF) can connect instances of the
      same or distinct SFs.
   o  A SF instance can be serviced by one or multiple SFFs.
   o  One or multiple SFs can be co-located with a SFF.
   o  A boundary node (that connects one SFC-enabled domain to a node
      either located in another SFC-enabled domain or in a domain that
      is SFC-unaware) can act as an egress node and an ingress node for
      the same flow.
   o  Distinct ingress and egress nodes may be crossed by a packet when
      forwarded in an SFC-enabled domain.
   o  Distinct ingress nodes may be solicited for each traffic direction
      (e.g., upstream and downstream).
   o  The same boundary node may act as an ingress node, an egress node,
      and also embed a classifier.
   o  A classifier can be hosted in a node that embeds one or more SFs.




Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


   o  Many network elements within an SFC-enabled domain may behave as
      egress/ingress nodes.

   Furthermore, the following assumptions are made:

   o  A Control Element can be co-located with a classifier, SFF or SF.
   o  One or multiple Control Elements can be deployed in an SFC-enabled
      domain.
   o  State synchronization between Control Elements is out of scope.

2.  Generic Considerations

2.1.  Generic Requirements

   Some deployments require that forwarding within an SFC-enabled domain
   must be allowed even if no control protocols are enabled.  Static
   configuration must be allowed.

   A permanent association between an SFC data plane element with a
   Control Element must not be required; specifically, the SFC-enabled
   domain must keep on processing incoming packets according to the SFC
   instructions even during temporary unavailability events of control
   plane components.  SFC implementations that do not meet this
   requirement will suffer from another flavor of the constrained high
   availability issue, discussed in Section 2.3 of [RFC7498], supposed
   to be solved by SFC designs.

2.2.  SFC Control Plane Bootstrapping

   The interface that is used to feed the SFC control plane with service
   objectives and guidelines is not part of the SFC control plane
   itself.  Therefore, this document assumes the SFC control plane is
   provided with a set of information that is required for proper SFC
   operation with no specific assumption about how this information is
   collected/provisioned, nor about the structure of such information.
   The following information that is recommended to be provided to the
   SFC control plane prior to bootstrapping includes:

   o  Locators for classifiers/SFF/SFs/SFC proxies, etc.
   o  SFs serviced by each SFF.
   o  A list of service function chains, including how they are
      structured and unambiguously identified.
   o  Status of each SFC: active/pre-deployment phase/etc.  A SFC can be
      defined at the management level and instantiated in an SFC-enabled
      domain for pre-deployment purposes (e.g., testing).  Actions to
      activate, modify or withdraw an SFC are triggered by the control
      plane.  Nevertheless, this document does not make any assumption
      about how an operator instructs the control plane.



Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


   o  A list of classification guidelines and/or rules to bind flows to
      SFCs/SFPs.
   o  Security credentials.
   o  Context information that needs to be shared on a per SFC basis.

   Optionally, load balancing objectives at the SFC level or on a per
   node (e.g., per-SF/SFF/SFC proxy) basis may also be provided to the
   SFC control plane.

   Also, the SFC control plane may gather the following information from
   an SFC-enabled domain at bootstrapping (non-exhaustive list).  How
   this information is collected is left unspecified in this document:

   o  The list of active SFC-aware SFs (including their locators).
   o  The list of SFFs and the SFs that are attached to.
   o  The list of enabled SFC proxies, and the list of SFC-unaware SFs
      attached to.
   o  The list of active SFCs/SFPs as enabled in an SFC-enabled domain.
   o  The list of classifiers and their locators, so as to retrieve the
      classification policy table for each classifier, in particular.
   o  The SFP Forwarding Policy Tables maintained by SFFs.

   During the bootstrapping phase, a Control Element may detect a
   conflict between the running configuration in an SFC data plane
   element and the information maintained by the control plane.
   Consequently, the control plane undertakes appropriate actions to fix
   those conflicts.  This is typically achieved by invoking one of the
   interfaces defined in Section 3.3.

2.3.  Coherent Setup of an SFC-enabled Domain

   Various transport encapsulation schemes and/or versions of SFC header
   implementations may be supported by one or several nodes of an SFC-
   enabled domain.  For the sake of coherent configuration, the SFC
   control plane is responsible for instructing all the involved SFC
   data plane functional elements about the behavior to adopt to select
   the transport encapsulation scheme(s), the version of the SFC header
   to enable, etc.

3.  SFC Control Plane: Reference Architecture & Interfaces

3.1.  Reference Architecture

   The SFC control plane is responsible for the following:

   o  Build and monitor the service-aware topology.  For example, this
      can be achieved by means of dynamic SF discovery techniques.
      Those means are out of scope of this document.



Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


   o  Maintain a repository of service function chains, SFC matching
      criteria to bind flows to a given service function chain, and
      mapping between service function chains and SFPs.
   o  Guarantee the coherency of the configuration and the operation of
      an SFC-enabled domain.
   o  Dynamically compute a service forwarding path (distributed model,
      see Section 3.2).
   o  Determine a forwarding path in the context of a centralized
      deployment model (see Section 3.2).
   o  Update service function chains or adjust SFPs (e.g., for
      restoration purposes) based on various inputs (e.g., external
      policy context, path alteration, SF unavailability, SF withdrawal,
      service decommissioning, etc.).
   o  Provision SFP Forwarding Policy Tables of involved SFFs and
      provides classifiers with traffic classification rules.

   Figure 1 shows the overall SFC control plane architecture, including
   interface reference points.

   This document does not elaborate on the internal decomposition of the
   SFC control plane functional blocks.  The components within the SFC
   control plane and their interactions are out of scope.

   As discussed in Section 3.2, the SFC control plane can be implemented
   in a (logically) centralized or distributed fashion.


























Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


                  +----------------------------------------------+
                  |                                              |
                  |               SFC  Control Plane             |
          +-------|                                              |
          |       |                                              |
          C1      +------^-----------^-------------^-------------+
   +---------------------|C3---------|-------------|-------------+
   |      |            +----+        |             |             |
   |      |            | SF |        |C2           |C2           |
   |      |            +----+        |             |             |
   | +----V--- --+       |           |             |             |
   | |   SFC     |     +----+      +-|--+        +----+          |
   | |Classifier |---->|SFF |----->|SFF |------->|SFF |          |
   | |   Node    |<----|    |<-----|    |<-------|    |          |
   | +-----------+     +----+      +----+        +----+          |
   |                     |           |              |            |
   |                     |C2      -------           |            |
   |                     |       |       |     +-----------+ C4  |
   |                     V     +----+ +----+   | SFC Proxy |-->  |
   |                           | SF | |SF  |   +-----------+     |
   |                           +----+ +----+                     |
   |                             |C3    |C3                      |
   |  SFC Data Plane Components  V      V                        |
   +-------------------------------------------------------------+

                   Figure 1: SFC Control Plane: Overview

   Note, the SFC control plane must be able to invoke SFC OAM
   mechanisms, and to determine the results of OAM operations.

3.2.  Centralized vs. Distributed

   The SFC control plane can be (logically) centralized, distributed or
   a combination thereof.  Whether one or multiple SFC Control Elements
   are enabled is deployment-specific.  Nevertheless, the following
   comments can be made:

   SFC management (including SFC monitoring and supervision):  is likely
      to be centralized.

   SFC Mapping Rules:  i.e., service instructions to bind a flow to a
      service function chain and SFP are likely to be managed by a
      central SFC Control Element, but the resulting policies can be
      shared among several Control Elements.  Note, these policies can
      be complemented with local information (e.g., an IPv4 address/IPv6
      prefix assigned to a customer) because such information may not be
      available to the central entity but known only during network
      attachment phase.



Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


   Path computation:  can be either distributed or centralized.
      Distributed path computation means that the selection of the exact
      sequence of SF functions that a packet needs to invoke (along with
      instances and/or SFF locator information) is a result of a
      distributed path selection algorithm executed by involved nodes.
      For some traffic engineering proposes, the SFP may be constrained
      by the control plane; as such, some SFPs can be fully specified
      (i.e., list all the SFF/SFs that need to be solicited) or
      partially specified (e.g., exclude some nodes, explicitly select
      which instance of a given SF needs to be invoked, etc.).

   SFP Resiliency (including restoration)  refers to mechanisms to
      ensure high available service function chains.  It includes means
      to detect node/link/path failures.  Both centralized and
      distributed mechanism to ensure SFP resiliency can be envisaged.

   Implementing a (logically) centralized path computation engine
   requires information to be dynamically communicated to the central
   SFC Control Element, such as the list of available SF instances, SFF
   locators, load status, SFP availability, etc.

3.3.  Interface Reference Points

   The following sub-sections describe the interfaces between the SFC
   control plane, as well as various SFC data plane elements.

3.3.1.  C1: Interface between SFC Control Plane & SFC Classifier

   As a reminder, a classifier is a function that is responsible for
   classifying traffic based on (pre-defined) rules.

   This interface is used to install SFC classification rules in
   classifiers.  Once classification rules are populated, classifiers
   are responsible for binding incoming traffic to service function
   chains and SFPs according to these classification rules.  Note, the
   SFC control plane must not make any assumption on how the traffic is
   to be bound to a given service function chain.  In other words,
   classification rules are deployment-specific.  For instance,
   classification can rely on a subset of the information carried in a
   received packet such as 5-tuple classification, be subscriber-aware,
   be driven by traffic engineering considerations, or any combination
   thereof.

   The SFC control plane should be responsible for removing invalid (and
   stale) mappings from the classification tables maintained by the
   classifiers.  Also, local sanity checks mechanisms may be supported
   locally by the classifiers, but those are out of scope.




Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


   The classifier may be notified by the control plane about the
   available SFs (including the SFFs they are attached to) or be part of
   the service function discovery procedure.

   Classification rules may be updated, deleted or disabled by the
   control plane.  Criteria that would trigger those operations are
   deployment-specific.

   Given that service function chaining solutions may be applied to very
   large sets of traffic, any control solution should take scaling
   issues into consideration as part of the design.  For example,
   because a large number (e.g., 1000s) of classification entries may be
   configured to a classifier, means to reduce classification lookup
   time such as optimizing the size of the classification table (e.g.,
   by means of aggregation capabilities) should be supported by the SFC
   control plane (and/or the classifier).

   Below are listed some functional objectives that can be achieved
   thanks to the invocation of this interface:

   o  Rationalize the management of classification rules.
   o  Maintain a global view of instantiated rules in all classifiers in
      an SFC-enabled domain.
   o  Check the consistency of instantiated classification rules within
      the same classifier or among multiple classifiers.
   o  Assess the impact of removing or modifying a classification rule
      on packets entering an SFC-enabled domain.
   o  Aggregate classification rules for the sake of performance
      optimization (mainly reduce lookup delays).
   o  Adjust classification rules when rules are based on volatile
      identifiers (e.g., an IPv4 address, IPv6 prefix).
   o  Allow to rapidly restore SFC/SFP states during failure events that
      occurred at a classifier (or a Control Element).

   The control plane must instruct the classifier about the initial
   values of the Service Index (SI).

   The control plane must instruct the classifier whether it can trust
   an existing SFC information carried in an incoming packet or whether
   it must be ignored.

   A classifier should send unsolicited messages through this interface
   to notify the SFC control plane about specific events.  Triggers for
   sending unsolicited messages should be configurable parameter.

   When re-classification is allowed in an SFC-enabled domain, this
   interface can be used to control classifiers co-resident with SFC-
   aware SFs, SFC proxies, or SFFs to manage re-classification rules.



Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


   When an incoming packet matches more than one classification rule,
   tie-breaking criteria should be followed (e.g., priority).  Such tie-
   breaking criteria should be instructed by the control plane.

   The identification of instantiated SFCs/SFPs is local to each
   administrative domain; it is policy-based and deployment-specific.

3.3.2.  C2: Interface between SFC Control Plane & SFF

   SFFs make traffic forwarding decisions according to the entries
   maintained in their SFP Forwarding Policy Table.  Such table is
   populated by the SFC control plane through the C2 interface.  In
   particular, this interface is used to instruct the SFF about the set
   of information to use for lookup purposes (e.g., SFP-id, 5-tuple
   transport coordinates).

   This interface is used to instruct a SFF about the SFC-aware SFs that
   it can service.  This interface is also used by the SFF to report the
   connectivity to their attached (including embedded) SFs.  Local means
   may be enabled between the SFC-aware SFs and SFFs to allow for the
   dynamic attachment of SFs to a SFF and/or discovery of SFs by a SFF
   but those means are unspecified in this document.

   The C2 interface is also used for collecting states of attributes
   (e.g., availability, workload, latency), for example, to dynamically
   adjust Service Function Paths.

   The C2 interface may be used to configure groups of functionally
   equivalent SFs.  In particular, this group may be used for load-
   balancing purposes.

   An SFF must be instructed to strip the SFC information for the chains
   it terminates.  Forwarding policies for handling packets bound to
   chains that are terminated by an SFF may be communicated via this
   interface.  By default, an SFF relies on legacy processing for
   forwarding these packets.

3.3.3.  C3: Interface between SFC Control Plane & SFC-aware SFs

   The SFC control plane uses this interface to interact with SFC-aware
   SFs.  This interaction may be direct or via dedicated SF management
   systems.

   SFs may need to output some processing results of packets to the SFC
   control plane.  This information can be used by the SFC control plane
   to update the SFC classification rules and the SFP Forwarding Policy
   Table entries.




Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


   This interface is used to collect such kind of feedback information
   from SFs.  For example, the following information can be exchanged
   between a SF and the SFC control plane:

   o  SF execution status: Some SFs may need to send information to the
      control plane to fine tune SFPs.  For example, a threat-detecting
      SF can periodically send the threat characteristics via this
      interface, such as high probability of threat with packet of a
      given size.  The control plane can then add an appropriate
      matching criteria to SFF to steer traffic to a scrubbing center.

   o  SF load update: When SFs are under stress that yielded the
      crossing of some performance thresholds, the SFC control plane
      needs to be notified to adjust SFPs accordingly (especially when
      the centralized path computation mode is enabled).  It is out of
      scope of this document to specify the exact methods to monitor the
      performance threshold or stress level of SFs, nevertheless the SFC
      control plane can invoke those methods for its operations.

   o  SF bypass: An SF may use this interface to notify the Control
      Plane about its desire to be bypassed.  The exact details about SF
      bypass logic are out of scope of this document.

   The SFC control needs the above status information for various tasks
   it undertakes, but this information may be acquired directly from SFs
   or indirectly from other management and control systems in the
   operational environment.

   This interface is also used to instruct an SFC-aware SF about any
   context information (a.k.a., metadata) it needs to attach to packets
   for a given SFC.

   Also, this interface informs the SFC-aware SF about the semantics of
   a context information, which would otherwise have opaque meaning.
   Several attributes may be associated with a context information such
   as (but not limited to) the "scope" (e.g., per-packet, per-flow or
   per host), whether it is "mandatory" or "optional" to process flows
   bound to a given chain, etc.  Note that a context may be mandatory
   for "chain 1", but optional for "chain 2".

   The control plane may indicate, for a given service function chain,
   an order for consuming a set of contexts supplied in a packet.

   A SFC-aware SF can also be instructed about the behavior it should
   adopt after consuming a context information that was supplied in the
   SFC header.  For example, the context can be maintained, updated, or
   stripped.




Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


   Multiple SFs may be located within the same physical node, but no SFF
   is enabled in that same node, means to unambiguously forward the
   traffic from the SFF to the appropriate SF must be supported.
   Concretely, each SF must have a unique locator for unambiguous
   forwarding.  This locator may be configured using this interface.

   The controller may use the C3 interface to specify how the reverse
   path of flows, that are processed for a given direction, is selected
   by the SF.  This feature is useful, for example, for packets
   generated by an SFC-aware SF to ensure these packets are forwarded to
   the corresponding source node with the same set of SFs, involved in
   the forward path, are invoked in the reverse order when forwarding
   back these packets.  Special care should be considered to avoid that
   instructions provided to distinct SFs lead to loops.  Additional
   considerations are discussed in Section 4.2.

3.3.4.  C4: Interface between SFC Control Plane & SFC Proxy

   The SFC control plane uses this interface to interact with an SFC
   proxy.

   The SFC proxy can be instructed about authorized SFC-unaware SFs it
   can service.  A SFC proxy can be instructed about the behavior it
   should adopt to process the context information that was supplied in
   the SFC header on behalf of a SFC-unaware SF, e.g., the context can
   be maintained or stripped.

   The SFC proxy is also instructed about the semantics of a context
   information, which would otherwise have opaque meaning.  Several
   attributes may be associated with a context information such as (but
   not limited to) the "scope" (e.g., per-packet, per-flow or per host),
   whether it is "mandatory" or "optional" to process flows bound to a
   given chain, etc.

   The SFC proxy can also be instructed to add some new context
   information into the SFC header on behalf of a SFC-unaware SF.

   The C4 interface is also used for collecting attribute states (e.g.,
   availability, workload, latency), for example, to dynamically adjust
   Service Function Paths.

   This interface may also be used to instruct the SFC proxy about the
   state and information to maintain for proper handling of packets
   received back from an SFC-unaware SF.







Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


4.  Additional Considerations

4.1.  Discovery of the SFC Control Element

   SFC data plane functional elements need to be provisioned with the
   locators of the Control Elements.  This can be achieved using a
   variety if mechanisms such as static configuration or the activation
   of a service discovery mechanism.  The exact specification of how
   this provisioning is achieved is out of scope.

4.2.  SF Symmetry

   Some SFs require both directions of a flow to traverse.  Some service
   function chains require full symmetry.  If a SF (e.g., stateful
   firewall or NAT) needs both direction of a flow, it is the SF
   instantiation that needs both direction of a flow to traverse, not
   the abstract SF (which can have many instantiations spread across the
   network).

   Typically:

   o  C1 interface is used to instruct the classifier how both
      directions of a flow should be processed when crossing an SFC-
      enabled domain.

   o  C2 interface may be used to ensure that the same SF instance is
      involved in both directions of a flow (including, to ensure full
      chain symmetry).

4.3.  Pre-deploying SFCs

   Enabling service function chains should preserve some deployment
   practices adopted by Operators.  Particularly, installing a service
   function chain (and its associated SFPs) should allow for pre-
   deployment testing and validation purposes (that is a restricted and
   controlled usage of such service function chain (and associated
   SFPs)).

4.4.  Withdraw a Service Function (SF)

   During the lifetime of a SFC, a given SF can be decommissioned.  To
   accommodate such context and any other case where a SF is to be
   withdrawn, the control plane should instruct the SFC data plane
   functional element about the behavior to adopt.  For example:

   1.  a first approach would be to update the service function chains
       and/or associated SFPs where that SF is present by removing any
       reference to that SF.  The update concerns service functions



Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


       chains if the decommissioned SF is not provided by any active
       node.  SFPs are impacted when alternate SF instances can provide
       the same service of the decommissioned SF instance.

   2.  a second approach would be to delete/deactivate any service
       function chain (and its associated SFPs) that involves that SF
       but install new service function chains.

4.5.  SFC/SFP Operations

   Various actions can be executed on a service function chain (and
   associated SFPs) that is structured by the SFC control plane.
   Indeed, a service function chain (and associated SFPs) can be
   enabled, disabled, its structure modified by adding a new SF hop or
   remove an SF from the sequence of SFs to be invoked, its
   classification rules modified, etc.

   A modification of a service function chain can trigger control
   messages with the appropriate SFC-aware nodes accordingly.

4.6.  Unsolicited (Notification) Messages

   SFC data plane functional elements must be instructed to send
   unsolicited notifications when loops are detected, a problem in the
   structure of a service function chain is encountered, a long
   unavailable forwarding path time is observed, etc.

   Specific criteria to send unsolicited notifications to a Control
   Element should be fine tuned by the control plane using the interface
   defined in Section 3.3.

4.7.  Liveness Detection

   The control plane must allow to detect the liveliness of SFC data
   plane elements of an SFC-enabled domain.  Note that a data element
   may responsive from a connectivity standpoint, but the service it is
   supposed to provide may not be available.

   In particular, the control plane must allow to dynamically detect
   that a SF instance is out of service and notify the relevant Control
   Element elements accordingly.  The liveness information may be
   acquired directly from SFs or indirectly from other management and
   control systems in the operational environment.

   Liveness status records for all SF instances, and service function
   chains (including the SFPs bound to a given chain) are maintained by
   the SFC Control.




Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


   The classifier may be notified by the control plane or be part of the
   liveness detection procedure.

   The ability of a SFC Control Element to check the liveness of each SF
   present in service function chain has several advantages, including:

   o  Enhanced status reporting by the control plane (i.e., an
      operational status for any given service chain derived from
      liveness state of its SFs).
   o  Ability to support various resiliency policies (i.e., bypass a
      node embedding an SF, use alternate node, use alternate chain,
      drop traffic, etc.) .
   o  Ability to support load balancing capabilities to solicit multiple
      SF instances that provide equivalent functions.

   Local failure detect and repair mechanisms may be enabled by SFC-
   aware nodes.  Control Elements may be fed directly or indirectly with
   inputs from these mechanisms.

   Because a node embedding a SF can be responsive from a reachability
   standpoint (e.g., IP level) while the function its provides may be
   broken (e.g., a NAT module may be down), additional means to assess
   whether an SF is up and running are required.  These means may be
   service-specific.

4.8.  Monitoring & Counters

   SFC-specific counters and statistics must be provided using the
   interfaces defined in Section 3.3.  These data include (but not
   limited to):

   o  Number of flows ever and currently assigned to a given service
      function chain and a given SFP.
   o  Number of flows, packets, bytes dropped due to policy.
   o  Number of packets and bytes in/out per service function chain and
      SFP.
   o  Number of flows, packets, bytes dropped due to unknown service
      function chain (this is valid in particular for a SF node).

4.9.  Validity Lifetime

   SFC instructions communicated via the various interfaces introduced
   in Section 3.3 may be associated with validity lifetimes, in which
   case classification entries will be automatically removed upon the
   expiry of the validity lifetime without requiring an explicit action
   from a Control Element.





Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


   Lifetimes are used in particular by an SFC data plane element to
   clear invalid control entries that would be maintained in the system
   if, for some reason, no appropriate action was undertaken by the
   control plane to clear such entries.

   Both short and long lifetimes may be assigned.

4.10.  Considerations Specific to the Centralized Path Computation Model

   This section focuses on issues that are specific to the centralized
   deployment model (Section 3.2).

4.10.1.  Service Function Path Adjustment

   A SFP is determined by composing SF instances and overlay links among
   SFFs.  Thus, the status of a SFP depends on the states or attributes
   (e.g., availability, topological location, latency, workload, etc.)
   of its components.  For example, failure of a single SF instance
   results in failure of the whole SFP.  Since these states or
   attributes of SFP components may vary in time, their changes should
   monitored and SFPs should be dynamically adjusted.

   Examples of use cases for SFP adjustment are listed below:

   SFP fail-over:   re-construct a SFP with replacing the failed SF
      instance with another instance of the same SF or withdraw the
      failed SF from being invoked.  Note that withdrawing an SF may be
      envisaged if the resulting connectivity service is not broken
      (that is, packets bound to the updated SFP can be successfully
      delivered to their ultimate destinations).  Rerouting the traffic
      to another SF instance or withdrawing the failed SF is deployment-
      specific.

   SFP with better latency experience:  re-construct a SFP with a low
      path stretch considering the changes in topological locations of
      SF instances and the latency induced by the (overlay) connectivity
      among SFFs.

   Traffic engineered SFP:  re-construct SFPs to localize the traffic in
      the network considering various TE goals such as bypass a node,
      bypass a link, etc.  These techniques may be used for planned
      maintenance operations on a SFC-enabled domain.

   SF/SFP Load-balancing:   re-construct SFPs to distribute the workload
      among various SF instances.  Particularly, load distribution
      policies can be taken into account by the Control Element to re-
      compute an SFP or be provisioned as attributes to SFPs that will




Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


      be installed using the control interfaces (C2 interface,
      typically).

   For more details about the use cases, refer to
   [I-D.lee-nfvrg-resource-management-service-chain].

   The procedures for SFP adjustment may be handled by the SFC control
   plane as follows:

   o  Collect and monitor states and attributes of SF instances and
      overlay links via the C2 interface (Section 3.3.2) and the C3
      interface (Section 3.3.3).

   o  Evaluate SF instances and overlay links based on the monitoring
      results.

   o  Select SF instances to re-determine a SFP according to the
      evaluation results.

   o  Replace target SF instances (e.g., in a failure or overladed) with
      newly selected ones.

   o  Enforce the updated SFP for upcoming SFC traversal to SFFs via the
      C1 interface (Section 3.3.1) or the C2 interface (Section 3.3.2).

4.10.2.  Head End Initiated SFP Establishment

   In some scenarios where a SFC Control Element is not connected to all
   SFFs in a SFC-enabled domain, the SFC control plane can send the
   explicit SFF/SF sequence or SF sequence to the SFC head-end, e.g.,
   the classifier via the C1 interface (Section 3.3.1).  SFC head-end
   can use a signaling protocol to establish the SFF/SF sequence based
   on the SF sequence.

4.10.3.  (Regional) Restoration of Service Functions

   There are situations that it might not be feasible for the classifier
   to be notified of the changes of SFF-sequence or SFF/SF Sequence for
   a given SFP because of the time taken for the notification and the
   limited capability of the classifiers.

   If a SF has a large number of instantiations, it scales better if the
   classifier doesn't need to be notified with status of visible
   instantiations of SFs on a SFP.

   It might not be always feasible for the classifier to be aware of the
   exact SF instances selected for a given SFP due to too many instances
   for each SF, notifications not being promptly sent to the classifier,



Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


   or other reasons.  This is about multiple instances of the same SF
   attached to one SFF node; those instances can be handled by the SFF
   via local load balancing schemes.

   Regional restoration can take the similar approach as the global
   restoration: choosing a regional ingress node that can take over the
   responsibility of installing the new steering policies to the
   involved SFFs or network nodes.  Typically, the regional ingress node
   should be:

   o  on the data path of the flow of the given SFC;
   o  in front of the relevant SFFs or network nodes that are impacted
      by the change of the SFP;
   o  capable of encoding the detailed SFP to the Service Chain Header
      of data packets of the identified flow; and
   o  capable of removing the detailed SFP encoding in data packets
      after all the impacted SFFs and network nodes completed the policy
      installation.

4.10.4.  Fully Controlled SFF/SF Sequence for a SFP

   This section discusses some information that can be exchanged over C2
   interface (Section 3.3.2) when the SFC Control Element explicitly
   passes the steering policies to all SFFs for the SFF/SF sequence of a
   given SFC.  In this model, each SFF doesn't need to signal other SFFs
   for the SFP.

   For illustration purposes, an example set of steering policies for an
   SFF is depicted in Figure 2.

              Match Condition            |       Action
   --------------------------------------+-------------------------
   SFP-id = "id#1" & ingress = sffx-port | next-hop: "sf2" & VLAN-ID
   SFP-id = "id#2" & ingress = sf2-port  | next-hop: "sf3" & VLAN-ID
   SFP-id = "id#3" & ingress = sf3-port  | next-hop: sff-b

        Figure 2: Example of Traffic Steering Policy to a SFF node

   The SFF nodes are not required to be directly adjacent to each other.
   As such, they can be interconnected using an overlay technique, such
   as Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE), Virtual eXtensible Local Area
   Network (VXLAN), etc.  SFs are attached to a SFF node or SFC proxy
   node via Ethernet link or other link types.  There are multiple
   different steering policies for one flow within one SFF and each set
   of steering policies is specific for an ingress port.

   For example, the semantics of traffic steering rules can be a match
   condition and an action, similar to, e.g., the route described in



Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016              [Page 20]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


   Section 2.3 of [I-D.ietf-i2rs-rib-info-model].  The match conditions
   and action for distinct ports can be different.

   The matching criteria for SFF can be more sophisticated.  For
   example, it could be the SFP-id together with any fields in the data
   packets, such as (non-exhaustive list):

   o  Destination MAC address
   o  Source MAC address
   o  VLAN-ID,
   o  Destination IP address
   o  Source IP address
   o  Source port number
   o  Destination port number
   o  Differentiated Services Code Point (DSCP)
   o  Packet size, etc., or any combination thereof.

   A SFF node may not support some of the matching criteria listed
   above.  It is important that SFC control plane can retrieve the
   supported matching criteria by SFF nodes.  The actions for traffic
   steering could be to steer traffic to the attached SF instances via a
   specific port.

   The actions to SFC proxy may include a method to map the SFP
   identifier carried in the packet header to a locally significant link
   identifier, e.g., VLAN-ID, and a method to construct and encapsulate
   the SFC header back to the packets when they come back from the
   attached SFs.

   This approach does not require using an end-to-end signaling protocol
   among classifier nodes and SFF nodes.  However, there may be problems
   encountered if SFF nodes are not updated in the proper order or not
   at the same time.  For example, if the SFF "A" and SFF "C" get flow
   steering policies at slightly different times, some packets might not
   be directed to some service functions on a chain.

5.  Security Considerations

5.1.  Secure Communications

   The SFC Control Elements and the participating SFC data plane
   elements must mutually authenticate.  SFC data plane elements must
   ignore instructions received from unauthenticated SFC Control
   Elements.  The credentials details used during authentication can be
   used by the SFC control plane to decide whether specific
   authorization may be granted to a Service Function with regards to
   some specific operations (e.g., authorize a given SF to access
   specific context information).



Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016              [Page 21]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


   In case multiple SFC data plane elements are embedded in the same
   node, the authentication mechanism may be executed as a whole; not
   for each instance.

   A SFC data plane element must be able to send authenticated
   unsolicited notifications to a SFC Control Element.

   The communication between a Control Element and SFC data plane
   elements must provide integrity and replay protection.

   A Service Function must by default discard any action from a SFC
   Control Element that requires specific right privileges (e.g., access
   to a legal intercept log, mirror the traffic, etc.).

5.2.  Pervasive Monitoring

   The authentication mechanism should be immune to pervasive monitoring
   [RFC7258].  An attacker can intercept traffic by installing
   classification rules that would lead to redirect all or part of the
   traffic to an illegitimate network node.  Means to protect against
   attacks that would lead to install, remove, or modify classification
   rules must be supported.

5.3.  Privacy

   The SFC control plane must be able to instruct SFC data plane
   elements about the information to be leaked outside an SFC-enabled
   domain.  Particularly, the SFC control plane must support means to
   preserve privacy [RFC6973].  Context headers may indeed reveal
   privacy information (e.g., IMSI, user name, user profile, location,
   etc.).  Those headers must not be exposed outside the operator's
   domain.

5.4.  Denial-of-Service (DoS)

   In order to protect against denial of service that would be caused by
   a misbehaving trusted SFC Control Element, SFC data plane elements
   should rate limit the messages received from an SFC Control Element.

5.5.  Illegitimate Discovery of SFs and SFC Control Elements

   Means to defend against soliciting illegitimate SFs/SFFs that do not
   belong to the SFC-enabled domain must be enabled.  Such means must be
   defined in service function discovery and SFC Control Element
   discovery specification documents.






Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016              [Page 22]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require any IANA actions.

7.  Acknowledgments

   This document is the result of merging with
   [I-D.lee-sfc-dynamic-instantiation].

   Hongyu Li, Qin Wu, and Yong(Oliver) Huang edited an early version of
   the individual submission of this document.

   Many thanks to Shibi Huang, Lac Chidung, Taeho Kang, Sumandra Majee,
   Dave Dolson, Paul Bottorff, Reinaldo Penno, Jim Guichard, Shunsuke
   Homma, Ken Gray, and Henry Fourie for the feedback and discussion on
   the mailing list.

   The text about the semantic of a context information is provided by
   Dave Dolson.

   Many thanks to Paul Quinn and Uri Elzur for the detailed review.

   Thanks to Catherine Meadows for the SecDir review, and to Stephen
   Farrell and Tero Kivinen for scheduling an early SecDir review.

8.  Contributors

   The following individuals have contributed significantly to this
   document:

      Hongyu Li
      Huawei
      Huawei Industrial Base,Bantian,Longgang
      Shenzhen
      China

      EMail: hongyu.li@huawei.com


      Qin Wu
      Huawei
      101 Software Avenue, Yuhua District
      Nanjing, Jiangsu  210012
      China

      EMail: bill.wu@huawei.com





Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016              [Page 23]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


      Yong(Oliver) Huang
      Huawei
      Huawei Industrial Base,Bantian,Longgang
      Shenzhen
      China

      EMail: oliver.huang@huawei.com


      Christian Jacquenet
      Orange
      Rennes 35000
      France

      EMail: christian.jacquenet@orange.com


      Walter Haeffner
      Vodafone D2 GmbH
      Ferdinand-Braun-Platz 1
      Duesseldorf  40549
      DE

      EMail: walter.haeffner@vodafone.com


      Seungik Lee
      ETRI
      218 Gajeong-ro Yuseung-Gu
      Daejeon  305-700
      Korea

      Phone: +82 42 860 1483
      EMail: seungiklee@etri.re.kr


      Ron Parker
      Affirmed Networks
      Acton
      MA  01720
      USA

      EMail: ron_parker@affirmednetworks.com


      Linda Dunbar
      Huawei Technologies
      USA



Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016              [Page 24]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


      EMail: ldunbar@huawei.com


      Andrew Malis
      Huawei Technologies
      USA

      EMail: agmalis@gmail.com


      Joel M. Halpern
      Ericsson

      EMail: joel.halpern@ericsson.com


      Tirumaleswar Reddy
      Cisco Systems, Inc.
      Cessna Business Park, Varthur Hobli
      Sarjapur Marathalli Outer Ring Road
      Bangalore, Karnataka  560103
      India

      EMail: tireddy@cisco.com


      Prashanth Patil
      Cisco Systems, Inc.
      Bangalore
      India

      EMail: praspati@cisco.com

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC7665]  Halpern, J., Ed. and C. Pignataro, Ed., "Service Function
              Chaining (SFC) Architecture", RFC 7665,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7665, October 2015,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7665>.

9.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-i2rs-rib-info-model]
              Bahadur, N., Kini, S., and J. Medved, "Routing Information
              Base Info Model", draft-ietf-i2rs-rib-info-model-08 (work
              in progress), October 2015.



Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016              [Page 25]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


   [I-D.ietf-opsawg-firewalls]
              Baker, F. and P. Hoffman, "On Firewalls in Internet
              Security", draft-ietf-opsawg-firewalls-01 (work in
              progress), October 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-sfc-dc-use-cases]
              Surendra, S., Tufail, M., Majee, S., Captari, C., and S.
              Homma, "Service Function Chaining Use Cases In Data
              Centers", draft-ietf-sfc-dc-use-cases-04 (work in
              progress), January 2016.

   [I-D.ietf-sfc-use-case-mobility]
              Haeffner, W., Napper, J., Stiemerling, M., Lopez, D., and
              J. Uttaro, "Service Function Chaining Use Cases in Mobile
              Networks", draft-ietf-sfc-use-case-mobility-06 (work in
              progress), April 2016.

   [I-D.lee-nfvrg-resource-management-service-chain]
              Lee, S., Pack, S., Shin, M., and E. Paik, "Resource
              Management in Service Chaining", draft-lee-nfvrg-resource-
              management-service-chain-01 (work in progress), March
              2015.

   [I-D.lee-sfc-dynamic-instantiation]
              Lee, S., Pack, S., Shin, M., and E. Paik, "SFC dynamic
              instantiation", draft-lee-sfc-dynamic-instantiation-01
              (work in progress), October 2014.

   [RFC3022]  Srisuresh, P. and K. Egevang, "Traditional IP Network
              Address Translator (Traditional NAT)", RFC 3022,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3022, January 2001,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3022>.

   [RFC3135]  Border, J., Kojo, M., Griner, J., Montenegro, G., and Z.
              Shelby, "Performance Enhancing Proxies Intended to
              Mitigate Link-Related Degradations", RFC 3135,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3135, June 2001,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3135>.

   [RFC6146]  Bagnulo, M., Matthews, P., and I. van Beijnum, "Stateful
              NAT64: Network Address and Protocol Translation from IPv6
              Clients to IPv4 Servers", RFC 6146, DOI 10.17487/RFC6146,
              April 2011, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6146>.

   [RFC6333]  Durand, A., Droms, R., Woodyatt, J., and Y. Lee, "Dual-
              Stack Lite Broadband Deployments Following IPv4
              Exhaustion", RFC 6333, DOI 10.17487/RFC6333, August 2011,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6333>.



Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016              [Page 26]

Internet-Draft              SFC Control Plane                   May 2016


   [RFC6973]  Cooper, A., Tschofenig, H., Aboba, B., Peterson, J.,
              Morris, J., Hansen, M., and R. Smith, "Privacy
              Considerations for Internet Protocols", RFC 6973,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6973, July 2013,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6973>.

   [RFC7258]  Farrell, S. and H. Tschofenig, "Pervasive Monitoring Is an
              Attack", BCP 188, RFC 7258, DOI 10.17487/RFC7258, May
              2014, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7258>.

   [RFC7498]  Quinn, P., Ed. and T. Nadeau, Ed., "Problem Statement for
              Service Function Chaining", RFC 7498,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7498, April 2015,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7498>.

Author's Address

   Mohamed Boucadair (editor)
   Orange
   Rennes
   35000
   France

   EMail: mohamed.boucadair@orange.com



























Boucadair               Expires November 12, 2016              [Page 27]
