

Internet Draft                                                          
                                                     Jaehoon Paul Jeong 
                                                          Jung-Soo Park 
                                                                   ETRI 
                                                           Kenichi Mase 
                                                     Niigata University 
                                                           Youn-Hee Han 
                                                           SAMSUNG Sait 
                                                            Badis Hakim 
                                                         LRI laboratory 
                                                       Jean-Marie Orset 
                                                            Telecom INT 
draft-jeong-manet-addr-autoconf-reqts-01.txt                            
Expires: August 2004                                   14 February 2004 
    
    
           Requirements for Ad Hoc IP Address Autoconfiguration 
                                      
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 except that the right to 
   produce derivative works is not granted [1]. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering     
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that     
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-     
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress". 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Abstract 
    
   Ad hoc network has no built-in infra-structure for communication 
   among mobile nodes and operates in a stand-alone fashion, or may be 
   connected to the public Internet.  All the nodes in ad hoc network 
   have the capability to maintain all the resources of the network in a 
   distributed fashion.  One of the most important resources is the set 

 
 
Jeong, et al.            Expires - August 2004                [Page 1] 
 
Internet-Draft     MANET Address Autoconf Requirements   February 2004 
 
 
   of IP addresses configured with an addressing scheme.  When a new 
   node joins a network, it has to be assigned an IP address as part of 
   its initialization.  Since ad hoc network's topology may change 
   unpredictably, it is important to provide a resilient method for 
   providing IP address autoconfiguration.  This document specifies the 
   requirements for IP address autoconfiguration in ad hoc networks 
   which have dynamic network topology. 
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [2]. 
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Terminology...................................................2 
   2. Introduction..................................................2 
   3. Scenarios.....................................................3 
      3.1 Join and Departure of Mobile Nodes........................3 
      3.2 Network Partitioning and Merging..........................4 
      3.3 Internet Connectivity.....................................4 
   4. Requirements for Ad Hoc IP Address Autoconfiguration..........5 
   5. IPv6 Considerations...........................................6 
   6. Security Considerations.......................................6 
   7. Open Issues...................................................7 
   8. Copyright.....................................................8 
   9. References....................................................8 
   10. Authors' Addresses...........................................9 
    
    
1. Terminology 
    
   Two new terms are defined below: 
    
   Mobile Ad Hoc Network (MANET)    A network where mobile nodes can 
                                    communicate with one another without 
                                    preexisting communication 
                                    infrastructure such as base station 
                                    or access point. 
    
   Autoconfiguration (Autoconf)     Automatic configuration or 
                                    self-configuration. 
    
2. Introduction 
    
   IP address configuration is a prerequisite for all the IP networking.  
   In ad hoc networks, such configuration should be performed in every 
 
 
Jeong, et al.            Expires - August 2004                [Page 2] 
 
Internet-Draft     MANET Address Autoconf Requirements   February 2004 
 
 
   mobile node, either manually or automatically.  For convenience sake, 
   automatic configuration is needed in MANET [3]. 
    
   In ad hoc networks, having dynamic network topology and being multi-
   hop, the current automatic address configuration schemes used in the 
   Internet are difficult to adopt, such as DHCP and IPv6 stateless 
   address autoconfiguration.  Also, MANET is an unadministered network 
   where there exists no network administrator who provides network 
   configuration information to users.  In this environment, mobile node 
   should be able to self-configure its IP address. 
    
   This document specifies the requirements for IP address 
   autoconfiguration, considering MANET where there happen the network 
   partitioning and merging very often.  Also, it considers the global 
   connectivity between the MANET and Internet. 
    
3. Scenarios 
    
   There are the scenarios that should be considered in ad hoc IP 
   address autoconfiguration.  Address autoconf protocol needs to deal 
   with the following aspects of the ad hoc environment. 
    
3.1 Join and Departure of Mobile Nodes 
    
   When a mobile node joins a new MANET, an unused IP address is 
   allocated to or configured in the mobile node.  When the mobile node 
   leaves the MANET, its address may become free for another. 
    
   Requirements: 
    
   o  Address autoconf protocol MUST support timely autoconfiguration of 
      IP address for a mobile node. 
    
   o  Address autoconf protocol MAY support mechanisms to probe 
      whether a mobile node moves into another MANET. 
    
   o  Mobile nodes using address autoconf protocol MUST validate 
      allocated IP addresses when powering up or rebooting. 
    
   o  Mobile nodes using address autoconf protocol MAY validate 
      allocated IP addresses when moving into a new network. 
    
   Implication: 
    
   o  The information needed to autoconfigure IP address must be 
      collected or predefined in the MANET. 
    

 
 
Jeong, et al.            Expires - August 2004                [Page 3] 
 
Internet-Draft     MANET Address Autoconf Requirements   February 2004 
 
 
3.2 Network Partitioning and Merging 
    
   Inevitably, a single MANET will be divided into two or more MANET 
   partitions.  Also, these two or more MANET partitions, using the same 
   address autoconf protocol, will be connected together, creating a 
   single merged MANET.  Prior to the merging, each partition has 
   independently allocated or configured addresses.  After merging, two 
   nodes in the merged network may end up using the same address, thus    
   potentially creating address conflict. 
    
   Therefore, this network merging must be perceived by mobile node.  If 
   address conflicts exist, they should be resolved. 
    
   Implication: 
    
   o  The detection and resolution of address conflicts are the 
      indispensable part of address autoconf protocol operation. 
    
   Requirements: 
    
   o  Ad hoc address autoconf protocol MUST detect and resolve address 
      conflicts in a timely manner and on an ongoing basis. 
    
   o  Ad hoc address autoconf protocol MUST allow conflicted address 
      replaced with another. 
    
   o  Ad hoc address autoconf protocol SHOULD minimize the damage, such 
      as loss of delivered packets, due to address replacement. 
    
   o  Addresses SHOULD be allocated or autoconfigured in a way that 
      minimizes the probability that two or more nodes will have the 
      same address. 
    
   o  In order to detect duplicate addresses, ad hoc address autoconf 
      protocol MAY get the aid of ad hoc routing protocol. 
    
   Through address autoconf protocol that detects and resolves the 
   conflicts on an ongoing basis, mobile nodes will benefit from 
   preventing misrouting due to duplicate addresses, and can be provided 
   consistent routing. 
    
3.3 Internet Connectivity 
    
   A mobile node can want to communicate with a node placed in the 
   Internet.  In such case, an Internet gateway providing the Internet 
   connectivity can exist in the MANET [4]. 
    
   Requirements: 
 
 
Jeong, et al.            Expires - August 2004                [Page 4] 
 
Internet-Draft     MANET Address Autoconf Requirements   February 2004 
 
 
    
   o  MANET MAY allow configuration of zero or more gateways for the 
      global connectivity to the Internet. 
    
   Implication: 
    
   o  For host DNS name resolution, DNS information, such as the address 
      of recursive DNS server, should be delivered together with gateway 
      information. 
    
4. Requirements for Ad Hoc IP Address Autoconfiguration 
    
   Ad hoc IP address autoconfiguration always includes the   
   configuration of an IP address and netmask (or prefix information in 
   IPv6); it may include some routing information (such as default route 
   or Internet gateway), considering the global connectivity to the 
   Internet.  IP address autoconfiguration must take place before an IP 
   packet can be sent from one node to another.  This section requires 
   that sufficient information be provided by an ad hoc address autoconf  
   protocol to allow IP packets to be sent to a unicast destination IP    
   address within a connected MANET partition, consisting of multi hops. 
    
   Requirements: An ad hoc address autoconf protocol 
    
   o  MUST configure an appropriate netmask or prefix information. 
    
   o  MUST allocate or autoconfigure unique IP addresses within an 
      connected MANET partition. 
    
   o  MAY allow configuration of zero or more gateways for the global 
      connectivity to the Internet. 
    
   The following requirements are derived from applying Section 3.1 and    
   Section 3.2 to IP interface configuration. 
    
   Requirements: An ad hoc address autoconf protocol 
    
   o  MUST be capable of providing IP address in a reasonable delay. 
    
   o  MUST be capable of discovering whether an IP address is currently 
      in use. 
    
   o  MUST detect and resolve IP address conflicts in a timely manner 
      and on an ongoing basis. 
    
   o  MUST timely validate autoconfigured IP addresses when powering up 
      or rebooting. 
    
 
 
Jeong, et al.            Expires - August 2004                [Page 5] 
 
Internet-Draft     MANET Address Autoconf Requirements   February 2004 
 
 
   o  MAY timely validate autoconfigured IP addresses when moving into a 
      new network. 
    
   o  SHOULD be able to process the address conflict due to manual 
      address configuration. 
    
   o  SHOULD minimize the influence of autoconf traffic on the ongoing 
      MANET communication performance. 
       
   o  MAY get the aid of ad hoc routing protocol so as to detect 
      duplicate addresses. 
    
   o  SHOULD minimize the modification of existing MANET routing 
      protocol. 
    
   o  MAY get the aid of ad hoc routing protocol so as to minimize 
      the probability that two or more nodes will have the same address. 
    
   o  When MANET partitions merge, ad hoc address autoconf protocol 
      SHOULD be performed in the way it avoids congestion caused by 
      messages sent for the purpose of duplicate address detection. 
    
   o  SHOULD minimize the damage, such as loss of delivered packets, 
      due to address replacement for supporting the survivability 
      of upper-layer sessions, such as TCP. 
    
   o  SHOULD allocate IP addresses to mobile nodes in a way that 
      minimizes the probability that two or more nodes will have the 
      same address. 
    
   o  The reclamation of the addresses unused any more MAY be considered. 
      An IP address is assigned only for the duration the node stays in 
      the network.  When the node departs the network, its IP address 
      MAY become available for assignment to other nodes.  In this case, 
      address autoconf protocol SHOULD NOT immediately reuse the 
      released IP addresses as soon as they become available, in order 
      to reduce address conflicts. 
    
5. IPv6 Considerations 
    
   IPv6 provides a mechanism that allows a host to generate a link-local    
   IP address Autoconfiguration [5][6].  Thus, this mechanism can be 
   extended to be suitable for MANET [7] or another can be redesigned 
   separately [8][9].  Also, it is necessary to discuss how to use IPv6 
   link-local address in a MANET which is logically one subnet. 
    
6. Security Considerations 
    
 
 
Jeong, et al.            Expires - August 2004                [Page 6] 
 
Internet-Draft     MANET Address Autoconf Requirements   February 2004 
 
 
   Ad hoc IP address autoconf protocol MUST NOT be any less secure than 
   current IETF-Standard protocols related to IP address 
   autoconfiguration. 
    
   Because of their lack of infrastructure and their strong mobility, 
   mobile ad hoc networks are vulnerable to lots of security attacks. 
   Especially, address autoconf protocol is likely to be a good target 
   for attackers.  For example, it can be the victim of Denial of 
   Service attacks in which a malicious node monopolizes all the 
   addresses or sends the response messages to create address conflicts 
   in the network.  Consequently, an ad hoc IP address autoconf protocol 
   SHOULD, as much as possible, prevent such attacks. 
    
   Requirements: An ad hoc address autoconf protocol 
    
   o  SHOULD prevent malicious nodes from monopolizing all addresses of 
      a network. 
    
   o  SHOULD prevent malicious nodes from voluntarily creating IP 
      conflicts. 
    
   o  SHOULD be able to identify nodes which belong to the network. 
    
   o  SHOULD make sure that only authorized nodes are configured and 
      granted access to network resources. 
    
   Implication: 
    
   o  A node SHOULD be able to prove at every moment, its membership of 
      the network. 
    
7. Open Issues 
    
   There are some open issues about ad hoc address autoconfiguration as 
   follows: 
    
   o  Is there any need to categorize requirements into some classes? 
      Most of the ad hoc address autoconf protocols proposed until now 
      can be categorized into two classes: a) Stateless address 
      autoconf protocol and b) Stateful address autoconf protocol. 
      We need to discuss if we should specify the respective 
      requirements according to each class. 
       
   o  Should we make ad hoc address autoconf protocol completely 
      independent of ad hoc routing protocol or able to get the aid of 
      ad hoc routing protocol? 
    
   o  Should we consider address conflict in the overlapped MANETs with 
 
 
Jeong, et al.            Expires - August 2004                [Page 7] 
 
Internet-Draft     MANET Address Autoconf Requirements   February 2004 
 
 
      two or more ad hoc routing protocols? 
       
   o  Should we consider the coexistence of the address autoconf 
      protocol using authentication mechanism and that not using 
      authentication mechanism? 
    
8. Copyright 
    
   The following copyright notice is copied from RFC 2026 [Bradner,  
   1996], Section 10.4, and describes the applicable copyright for this  
   document. 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society July 12, 2001. All Rights   
   Reserved. 
      
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to   
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it   
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published   
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any   
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph   
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this  
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing   
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other   
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of   
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for   
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be   
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than   
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be   
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an   
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING   
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING   
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION   
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF   
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
9. References 
    
   [1] Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
       9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   [2] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
       Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   [3] A. Williams, "Requirements for Automatic Configuration of IP 
 
 
Jeong, et al.            Expires - August 2004                [Page 8] 
 
Internet-Draft     MANET Address Autoconf Requirements   February 2004 
 
 
       Hosts", draft-ietf-zeroconf-reqts-12.txt, September 2002. 
    
   [4] Ryuji Wakikawa et al., "Global connectivity for IPv6 Mobile Ad 
       Hoc Networks", draft-wakikawa-manet-globalv6-01.txt, July 2002. 
    
   [5] T. Narten, E. Nordmark and W. Simpson, "Neighbour Discovery for 
       IP version 6", RFC 2461, December 1998. 
    
   [6] S. Thomson and T. Narten, "IPv6 Stateless Address 
       Autoconfiguration", RFC 2462, December 1998. 
    
   [7] Charles E. Perkins, Jari T. Malinen, Ryuji Wakikawa, Elizabeth M. 
       Belding-Royer and Yuan Sun, "IP Address Autoconfiguration for Ad 
       Hoc Networks", draft-ietf-manet-autoconf-01.txt, November 2001. 
    
   [8] Jaehoon Jeong et al., "Ad Hoc IP Address Autoconfiguration", 
       draft-jeong-adhoc-ip-addr-autoconf-02.txt, February 2004. 
    
   [9] Jaehoon Jeong et al., "Ad Hoc IP Address Autoconfiguration for 
       AODV", draft-jeong-manet-aodv-addr-autoconf-00.txt, February 
       2004. 
    
10. Authors' Addresses 
    
   Jaehoon Paul Jeong 
   ETRI / PEC 
   161 Gajeong-dong, Yuseong-gu 
   Daejon 305-350 
   Korea 
    
   Phone: +82-42-860-1664 
   EMail: paul@etri.re.kr 
    
   Jung-Soo Park 
   ETRI / PEC 
   161 Gajeong-dong, Yuseong-gu 
   Daejon 305-350 
   Korea 
    
   Phone: +82-42-860-6514 
   EMail: pjs@etri.re.kr 
    
   Kenichi Mase 
   Niigata University 
   2-8050 Ikarashi, 
   Niigata-shi, 950-2181 
   Japan 
    
 
 
Jeong, et al.            Expires - August 2004                [Page 9] 
 
Internet-Draft     MANET Address Autoconf Requirements   February 2004 
 
 
   Phone: +81-25-262-7446 
   EMail: mase@ie.niigata-u.ac.jp 
    
   Youn-Hee Han 
   Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology 
   111, Suwon 440-600 
   Korea 
    
   Phone: +82-31-280-9577 
   EMail: yhhan@sait.samsung.co.kr 
    
   Badis Hakim 
   LRI Laboratory 
   University of Paris-XI 
   91405 Orsay cedex 
   France 
    
   Phone: 01-69-15-65-91 
   EMail: Hakim.Badis@lri.fr 
    
   Jean-Marie Orset 
   Institut National des Telecommunications 
   9, rue Charles Fourier  
   91 011 Evry 
   France 
    
   Phone: 01-60-76-44-75 
   EMail: jean-marie.orset@int-evry.fr 
    



















 
 
Jeong, et al.            Expires - August 2004               [Page 10] 
