

                                                              M. Handley
                                               University College London
INTERNET-DRAFT                                               E. Rescorla
draft-handley-doc-market-00.txt                               RTFM, Inc.

                A Market for RFC Publication and Review


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups. Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference mate-
   rial or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
   Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
   munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or
   ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).


Abstract

   We describe a market mechanism for providing incentive for the review
   of IETF documents. Reviewers would be "paid" by the IESG to for their
   reviews. In turn, document authors would need to "pay" the IESG to
   take up their documents. This mechanism rewards reviewers for their
   reviews, thus (hopefully) increasing the quantity and quality of
   reviews.

1. Introduction

   The IETF process depends critically on peer review of documents. How-
   ever, it is notoriously difficult to get quality review of documents.
   Most documents receive few if any Last Call comments and it's quite
   common to see that almost noone has read the documents at IETF meet-
   ings. We believe that much of the reason for this lack of review is a
   lack of incentives. Since reviewers are not compensated, it is not
   surprising that the IETF process lacks sufficiently detailed early
   review.




Handley, Rescorla                                                [Page 1]


   In this memo, we describe a system for compensating reviewers for
   reviews. Although the IETF is not in a position to pay reviewers
   actual money, that does not mean that there is nothing of value to
   offer them. The most obvious thing to offer is the right to publish
   documents. We propose to use this right as the source of our incen-
   tives.

2. An IETF Currency

   We propose to use the common tactic of introducing an internal IETF
   currency, the "Itil", based on the right to publish documents. The
   source of the Itil's value is that the IESG charges individuals and
   working groups for the right to publish documents. The IETF can then
   pay individuals for specific activities judged to be useful.

2.1. Charging for Publication

   The central idea is that the IESG charges for admission to the publi-
   cation queue. When a document is submitted to the IESG, the authors
   must also provide a certain number of Itils. This admission fee is
   what gives the Itil its value. Since no document can be published
   without paying the fee, it's therefore desirable to be in possession
   of Itils. It is not necessary that the authors of the document per-
   sonally have the appropriate number of Itils. Rather, they merely
   need to convince enough people to "chip in" so that they can collec-
   tively pay the fee. This allows people to pay for the publication of
   documents they consider valuable.

   Note that the idea is not to circumvent the IESG quality review pro-
   cess. One cannot simply pay one's fee and publish. Rather, the fee is
   simply for admission to the queue. Once the fee has been paid, the
   IESG review process proceeds as normal. Similarly, Area Director
   approval would be required to submit documents, as per usual. The
   purpose of this fee is purely to create the proper incentives.

   The publication fee is intentionally left unspecified here. It is the
   intent that the IESG could adjust the fee as necessary to keep the
   queue of appropriate depth. We envision the IESG publishing a price
   list and adjusting it on a periodic basis.

2.2. Issuing Itils

   The basic way in which IETF members obtain Itils is that they perform
   services judged to be socially useful. These services might include:
   * Reviewing documents.
   * Chairing working groups.
   * Serving on area directorates.




Handley, Rescorla                                                [Page 2]Internet-Draft   A Market for RFC Publication and Review  


   We envision that the IESG would publish a price list of the value of
   various services. Thus, IETF members could know what they were going
   to be paid for various services.

2.3. Transferability

   In the proposed system, the only built-in way to obtain Itils is to
   get them from the IESG. The only built-in way to spend them is to pay
   the IESG for publication. However, in practice, a system of fungible
   tokens will usually end up being used for private transactions as
   well. Rather than discouraging this, we think it better to encourage
   it. Thus, for instance, members of the WG might pay an external (to
   the WG) expert to assist them in developing their system. The exis-
   tence of such a secondary market for Itils means that the IESG needs
   to set the price on fewer quantities since the market will automati-
   cally adjust them to their efficient values.

3. Practical Issues

   In this section we discuss a number of practical issues relating to
   our proposed system.

3.1. Ensuring Quality

   One obvious objection here is that reviewers will submit low quality
   reviews in order to accumulate Itils. This is easily solved by
   requiring reviews to be accepted by a member of the IESG. If reviews
   are not judged to be of sufficient quality then they simply would not
   be paid for.

   In practice the IESG might simply accept reviews by default, and
   withdraw the payment after the fact if a valid complaint about a
   review were received. As most reviews would be public, kept online,
   and attributed to an individual, we expect social pressures would
   prevent people trying to game the system.

3.2. Accounting

   The conventional method of providing a currency is to have actual
   physical tokens. This is inconvenient in the IETF. However, it's rel-
   atively simple just to keep electronic accounts of everyone's Itil
   balance on a web site somewhere.

   The third-party transfer of Itils poses a minor authentication prob-
   lem. However, unlike cash, Itils are not anonymous. Thus if someone
   asserts that someone else has transfered one of their Itils without
   their authorisation then it is relatively simple to audit what really
   happened. Again, we expect that as the IETF is a relatively small



Handley, Rescorla                                                [Page 3]


   organization of peers, social pressure will mean that we shouldn't
   need strong authentication mechanisms.

3.3. Undesirable Incentives

   If the IESG changes a per-document fee, then there is an incentive
   for document authors to merge what should be multiple documents into
   a single document. However, if the IESG charges a per-page fee, then
   there's a risk of the system quickly getting very complex, with pos-
   sibilities like paying more for better reviews. A per-page fee also
   provides disincentive for properly explaining the background to an
   idea. Clearly it's undesirable for documents to be excessively long,
   but it's also undesirable for documents to be excessively brief.

   We believe the system has to be simple to work well. Thus we propose
   a flat fee per document as a starting point. The IESG can always
   require a document to be re-submitted if they believe that it would
   be better as multiple separate documents. Charging a re-submission
   fee would then provide a disincentive to submitting merged documents
   in the first place.

3.4. Priming the Pump

   In the initial stages of this system, there will be an undersupply of
   Itils relative to the demand. We propose to prime the pump by simply
   issuing a modest number of Itils initially. A number of criteria
   could be used for ths initial grant, including a lottery, a minimal
   bar (everyone who's published an RFC), or delaying charging for pub-
   lication until a sufficient number of Itils had been earned.


4. Some Initial Prices

   Although the IESG needs to periodically adjust prices, it is useful
   to have an idea of an initial starting set. We propose the following
   starting price list. Negative numbers are paid to the IESG, positive
   numbers are paid by the IESG.
   Activity                    Price
   -------------------------------------------------
   Admission to the IESG queue                -5
   Resubmission of a revised document         -3
   Review of a document                       +1
   Chairing a WG                              +2/yr
   Serving on the IESG                        +5/yr
   Serving on the IAB                         +2/yr
   Serving on a directorate                   +1/yr





Handley, Rescorla                                                [Page 4]Internet-Draft   A Market for RFC Publication and Review  


Author's Addresses
   Mark Handley  <m.handley@cs.ucl.ac.uk>
   Department of Computer Science
   University College London
   Gower Street
   London
   WC1E 6BT
   UK.

   Eric Rescorla <ekr@rtfm.com>
   RTFM, Inc.
   2064 Edgewood Drive
   Palo Alto, CA 94303
   USA
   Phone: (650)-320-8549




































