


Network Working Group                                          A. Pastor
Internet-Draft                                                  D. Lopez
Intended status: Experimental                             Telefonica I+D
Expires: September 21, 2016                                      A. Shaw
                                                    Hewlett Packard Labs
                                                          March 20, 2016


 Remote Attestation Procedures for virtualized NSFs (vNSFs) through the
                       I2NSF Security Controller
                 draft-pastor-i2nsf-vnsf-attestation-01

Abstract

   This document describes the procedures a user can follow to assess
   the trust on a virtualized NSF and its user-defined configuration
   through the I2NSF Security Controller.  The procedure to assess
   trustworthiness is based on a remote attestation of the
   virtualization platform and the vNSFs running on it performed through
   a Trusted Platform Module (TPM) invoked by the Security Controller.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 21, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Pastor, et al.         Expires September 21, 2016               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Remote Attestation for vNFs            March 2016


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Requirements Language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Establishing User Trust  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  First Step: User-Agnostic Attestation  . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  Second Step: User-Specific Attestation . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.3.  Trusted Computing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  vNSF Attestation Principles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.1.  Requirements for a Trusted vNSF Platform . . . . . . . . .  9
       4.1.1.  Trusted Boot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       4.1.2.  Remote Attestation Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       4.1.3.  Secure Boot  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  Remote Attestation Procedures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.1.  Trusted Channel with the Security Controller . . . . . . . 13
     5.2.  Security Controller Attestation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     5.3.  Platform Attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16






















Pastor, et al.         Expires September 21, 2016               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Remote Attestation for vNFs            March 2016


1.  Introduction

   As described in [I-D.pastor-i2nsf-merged-use-cases], when
   virtualization is applied to the NSF environment (vNSF) it implies
   several additional concerns in security.  The most relevant threats
   associated with a security virtual platform are:

   o  An unknown/unauthorized user can try to impersonate another user
      that can legitimately access virtualized NSF services.  This
      attack may lead to accessing the policies and applications of the
      attacked user or to generate network traffic outside a the
      security functions with a falsified identity.

   o  An authorized user may misuse assigned privileges to alter the
      network traffic processing of other users in the virtualization
      platform.  This can become especially serious when such a user has
      administration privileges granted by the virtualization provider,
      the ISP or the local network operator.

   o  A user may try to install malformed elements (policy or
      application), trying to directly take the control of a NSF or
      virtualization platform, for example by exploiting a vulnerability
      on one of the functions or may try to intercept or modify the
      traffic of other users in the same platform.

   o  A malicious virtualization provider can modify the software
      running on it (the operating system or a concrete vNSF) to alter
      the behaviour of the latter.  This event has a high impact on all
      users accessing vNSFs as the virtualization provider has the
      highest level of privilege on the software in execution.

   o  A user with physical access to the virtualization platform can
      modify the behavior of hardware components, or the components
      themselves.  Furthermore, it can access a serial console (most
      devices offer this interface for maintenance reasons) to access
      the NSF software with the same level of privilege of the
      virtualization provider.

   Mutual authentication between the user and the vNSF environment and,
   what is more important, the attestation of the elements in the vNSF
   environment by users could address these threats to an acceptable
   level of risk.  In particular:

   o  User impersonation will be minimized by mutual authentication, and
      since appropriate records of such authentications will be made
      available, events will be suitable for auditing in the case of an
      incident.




Pastor, et al.         Expires September 21, 2016               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Remote Attestation for vNFs            March 2016


   o  Attestation of the vNSF environment, especially when performed
      periodically, will allow users to detect the alteration of the
      processing elements, or the installation of malformed elements,
      and mutual authentication will provide again an audit trail.

   o  Attestation relying on independent Trusted Third Parties will
      alleviate the impact of malicious activity on the side of the
      virtualization provider by issuing the appropriate alarms in the
      event of vNSF environment manipulation.

   o  While it is true that any virtual environment is vulnerable to
      malicious activity with full physical access (and this is
      obviously beyond the scope of this document), the application of
      attestation mechanisms raises the degree of physical control
      necessary to perform an untraceable malicious modification of the
      environment.

   The user can have a proof that their vNSFs and policies are correctly
   (from the user point of view) enforced by the Security Controller.
   Taking into account the threats identified above, this document first
   identifies the user expectations regarding remote trust
   establishment, briefly analyzes Trusted Computing techniques, and
   finally describes the proposed mechanisms for remote establishment of
   trust through the Security Controller.


2.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   In this document, these words will appear with that interpretation
   only when in ALL CAPS.  Lower case uses of these words are not to be
   interpreted as carrying RFC-2119 significance.


3.  Establishing User Trust

   From a high-level standpoint, in a virtualized I2NSF platform, the
   user connects and authenticates to the Security Controller, which
   then initialises the user's vNSFs and policies.  Afterwards, the user
   traffic reaches the Internet via the virtualized platform which hosts
   the user's vNSFs.  The user's expectations of the platform behavior
   are thus twofold:

   o  The user traffic will be treated according to the user-specified
      vNSFs and policies, and no other processing will be performed by



Pastor, et al.         Expires September 21, 2016               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Remote Attestation for vNFs            March 2016


      the Security Controller or the platform itself (e.g. traffic
      eavesdropping).

   o  Each vNSF (and its corresponding policies) behaves as configured
      by the user.

   We will refer to the attestation of these two expectations as the
   "user-agnostic attestation" and the "user-specific attestation".
   Trusted Computing techniques play a key role in addressing this
   expectations.

3.1.  First Step: User-Agnostic Attestation

   This is the first interaction between a user and a Security
   Controller: the user wants to attest that he is connected to a
   genuine Security Controller before he continues with the
   authentication.  In this context, two properties characterise the
   genuineness of the Security Controller:

   1.  That the identity of the Security Controller is correct

   2.  That it will process the user's credentials and set up the user
       vNSFs and policies properly.

   Once these two properties are proven to the user, the user knows that
   their credentials will only be used by the Security Controller to set
   up the execution platform for their vNSFs.

3.2.  Second Step: User-Specific Attestation

   From the security enforcement point of view, the user agnostic
   attestation focuses on the initialization of the execution platform
   for the vNSFs.  This second step aims to prove to the user that their
   security is enforced accordingly with their choices (i.e. vNSFs and
   policies).  The attestation can be performed at the initialization of
   the vNSFs, before the user traffic is processed by the vNSFs, or
   during the execution of the vNSFs.

   Support of static vNSF attestation is REQUIRED for a Security
   Controller managing vNSFs, and MUST be performed before the user
   traffic is redirected through any set of vNSFs.  The Security
   Controller MUST provide a proof to the user that the instantiated
   vNSFs and policies are the ones chosen.

   Additionally to the vNSFs instantiation attestation, a continuous
   attestation of the vNSFs execution MAY be required by a user to
   ensure their security.




Pastor, et al.         Expires September 21, 2016               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Remote Attestation for vNFs            March 2016


3.3.  Trusted Computing

   In a nutshell, Trusted Computing (TC) aims at answering the following
   question: "As a user or administrator, how can I have some assurance
   that a computing system is behaving as it should?".  The major
   enterprise level TC initiative is the Trusted Computing Group [TCG],
   which has been established for more than a decade, that primarily
   focuses on developing TC for commodity computers (servers, desktops,
   laptops, etc.).

   The overall scheme proposed by TCG for using Trusted Computing is
   based on a step-by-step extension of trust, called a Chain of Trust.
   It uses a transitive mechanism: if a user can trust the first
   execution step and each step correctly attests the next executable
   software for trustworthiness, then a user can trust the system.




































Pastor, et al.         Expires September 21, 2016               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         Remote Attestation for vNFs            March 2016


                +-----------+
                |           |    extends PCR
                | Platform  +------------------------+
                |           |                        |
                +-----^-----+                        |
                      |                              |
                      |measures                      |
                +-----------+                        |
                | Security  |    extends PCR         |
                |           +---------------------+  |
                | Controller|                     |  |
                +-----^-----+                     |  |
                      |                           |  |
                      |measures                 +-v--v----------+
                +-----------+                   |               |
                |           |    extends PCR    |               |
                | Bootloader+-------------------> Root of Trust |
                |           |                   |               |
                +-----^-----+                   |               |
                      |                         +-^--^----------+
                      |measures                   |  |
                +-----------+                     |  |
                |           |    extends PCR      |  |
                | BIOS      +---------------------+  |
                |           |                        |
                +-----^-----+                        |
                      |                              |
                      |measures                      |
                +-----------+                        |
                | Bootblock |    extends PCR         |
                |  (CRTM)   +------------------------+
                |           |
                +-----------+


                   Figure 1: Applying Trusted Computing

   Effectively, during the loading of each piece of software, the
   integrity of each piece of software is measured and stored inside a
   log that reflects the different boot stages, as illustrated in the
   figure above.  Later, at the request of a user, the platform can
   present this log (signed with the unique identity of the platform),
   which can be checked to prove the platform identity and attest the
   state of the system.  The base element for the extension of the Chain
   of Trust is called the Core Root of Trust.

   The TCG has created a standard for the the design and usage of a
   secure cryptoprocessor to address the storage of keys, general



Pastor, et al.         Expires September 21, 2016               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         Remote Attestation for vNFs            March 2016


   secrets, identities and platform integrity measurements: the Trusted
   Platform Module (TPM).  When using a TPM as a root of trust,
   measurements of the software stack are stored in special on-board
   Platform Configuration Registers (PCRs) on a discrete TPM.  There are
   normally a small number of PCRs that can be used for storing
   measurements, however it is not possible to directly write to a PCR;
   instead measurements must be stored using a process called Extending
   PCRs.

   The extend operation can update a PCR by producing a global hash of
   the concatenated values of the previous PCR value with the new
   measurement value.  The Extend operation allows for an unlimited
   number of measurements to be captured in a single PCR, since the size
   of the value is always the same and it retains a verifiable ordered
   chain of all the previous measurements.

   Attestation of the virtualization platform will thus rely on a
   process of measuring the booted software and storing a chained log of
   measurements, typically referred to as Trusted Boot.  The user will
   either validate the signed set of measurements with a trusted third
   party verifier who will assess whether the software configuration is
   trusted, or the user can check for themselves against their own set
   of reference digest values (measurements) that they have obtained a
   priori, and having already known the public endorsement key of the
   remote Root of Trust.

   Trusted Boot should not be confused with a different mechanism known
   as "Secure Boot", as they both are designed to solve different
   problems.  Secure Boot is a mechanism for a platform owner to lock a
   platform to only execute particular software.  Software components
   that do not match the configuration digests will not be loaded or
   executed.  This mechanism is particularly useful in preventing
   bootkits from successfully infecting a platform on reboot.  A common
   standard for implementing Secure Boot is described in [UEFI].  Secure
   Boot only enforces a particular configuration of software, it does
   not allow a user to attest or quote for a series of measurements.


4.  vNSF Attestation Principles

   As a general principle, in the I2NSF environment users directly
   interact with the Security Controller, which will become the
   essential element to implement the measurements described above,
   relaying on a TPM for the Root of Trust.

   Given the role of the Security Controller, a mutual authentication of
   users and the Security Controller MUST be performed, establishing the
   desired level of assurance.  This level of assurance will determine



Pastor, et al.         Expires September 21, 2016               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         Remote Attestation for vNFs            March 2016


   how stringent are the requirements for authentication (in both
   directions), and how detailed the collected measurements and their
   verification will be.  Furthermore, the virtualization platform MUST
   run a TPM, able to collect measurements of the platform itself, the
   Security Controller, and the vNSFs being executed.  The Security
   Controller MUST make the attestation measurements available to the
   user, directly or by means of a Trusted Third Party.

   NOTE: The reference to results from WGs such as NEA and SACM is
   currently under consideration and will be included here.

   Upon successful authentication, a trusted connection with the
   Security Controller (or an endpoint designated by it) SHALL be
   established.  All traffic to and from the virtualized NSF environment
   will flow through this connection.  The connection is intended not
   only to be secure, but trusted in the sense that it SHOULD be bound
   to the mutual authentication between user and Security Controller,
   with the only exception of the application of the lowest levels of
   assurance, in which case the user MUST be made aware of this
   circumstance.

4.1.  Requirements for a Trusted vNSF Platform

   Although a discrete hardware TPM is RECOMMENDED, relaxed alternatives
   (such as embedded CPU TPMs, or memory and execution isolation
   mechanisms) MAY also be applied when the required level of assurance
   is lower.  This reduced level of assurance MUST be communicated to
   the user by the Security Controller during the initial mutual
   authentication phase.

4.1.1.  Trusted Boot

   All users who interact with a Security Controller MUST be able to:

   a.  Identify the Security Controller based on the public key of a
       Root of Trust.

   b.  Retrieve a set of measurements of all the base software the
       Security Controller has booted (i.e. the vNSF platform).

   This requires that firmware and software MUST be measured before
   loading, with the resulting value being used to extend the
   appropriate PCR register.  The general usage of PCRs by each software
   component SHOULD conform to open standards, in order to make
   verifying attestation reports interoperable, as it is the case of TCG
   Generic Server Specification [TCGGSS].

   The following list describes which PCR registers SHOULD be used



Pastor, et al.         Expires September 21, 2016               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         Remote Attestation for vNFs            March 2016


   during a Trusted Boot process:

   o  PCRs 00-03: for use by the CRTM (Initial EEPROM or PC BIOS)

   o  PCRs 04-07: for use by the bootloader stages

   o  PCRs 08-15: for use by the booted base system

   As well as for providing a signed audit log of boot measurements, the
   PCR values can also be used as an identity for dynamically decrypting
   encrypted blobs on the platform (such as encryption keys or
   configurations that belong to operating system components).  Software
   can choose to submit pieces of data to be encrypted by the Root of
   Trust (which has its own private asymmetric key and PCR registers)
   and only have it decrypted based on a criteria.  This criteria can be
   that the platform booted into a particular state (e.g. a set of PCR
   values).  Once the desired criteria is described and the sensitive
   data is encrypted by the root of trust, the data has been sealed to
   that platform state.  The sealed data will only be decrypted when the
   platform measurements held in the root of trust match the particular
   state.

   Trusted Boot requires the use of a root of trust for safely storing
   measurements and secrets.  Since the Root of Trust is self-contained
   and isolated from all the software that is measured, it is able to
   produce a signed set of platform measurements to a local or remote
   user.  Trusted Boot however does not provide enforcement of a
   configuration, since the root of trust is a passive component not in
   the execution path, and is solely used for safe independent storage
   of secrets and platform measurements.  It will respond to attestation
   requests with the exact measurements that were made during the
   software boot process.  Sealing and unsealing of sensitive data is
   also a strong advantage of Trusted Boot, since it prevents leakage of
   secrets in the event of an untrusted software configuration.

4.1.2.  Remote Attestation Service

   A service MUST be present for providing signed attestation report
   (e.g. the measurements) from the Root of Trust (RoT) to the end user.
   In case of failure to communicate with the service, the end user MUST
   assume the service cannot be trusted and seek an alternative Security
   Controller.

   Since some forms of RoT require serialised access (i.e. due to slow
   access to hardware), latency of getting an attestation report could
   increase with simultaneous requests.  Simultaneous requests could
   occur if multiple Trusted Third Parties (TTP) request for attestation
   reports at the same time.  This MAY be improved through batching of



Pastor, et al.         Expires September 21, 2016              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         Remote Attestation for vNFs            March 2016


   requests, in a special manner.  In a typical remote attestation
   protocol, the user sends a random number ("nonce") to the RoT in
   order to detect any replay attacks.  Therefore, cacheing of an
   attestation report does not work, since there is the possibility that
   it may not be a fresh report.  The solution is to batch the nonce for
   each requestor until the RoT is ready for creating the attestation
   report.  The report will be signed by the embedded identity of the
   RoT to provide data integrity and authenticity, and the report will
   include all the nonces of the requestors.  Regardless of the number
   of the number of nonces included, the requestor verifying the
   attestation report MUST check to see if the requestor's nonce was
   included in order to detect replay attacks.  In addition to the
   attestation report containing PCRs, an additional report known as an
   SML (Secure Measurement Log) can be returned to the requestor to
   provide more information on how to verify the report (e.g. how to
   reproduce the PCR values).  The integrity of the SML is protected by
   a PCR measurement in the RoT.  An example of an open standard for
   responses is [TCGIRSS].  Further details are discussed in
   Section 5.2.

   As part of initial contact, the Security Controller MAY present a
   list of external TTPs that the requestor can use to verify it.
   However, the user MUST assess whether these external verifiers can be
   trusted.  The user can also choose to ignore or discard the presented
   verifiers.

   Finally, to prevent malicious relaying of attestation reports from a
   different host, the authentication material of the secure channel
   (e.g.  TLS, IPSec, etc.)  SHOULD be bound to the RoT and verified by
   the connected user, unless the lowest levels of assurance have been
   chosen and an explicit warning made to the user.  This is also
   addressed in Section 5.1.

4.1.3.  Secure Boot

   Using a mechanism such as Secure Boot helps provide strong prevention
   of software attacks.  Furthermore, in combination with a hardware-
   based TPM, Secure Boot can provide some resilience to physical
   attacks (e.g. preventing a class of offline attacks and unauthorised
   system replacement).  For vNSF platform providers, it is RECOMMENDED
   that Secure Boot is employed wherever possible with an appropriate
   firmware update mechanism, due to the possible threat of software/
   firmware modifications in either public places or privately with
   inside attackers.







Pastor, et al.         Expires September 21, 2016              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         Remote Attestation for vNFs            March 2016


5.  Remote Attestation Procedures

   The establishment of trust with the Security Controller and the vNSF
   platform consists of three main phases, which need to be coordinated
   by the user through a trusted application executed by a trusted
   network-attached device:

   1.  Trusted channel with the Security Controller.  During this phase,
       the user securely connects to the Security Controller to avoid
       that user data can be tampered with or modified by an attacker if
       the network cannot be considered trusted.  The establishment of
       the trusted channel is completed after the next step.

   2.  Security Controller attestation.  During this phase, the user
       verifies that the Security Controller components responsible for
       handling the user's credentials and for the isolation with
       respect to other potential users are behaving correctly.
       Furthermore, it is verified that the identity of the platform
       attested is the same of the one presented by the Security
       Controller during the establishment of the secure connection.

   3.  Platform attestation.  During this step, that can be repeated
       periodically until the user connection is terminated, the
       Security Controller verifies the integrity of the elements
       composing the user vNSF platform.  The components responsible for
       this task have been already attested during the previous phase.



                                   +----------+
                 3. Attestation    | Trusted  |   3. Attestation
              +-------------------->  Third   <----------+
              |                    |  Party   |          |
              |                    +----------+ +--------+-------+
   +----------v-------+                         |  +-----v-----+ |
   | User Application |                         |  | Security  | |
   |                  |  1. Trusted channel     |  | Controller| |
   | 2. Get Cert      +------+ handshake +--------->           | |
   | 3. Attestation   |                         |  +-----------+ |
   | 4. Cont.handshake|                         |                |
   |                  |                         |                |
   |                  |                         |  +---------+   |
   |                  |                         |  |   vNSF  |   |
   |                  |                         |  +---------+   |
   +------------------+                         +----------------+






Pastor, et al.         Expires September 21, 2016              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         Remote Attestation for vNFs            March 2016


                  Figure 2: Steps for remote attestation

   In the following each step, as depicted in the above figure, is
   discussed in more detail.

5.1.  Trusted Channel with the Security Controller

   A trusted channel is an enhanced version of the secured channel that,
   differently from the latter, requires the integrity verification of
   the contacted endpoint by the other peer during the initial
   handshake.  However, simply transmitting the integrity measurements
   over the channel does not guarantee that the platform verified is the
   channel endpoint.  The public key or the certificate for the secure
   communication MUST be included as part of the measurements presented
   by the contacted endpoint during the remote attestation.  This way, a
   malicious platform cannot relay the attestation to another platform
   as its certificate will not be present in the measurements list of
   the genuine platform.

   In addition, the problem of a potential loss of control of the
   private key must be addressed (a malicious endpoint could prove the
   identity of the genuine endpoint).  This is done by defining a long-
   lived Platform Property Certificate.  Since this certificate connects
   the platform identity to the AIK public key, an attacker cannot use a
   stolen private key without revealing his identity, as it may use the
   certificate of the genuine endpoint but cannot create a quote with
   the AIK of the other platform.

   Finally, since the platform identity can be verified from the
   Platform Property Certificate, the information in the certificate to
   be presented during the establishment of a secure communication are
   redundant.  This allows for the use of self-signed certificates, what
   would simplify operational procedures in virtualized environments,
   especially when they are multi-tenant.  Thus, in place of
   certificates signed by trusted CAs, the use of self-signed
   certificates (which still need to be included in the measurements
   list) is RECOMMENDED.

   The steps required for the establishment of a trusted channel with
   the Security Controller are as follows:

   1.  The user application begins the trusted channel handshake with
       the selected Security Controller.

   2.  The certificate of the Security Controller is collected and used
       for verifying the binding of the attestation result to the
       contacted endpoint.




Pastor, et al.         Expires September 21, 2016              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         Remote Attestation for vNFs            March 2016


   3.  The user application performs Security Controller attestation
       either locally or with the help of a Trusted Third Party.

   4.  If the result of the attestation is positive, the application
       continues the handshake and establishes the trusted channel.
       Otherwise, it closes the connection.

5.2.  Security Controller Attestation

   During the establishment of the trusted channel, the user attests the
   Security Controller by verifying the identity of the contacted
   endpoint and its integrity.  Initially the Security Controller
   measures all the hardware and software components involved in the
   boot process of the vNSF platform, in order to build the chain of
   trust.

   Since a user terminal may not have enough capabilities to perform the
   integrity verification of a Security Controller the user application
   MAY request the status of a Security Controller to a Trusted Third
   Party (TTP), which is in charge of communicating with it.  This
   choice has the additional advantage of preventing an attacker from
   easily determining the software running at the Security Controller.

   If the user application directly performs the remote attestation it
   performs the following steps:

   1.  Ask the Security Controller to generate an integrity report with
       the format defined in [TCGIRSS].

   2.  The Security Controller retrieves the measurements and asks the
       TPM to sign the PCRs with an Attestation Identity Key (AIK).
       This signature provides the user with the evidence that the
       measurements received belong to the Security Controller being
       attested.

   3.  Once the integrity report has been generated it is sent back to
       the user application.

   4.  The user application first checks if the integrity report is
       valid by verifying the quote and the certificate associated to
       the AIK, and then determines if the Security Controller is
       behaving as expected, i.e. its software has not been compromised
       and isolation among the users connected to it is enforced.  As
       part of the verification, the application also checks that the
       digest of the certificate, received during the trusted channel
       handshake, is present among measurements.

   If the user application is running on a terminal with low computation



Pastor, et al.         Expires September 21, 2016              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft         Remote Attestation for vNFs            March 2016


   resources, it may contact a TTP which, in turn, attests the Security
   Controller and returns the result of the integrity evaluation to the
   user, following the same steps depicted above.

5.3.  Platform Attestation

   The main outcome of the Security Controller attestation is to detect
   whether or not it is correctly configuring the virtualization
   container for the vNSFs belonging to the connecting user (the
   virtualization platform, or vNSF platform) in a way that the user's
   traffic is processed only by the NSFs within the container.  The
   platform attestation, instead, evaluates the integrity of the NSFs
   running within the platform.

   The platform attestation does not imply a validation of the
   mechanisms the Security Controller can apply to select the
   appropriate NSFs (virtual or physical) to enforce the Service
   Policies applicable to a user.  The selection of these NSFs is
   supposed to happen independently of the attestation procedures, and
   trust on the selection process and the translation of policies into
   function capabilities has to be based on the trust the user has on
   the Security Controller being attested as the one it was intended to
   be used.  An attestation of the selection and policy mapping
   procedures constitute an interesting research matter, but it is out
   of the scope of this document.

   The procedures are essentially similar to the ones described in the
   previous section.  This step MAY be applied periodically if the level
   of assurance selected by the user requires it.

   Attesting vNSFs typically running as virtual machines can become a
   rather costly operation, especially if periodic monitoring is
   required by the requested level of assurance, and there are several
   proposals to make them feasible, from the proposal of virtual TPMs in
   [VTPM] to the application of Virtual Machine Introspection through an
   integrity monitor described by [VMIA].


6.  Security Considerations

   This document is specifically oriented to security and it is
   considered along the whole text.


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document requires no IANA actions.




Pastor, et al.         Expires September 21, 2016              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft         Remote Attestation for vNFs            March 2016


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.pastor-i2nsf-merged-use-cases]
              Pastor, A., Lopez, D., Wang, K., Zhuang, X., Qi, M.,
              Zarny, M., Majee, S., Leymann, N., Dunbar, L., and M.
              Georgiades, "Use Cases and Requirements for an Interface
              to Network Security Functions",
              draft-pastor-i2nsf-merged-use-cases-00 (work in progress),
              June 2015.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, DOI 10.17487/
              RFC2119, March 1997,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [TCG]      "Trusted Computing Group (TCG)",
              <https://www.trustedcomputinggroup.org/>.

   [TCGGSS]   "TCG Generic Server Specification, Version 1.0",
              <http://www.trustedcomputinggroup.org/>.

   [TCGIRSS]  "Infrastructure Work Group Integrity Report Schema
              Specification, Version 1.0",
              <https://www.trustedcomputinggroup.org/>.

8.2.  Informative References

   [UEFI]     "UEFI Specification Version 2.2 (Errata D), Tech. Rep.".

   [VMIA]     "Verifying system integrity by proxy".

   [VTPM]     "vTPM:Virtualizing the Trusted Platform Module", <https://
              www.usenix.org/legacy/events/sec06/tech/berger.html>.


Authors' Addresses

   Antonio Pastor
   Telefonica I+D
   Zurbaran, 12
   Madrid,   28010
   Spain

   Phone: +34 913 128 778
   Email: antonio.pastorperales@telefonica.com




Pastor, et al.         Expires September 21, 2016              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft         Remote Attestation for vNFs            March 2016


   Diego R. Lopez
   Telefonica I+D
   Zurbaran, 12
   Madrid,   28010
   Spain

   Phone: +34 913 129 041
   Email: diego.r.lopez@telefonica.com


   Adrian L. Shaw
   Hewlett Packard Labs
   Long Down Avenue
   Bristol,   BS34 8QZ
   UK

   Phone: +44 117 316 2877
   Email: als@hpe.com

































Pastor, et al.         Expires September 21, 2016              [Page 17]

