     Internet Draft                                       Greg Vaudreuil 
     Expires in six months                           Lucent Technologies 
                                                           July 10, 2004  
                                                                        
                                 
                      IMAP Conventions for Message Context 


                    <draft-ietf-lemonade-msg-context-00.txt> 


                                         


  Status of this Memo 


     This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions of 
     Section 10 of RFC 2026. 


     This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working 
     documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas, 
     and its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute 
     working documents as Internet Drafts. 


     Internet Drafts are valid for a maximum of six months and may be 
     updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any time.  It is 
     inappropriate to use Internet Drafts as reference material or to cite 
     them other than as a "work in progress". 


     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html 


     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 


      


  Intellectual Property Notice 


     By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable 
     patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed, or 
     will be disclosed, and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, 
     in accordance with RFC 3668. 


  Copyright Notice 


     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved. 


     This Internet-Draft is in conformance with Section 10 of RFC2026. 


  Overview 


     This document defined conventions for the use of IMAP flags or 
     annotations to indicate to a client the context of a message without 
     downloading the headers of the message.  One illustrative use is to 
     enable a client to effeciently display an icon representing the 
     message context when displaying a list of messages. 


     Please send comments on this document to the Lemonade working group 
     mailing list <lemonade@ietf.org> 



     Internet Draft        IMAP Message Context            July 10, 2004 



  Working Group Summary 


     This is a work item of the Lemonade working group. 


   


  Table of Contents 


  1.   ABSTRACT ..........................................................2 
  2.   THE BEEF ..........................................................2 
  3.   SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS ...........................................3 
  4.   IANA CONSIDERATIONS ...............................................3 
  5.   NORMATIVE REFERENCES ..............................................3 
  6.   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ...................................................3 
  7.   INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY NOTICE ......................................4 
  8.   COPYRIGHT NOTICE ..................................................4 
  9.   AUTHORS' ADDRESS ..................................................5 
     
  1. Abstract 


     This document defines one or more IMAP flags for the indication of 
     message context. 


  2. The Beef 


     The name of the flag is to be determimed. 


     The flag is set upon logical deposit into the mailbox.  When using a 
     server that provides context, a client requesting a list of messages 
     may expect this flag to indicate the message context set by the sender 
     in the message context header field defined in [Context]. 


     A new IMAP capability is defined to communicate to clients at 
     connection time that message context is available through the 
     indicated flag. 


     The key operational innovation of this standard is the requirement 
     that a message store populate a flag upon deposit.  Up to now, flags 
     have been set only by clients.  It is anticipated that a number of 
     useful deposit-time flags may be defined such as the sensitivity and 
     importance indicators as defined by [VPIM]. 


     It would be great if the WG would allow this extension to represent 
     arbitary message headers without requiring individual extensions.  The 
     set of useful deposit time flags can be expected to grow over time to 
     include such proprietary innovatations as spamassin(TM) header 
     markings.  The author desires assistance in identifying a scheme 
     whereby the server can indicate a list of headers that are summarized 
     as flags. 







     Vaudreuil                Expires 1/10/05                   [Page 2] 



     Internet Draft        IMAP Message Context            July 10, 2004 



  3. Security Considerations 


     This extension to IMAP does not create any new data not otherwise 
     available in the system.  It simply optimizes the access.  As such, 
     there are no anticipated security impacts. 


  4. IANA Considerations 


     This document may specify a registry of flags if the WG allows an 
     arbitrary extension mechanism.  Otherwise, this will simply register 
     another extension to IMAP.  (are IMAP extensions registered?) 


      


  5. Normative References 


   [IMAP] 


   [CONTEXT] Eric Burger, Emily Candell, Graham Klyne, Charles Eliott, 
      "Message Context for Internet Mail", RFC 3458, January 2003 


   [VPIM2] Vaudreuil, Greg, Parsons, Glen, "Voice Profile for Internet 
      Mail, Version 2", RFC 3801, June 2004. 


   


  6. Acknowledgments 


     It is assumed that several IMAP knowledgable people will step forward 
     to fill in the necessary protocol details as the enlisted author is a 
     novice at all things IMAP. 


      























     Vaudreuil                Expires 1/10/05                   [Page 3] 



     Internet Draft        IMAP Message Context            July 10, 2004 



  7. Intellectual Property Notice 


     The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
     intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to pertain 
     to the implementation or use of the technology described in this 
     document or the extent to which any license under such rights might or 
     might not be available; neither does it represent that it has made any 
     effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the IETF's 
     procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and standards-
     related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of claims of 
     rights made available for publication and any assurances of licenses 
     to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to obtain a 
     general license or permission for the use of such proprietary rights 
     by implementors or users of this specification can be obtained from 
     the IETF Secretariat. 


   
     The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
     copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
     rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice 
     this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
     Director. 


  8. Copyright Notice 


     "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved. 


     This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
     others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
     or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and 
     distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, 
     provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
     included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
     document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
     the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
     Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing 
     Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights defined 
     in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as required to 
     translate it into languages other than English.  


     The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
     revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 


     This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
     "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
     TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT 
     NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN 
     WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
     MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."  







     Vaudreuil                Expires 1/10/05                   [Page 4] 



     Internet Draft        IMAP Message Context            July 10, 2004 



  9. Authors' Address 


     Gregory M. Vaudreuil 
     Lucent Technologies 
     7380 Hilltop Dr. 
     Frederick, MD 21702 
     Email: GregV@ieee.org 


      














































     Vaudreuil                Expires 1/10/05                   [Page 5] 