


Authentication, Authorization and Accounting            Frank M. Alfano 
Internet Draft                                          Peter J. McCann 
Document: draft-alfano-aaa-qosreq-01.txt                      Tom Towle 
Expires: April 2004                                       Richard Ejzak 
                                                    Lucent Technologies 
                                                      Hannes Tschofenig 
                                                                Siemens 
                                                           October 2003 
    
    
                    Requirements for a QoS AAA Protocol 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1]. Internet-Drafts are 
   working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its 
   areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also 
   distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
    
Abstract 
    
   This document describes requirements for a protocol that would 
   perform Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting for Quality-of-
   Service reservations.  Such a protocol would be used by entities to 
   authenticate a user's reservation request, to ensure that the 
   reservation is authorized and to provide accounting functionality.  
    
   The requirements covered in this document primarily address the 
   communication of AAA protocols and not the QoS signaling protocols, 
   although they have to provide some degree of interworking. Therefore, 
   we list a minimal set of requirements on supported QoS signaling 
   protocols. 
    



 
 
Alfano, et al.           Expires - April 2004                 [Page 1] 
                 Requirements for a QoS AAA Protocol     October 2003 
 
 
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
      1.1 QoS Signaling..............................................3 
      1.2 Architecture...............................................3 
   2. Keywords.......................................................5 
   3. Terminology....................................................5 
   4. Generic Requirements on a QoS Signaling Protocol...............7 
      4.1 User Authentication/Authorization..........................7 
      4.2 Support for different authorization scenarios..............7 
      4.3 Providing Authorization Information........................7 
      4.4 Reauthorization............................................8 
      4.5 Integrity and Replay Protection............................8 
      4.6 Confidentiality Protection.................................8 
   5. Generic Requirements on a QoS AAA Protocol.....................9 
      5.1 Inter-domain Support.......................................9 
      5.2 Identity-based Routing.....................................9 
   6. Requirements for QoS Authentication............................9 
      6.1 Flexible Authentication Support............................9 
   7. Requirements for QoS Authorization............................10 
      7.1 Making an Authorization Decision..........................10 
      7.2 Triggering an Authorization Process.......................10 
      7.3 Associating QoS Reservations and Application State........10 
      7.4 Dynamic Authorization.....................................11 
      7.5 Bearer Gating.............................................11 
   8. Requirements for QoS Accounting...............................11 
      8.1 Accounting Records........................................11 
      8.2 Accounting Rules..........................................11 
      8.3 Sending Accounting Records................................12 
      8.4 Failure Notification......................................12 
      8.5 Accounting Correlation....................................12 
   9. Interaction with other AAA Applications.......................12 
   10. Use Scenario.................................................13 
      10.1 Bearer Gating............................................14 
      10.2 Loss of Connectivity.....................................14 
   11. Security Considerations......................................14 
   12. References...................................................15 
   13. Author's Addresses...........................................16 
    
 
1. Introduction 
    
   To meet the quality-of-service needs of applications such as voice-
   over-IP, it will often be necessary to explicitly request resources 
   from the network.  This will allow the network to identify packets 
   belonging to such application flows and ensure that bandwidth, delay, 
   and error rate requirements are met.  By performing admission control 

 
 
Alfano et al.            Expires - April 2003                 [Page 2] 
                 Requirements for a QoS AAA Protocol     October 2003 
 
 
   on individual flows, the network can avoid congestion and the 
   resulting high packet drop rates. 
    
1.1 QoS Signaling 
    
   A variety of protocols can be used to signal QoS information and to 
   make a reservation, such as RSVP, NSIS, SIP/SDP or link-layer 
   specific mechanisms.  
    
   RSVP [2] is the existing IETF-defined QoS signaling protocol. The 
   Next Steps in Signaling (NSIS) working group [3] is currently 
   developing a general signaling model based on two-layer architecture.  
    
   In the meantime, deployments such as 3rd generation cellular networks 
   are defining their own reservation procedures: these include link-
   layer specific means, such as the PDP Context Activation procedures 
   of 3GPP [4,5] or the service instance establishment procedures of 
   3GPP2 [6]. This list can easily be extended.  
    
   In other areas QoS signaling mechanisms are often tightly coupled to 
   the application signaling. In the 3GPP/3GPP2 IP Multimedia Core 
   Network subsystems the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [7] and 
   Session Description Protocol (SDP) [8] are essentially being used to 
   request resource reservations from the network. Special purpose 
   protocols are used for communication between the SIP servers and 
   network elements.  
    
1.2 Architecture 
    
   This draft describes requirements on a AAA protocol for QoS 
   reservations stemming from the new (primarily wireless) network 
   deployments in light of recent efforts to revisit QoS signaling 
   within the IETF. The goal is to meet these requirements of network 
   operators while at the same time supporting a variety of QoS 
   signaling protocols and avoiding the need for monolithic, vertically 
   integrated applications (such as e.g., a SIP proxy server in every 
   router).  A high-level picture of the resulting architecture is shown 
   in Figure 1. 
    










 
 
Alfano et al.            Expires - April 2003                 [Page 3] 
                 Requirements for a QoS AAA Protocol     October 2003 
 
 
                                        +-------------+ 
                                        | Resource    | 
                                        | Authorizing | 
                                        | Entity      | 
                                        +-----+-------+ 
                                              | 
                                              | 
                                       /-\----+-----/\ 
                                   ////               \\\\ 
                                 ||                       || 
                                |         AAA Cloud         | 
                                 ||                       || 
                                   \\\\               //// 
                                       \-------+-----/ 
                                               | 
         +-------------+                   +---+--+ 
         |  Entity     |    Application    |      | 
         |  Requesting |<<=================+  NE  +==========>> 
         |  Resource   |       Flow        |      | 
         +-------------+                   +------+ 
                         Figure 1: Architecture 
    
   Figure 1 depicts an entity requesting a resource, a network element 
   (NE) through which application flows need to pass (i.e., an entity 
   which enforces the QoS reservation), a cloud of AAA servers and an 
   entity authorizing the QoS request. In many cases, the authentication 
   terminates at the user's home network where a database containing 
   subscriber records is located. This is often the entity that executes 
   the authorization decision. Finally, there might be an interaction 
   with an application signaling protocol.  
    
   Note that the entity authorizing the QoS reservation request might be 
   a AAA server, an application server or another entity. These entities 
   are collectively referred as the "Resource Authorizing Entity" in 
   Figure 1.  
    
   The term "AAA Cloud" is used to refer to the network of AAA proxies 
   and brokers. Furthermore, there might be more than one network 
   element that needs to interact with the AAA infrastructure although 
   Figure 1 depicts only one for clarity.  Similarly, a given user might 
   support different authentication methods; he might have more than one 
   home network; or, he might use different means of authorization.  
    
   The remainder of this document is organized as follows:  
    
   Section 3 defines some terms that are used in subsequent discussion. 


 
 
Alfano et al.            Expires - April 2003                 [Page 4] 
                 Requirements for a QoS AAA Protocol     October 2003 
 
 
   Section 4 describes some generic requirements for a QoS signaling 
   protocol. 
   Section 5 gives generic requirements for a QoS AAA protocol. 
   Section 6 gives requirements specific to Authentication. 
   Section 7 gives requirements specific to Authorization. 
   Section 8 gives requirements specific to Accounting. 
   Section 9 discusses the relationship of a QoS AAA protocol to other 
   AAA applications. 
   Section 10 gives an example use scenario. 
   Finally, Section 11 outlines some security considerations. 
 
2. Keywords 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [9]. 
 
3. Terminology 
 
   Accounting Rules 
        An accounting rule is a collection of data that identifies one 
        or more IP flows and provides related information. An accounting 
        rule defines the accounting treatment such as on-line (i.e., 
        pre-paid) or off-line accounting. The data may also identify, 
        for example, volume or time based accounting, rating 
        information, termination actions for on-line accounting (e.g., 
        drop or re-route packets), record correlation identifiers, etc. 
      
   Application Server 
       An application server is a network entity that exchanges 
       signaling messages with an application endpoint.  It may be a 
       source of authorization for QoS-enhanced application flows.  For 
       example, a SIP server is one kind of application server. 
     
   Application Endpoint 
       An application endpoint is an entity in an end user device that 
       exchanges signaling messages with application servers or 
       directly with other application endpoints.  Based on the result 
       of this signaling, the endpoint will make a request for QoS from 
       the network.  For example, a SIP User Agent is one kind of 
       application endpoint. 
    
   Authorizing Entity 
       The authorizing entity is that entity responsible for 
       authorizing QoS requests for a particular application flow.  
       This may be a AAA server (with a subscriber database) or an 
       application server or some other entity. 
    

 
 
Alfano et al.            Expires - April 2003                 [Page 5] 
                 Requirements for a QoS AAA Protocol     October 2003 
 
 
   Network Element 
       A network element is a network entity such as an IP router on 
       the path between two endpoints, through which IP packets 
       belonging to application flows pass. Typically only a small 
       subset of the network elements along a path communicates with 
       the AAA infrastructure for the purpose of QoS authorization.  In 
       a typical service provider scenario, the first-hop router will 
       be required to play this role. A motivation of this 
       architectural simplification is referred to as the New Jersey 
       Turnpike Model and is described in detail in Section 4 of [11]. 
       Network elements are responsible for enforcing the result of the 
       authorization process. 
 
   Subscriber Database 
       A Subscriber Database holds information related to network users 
       such as information about their subscribed service. A user 
       might, for example, have a subscription for a 'gold' service 
       that authorizes him for higher QoS parameters than 'normal' 
       users.  
 
    Termination Actions 
       On-line accounting allows the on-line accounting authorization 
       entity to terminate flows in real time. A termination action 
       defines the action to be taken by the network element for the 
       case where a flow has been terminated. For example flow packets 
       might be dropped, might be redirected, or might be allowed to 
       continue but not be counted. 
    
   QoS signaling protocol 
       A protocol used to carry QoS information between two end points 
       and intercepted by entities along the path. The QoS signaling 
       protocols discussed in this context follow the data path (i.e., 
       they are path-coupled). 
    
   QoS AAA protocol 
       The QoS AAA protocol runs between a network element (acting as a 
       AAA client) and the resource authorizing entity (acting as a AAA 
       server).  For example, upon receipt of a QoS request from the 
       resource requesting entity, the network element might copy 
       authentication credentials and QoS flow information into a AAA 
       message which is forwarded to the resource authorizing entity, 
       possibly via one or more proxy AAA servers.  The authorizing 
       entity returns an authorization decision (yes/no) for the flow, 
       and accounting data would be sent to the authorizing entity 
       while the flow is active.  
    



 
 
Alfano et al.            Expires - April 2003                 [Page 6] 
                 Requirements for a QoS AAA Protocol     October 2003 
 
 
4. Generic Requirements on a QoS Signaling Protocol 
    
   While the details of a particular QoS signaling protocol are outside 
   the scope of this document, we do list here some generic requirements 
   that any QoS signaling protocol must meet in order to act as a front 
   end for a QoS AAA protocol. 
    
4.1 Identification of Resource Authorizing Entity 
    
   The QoS signaling protocol MUST carry information sufficient to 
   identify the resource authorizing entity.  Note that the network 
   element and the resource authorizing entity will often be in 
   different administrative domains. 
    
4.2 User Authentication/Authorization 
    
   The QoS signaling protocol MUST carry information to allow the 
   authorizing entity to compute the authorization decision. In most 
   cases this information will allow the authorizing entity to 
   authenticate the user. Note that authentication is not necessarily 
   required since authorization can also be accomplished for an 
   anonymous user.  
    
   Section 5.7.1 of [13] points to these requirements for the NSIS area. 
   RSVP extended the admission control procedure by adding user 
   authentication as described in [14]. Additional authorization 
   capability has been added with the help of authorization tokens as 
   described in [15] and [16].  
    
   It is important to provide cryptographic authentication or to protect 
   the authorization information (e.g., tokens) appropriately to counter 
   identity spoofing and attacks against the authorization information 
   (e.g., replay attacks). These attacks might lead to fraud as 
   described in [17].  
    
4.3 Support for different authorization scenarios 
    
   [11] and [12] describe a two and a three party approach for computing 
   the authorization decision. The QoS signaling protocol SHOULD support 
   these general authorization scenarios. This wide range of 
   authorization scenarios is required to make the QoS AAA protocol 
   applicable in all deployment environments.  
    
4.4 Providing Authorization Information 
    
   The QoS signaling protocol MUST carry sufficient information between 
   the authorizing entity and the enforcing entity (and vice versa) to 
   compute an authorization decision and to execute it.  
    
 
 
Alfano et al.            Expires - April 2003                 [Page 7] 
                 Requirements for a QoS AAA Protocol     October 2003 
 
 
   This information might include flow identification, QoS objects for 
   determining the authorization (in the direction to the authorizing 
   entity) as well as for provisioning (in the direction from the 
   authorizing entity to the enforcing entity) and price information. 
   Flow information can be used for determining the authorization 
   decision in those case where it meaningful.  
    
   In many cases it MUST be possible to determine the price of the QoS 
   reservation and to communicate the price to the user (or at least to 
   provide sufficient information to allow the user to compute the 
   price). As described in [11] one or both end-points may need to know 
   the price information.  
    
4.5 Reauthorization 
    
   The QoS signaling protocol MUST allow the network to trigger a 
   reauthorization procedure at any time to support periodic and event 
   triggered authorization.  
    
4.6 Integrity and Replay Protection 
    
   The QoS signaling protocol MUST be integrity and replay protected. 
    
   To support this requirement each signaling message would, for 
   example, carry a keyed message digest to ensure that only valid 
   requests are granted by the network.  This is especially important 
   when a user is being held responsible for charges associated with a 
   QoS session.  Prior to providing integrity and replay protection it 
   is necessary to dynamically establish session keys. This is 
   particularly important in a mobile environment as described in 
   Section 7 of [11].  
    
   Integrity and replay protection is required for NSIS as described in 
   [17] (see Section 4.2 and 4.3 of [17]). 
    
4.7 Confidentiality Protection 
    
   The QoS signaling protocol MUST provide confidentiality protection in 
   those cases where authorization information is vulnerable to replay 
   attacks. As an example, single-use authorization tokens may rely on 
   the use of a secure channel. An adversary who is able to eavesdrop 
   authorization tokens might be able to reuse them. They only provide a 
   proof of possession and do not serve the purpose of cryptographic 
   authentication where a liveness guarantee has to be provided by the 
   parties executing the protocol.  
    



 
 
Alfano et al.            Expires - April 2003                 [Page 8] 
                 Requirements for a QoS AAA Protocol     October 2003 
 
 
5. Generic Requirements on a QoS AAA Protocol 
    
   In this section we list some high-level requirements that must be met 
   by a QoS AAA protocol. 
    
5.1 Inter-domain Support 
    
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST support inter-domain operation. In 
   particular, users may roam outside their home network, leading to a 
   situation where the network element and authorizing entity are in 
   different administrative domains.  This implies the existence of a 
   roaming agreement between the two networks.  In general, one or both 
   end-points involved in a communication may be roaming, meaning that 
   the network elements along the data path may belong to multiple 
   administrative domains, none of which are the home domain of either 
   end-point. 
    
5.2 Identity-based Routing 
    
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST route AAA requests to the authorizing 
   entity based on the identity information given in the QoS signaling 
   protocol. 
    
6. Requirements for QoS Authentication 
    
   In this section we list some QoS AAA requirements specific to 
   authentication and authorization. 
    
6.1 Flexible Authentication Support 
    
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST support verification of authentication 
   information present in QoS signaling messages. The QoS AAA protocol 
   MUST support a variety of different authentication protocols. 
   Different QoS architectures are likely to have a different security 
   infrastructure with different requirements.  
    
   The PacketCable architecture, for example, heavily utilizes Kerberos 
   whereas the 3GPP architecture makes use of the UMTS AKA algorithm.  
    
    









 
 
Alfano et al.            Expires - April 2003                 [Page 9] 
                 Requirements for a QoS AAA Protocol     October 2003 
 
 
7. Requirements for QoS Authorization 
    
   In this section we list some QoS AAA requirements specific to 
   authorization. 
    
7.1 Making an Authorization Decision 
    
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST exchange sufficient information between the 
   authorizing entity and the enforcing entity (and vice versa) to 
   compute an authorization decision and to execute this decision.  
    
   This information might include flow identification, QoS objects for 
   determining the authorization as well as for provisioning and price 
   information.  
 
   The flow identification provided to the QoS AAA protocol MUST allow 
   flow information to be under-specified ("wild carded"). This might be 
   the case for aggregates and when endpoints are unknown at the time of 
   initial resource authorization. 
    
7.2 Triggering an Authorization Process 
    
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST allow periodic and event triggered 
   execution of the authorization process.  
    
   The trigger for re-authorization might be originated at the enforcing 
   entity or even at the authorizing entity. In any case it should be 
   possible to carry information with the QoS AAA protocol to allow the 
   enforcing or some other trusted entity to determine when to trigger 
   authorization. For example, a time-based trigger, a volume-based 
   trigger or even triggers based on consumed financial resources might 
   lead to a reauthorization procedure.  
 
7.3 Associating QoS Reservations and Application State 
 
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST carry information sufficient for an 
   application server to identify the appropriate application session. 
   This allows an application session to be associated with a particular 
   QoS reservation.  
    
   Note that if flow information is sufficient to identify an 
   application session then no separate identifier is required. Although 
   this is not true for NSIS other QoS signaling protocols use different 
   identifiers. 
 




 
 
Alfano et al.            Expires - April 2003                [Page 10] 
                 Requirements for a QoS AAA Protocol     October 2003 
 
 
7.4 Dynamic Authorization 
    
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST support dynamic authorization; that is, it 
   MUST be possible to push updates towards the network element(s) from 
   authorizing entities.  
    
   This requirement would support runtime application state transitions 
   or even a change in the subscriber∆s profile that would lead to a 
   different authorization state for a specific QoS reservation.  
    
7.5 Bearer Gating 
    
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST allow the authorizing entity to gate 
   authorized application flows. 
    
   Even though a user might received an authorization for a given flow, 
   some applications may want to toggle the flow on or off based on 
   application state transitions.  This control is called bearer gating. 
   Unlike revocation functionality, gating leaves state information 
   about the QoS reservation in place and it is only temporarily 
   suspended. 
 
 
8. Requirements for QoS Accounting 
    
   In this section we list some QoS AAA requirements specific to 
   accounting. 
 
8.1 Accounting Records 
    
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST define QoS accounting records containing 
   duration or volume (byte count) usage information, or both duration 
   and volume usage information.  The records MUST also contain a 
   description of the QoS attributes (e.g., bandwidth, delay, loss rate) 
   that were supported for the flow. 
 
8.2 Accounting Rules 
 
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST allow the authorizing entity to transfer 
   accounting rules that are applicable to specific flows. These rules 
   would define the on-line ("pre-paid") versus off-line ("post-paid") 
   nature of the accounting as well as convey other associated 
   parameters such as record identifiers, rating information, usage 
   quota, on-line termination actions, etc. 
 
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST allow for accounting rules to be provided 
   at authorization time as well as to be pushed later as dynamic 
   updates. 
    
 
 
Alfano et al.            Expires - April 2003                [Page 11] 
                 Requirements for a QoS AAA Protocol     October 2003 
 
 
8.3 Sending Accounting Records 
    
   The network element MUST send accounting records for a particular 
   application flow to the authorizing entity for that flow or to 
   another entity identified by the authorizing entity. 
 
8.4 Failure Notification 
    
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST allow the network element to report 
   failures to the authorizing entity. These failures (such as loss of 
   connectivity due to movement of a mobile node or other reasons for 
   packet loss) primarily address problems in the data path and do not 
   cover problems with the QoS AAA protocol.  
 
8.5 Accounting Correlation 
    
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST support the exchange of sufficient 
   information to allow for correlation between accounting records 
   generated by the network elements and accounting records generated by 
   an application server.  
    
   For example, an application server might create and pass an 
   accounting correlation identifier to the network element.  This 
   correlation identifier would then be stored for inclusion in 
   subsequent accounting records.  This would allow the home network to 
   link the accounting information of the network element with those of 
   the application server. 
    
9. Interaction with other AAA Applications 
    
   It is likely that an endpoint attached to a first-hop network element 
   was authenticated and authorized for basic, best-effort Internet 
   access prior to requesting any special QoS from the network.  If the 
   subscriber database for basic network access is the same as the one 
   containing a QoS subscription, it may be expeditious to define some 
   interactions between the AAA protocol used for basic access (e.g., 
   NASREQ [10]) and the one outlined here for QoS.  For example, it may 
   be useful to return some QoS-related attributes to the first-hop 
   network element at the time the endpoint is granted basic, best-
   effort access.  This would allow for some future QoS requests to be 
   granted based on the cached profile, rather than requiring a round-
   trip to the home subscriber database.  This gives rise to the 
   following requirement: 
    
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST define a QoS profile that can be re-used in 
   other AAA applications.  
    
   Still, it must be possible to execute the QoS AAA protocol 
   independently of other AAA protocols applications.  
 
 
Alfano et al.            Expires - April 2003                [Page 12] 
                 Requirements for a QoS AAA Protocol     October 2003 
 
 
    
   Also, it may be useful to allow application servers to push QoS 
   authorization information to a network element prior to any explicit 
   request from the endpoint.  This could support application endpoints 
   that do not support an explicit QoS signaling mechanism.  In this 
   case, the authorization may be pushed via the home AAA server, which 
   presumably knows to which NAS the endpoint is currently attached.  
   Alternatively, the QoS AAA protocol may define some sort of 
   redirection facility that would allow application servers to send AAA 
   messages directly to selected network elements such as a NAS.  This 
   operation could be considered a special case of dynamic authorization 
   where no explicit request for QoS was made prior to the 
   authorization: 
    
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST support dynamic authorization initiated by 
   the authorizing entity. 
 
10. Scenarios 
    
   This section provides a few example scenarios:  
    
   An application in a mobile node wants to open a video session with a 
   video server.  The mobile node and the video server negotiate the 
   resources to be used for the session and for which the application 
   will be financially responsible.  When resource negotiation has 
   completed, the video server stores the resource information and 
   assigns a session identifier to the information that can be used as 
   the primary key for later information queries.  This identifier has 
   to be known to both parties - the mobile node and the video server.  
     
   The mobile node starts to use a QoS signaling protocol. The signaling 
   message will hit a network element (most likely the first hop router) 
   in the visited network. The video server and the network element will 
   verify that the mobile node has not requested more resources than 
   what were negotiated and for which the application has agreed to be 
   financially responsible.  To link the application protocol session 
   with this particular resource request, the mobile node passes the 
   session identifier received from the video server to the network 
   element via the QoS signaling protocol.  The network element makes a 
   request to the video server (or some other centralized node) as 
   identified in the session identifier.  The video server passes the 
   relevant QoS state information to the network element in an answer 
   message, associating the origin host information from the request 
   with the state information stored by the video server.  (This can 
   then be used later for pushing information to the network element.)  
   All accounting messages from a network entity include an accounting 
   correlation id.  
 

 
 
Alfano et al.            Expires - April 2003                [Page 13] 
                 Requirements for a QoS AAA Protocol     October 2003 
 
 
10.1 Bearer Gating 
    
   The video server can control the flow of packets on the network 
   element by sending packet flow gating information in the answer 
   message delivered for resource authorization.  If the flow of packets 
   is not immediately enabled, some event at the video server will 
   trigger the server to enable the flow.  The video server sends a 
   request containing flow gating information to the network element to 
   allow the flow of packets.  The network element returns the state of 
   the packet flow in the response message to the video server. 
 
10.2 Loss of Connectivity 
    
   The network element determines connectivity to the end host has been 
   lost.  The video server needs this information in order to take 
   corrective action, charge appropriately, and/or release resources 
   associated with the session.  The network element informs the video 
   server of the loss of connectivity in a request message containing 
   state information of the network element.  The video server 
   acknowledges the request in an answer message.  The video server may 
   then issue a session abort request message to other network 
   functional entities. 
 
11. Security Considerations 
    
   The QoS AAA protocol whose requirements are given in this draft 
   assumes that a trust relationship exists between the authorizing 
   entity and the network element. This trust relationship does not need 
   to be pre-existing at the protocol startup but could also be 
   dynamically established. The relationship may be direct or it may be 
   indirect via a AAA cloud consisting of brokers and proxies.  Each 
   link in this chain of relationships MUST be secured to prevent 
   spoofed authorizations. 
 
   This relationship implies that the bearer element should grant 
   service based on the decision of the authorizing entity, presumably 
   because the used resources will be paid for. The establishment of a 
   trust relationship between the involved networks therefore also 
   implies the setup of a financial settlement.   
    
   The authentication outlined in Section 6 MUST be cryptographically 
   strong and protected against replay and other attacks. Various 
   threats against a QoS signaling protocol (and on the AAA 
   infrastructure) are described in [17].  
    
   Once QoS resources have been authorized, it may be possible for an 
   unauthorized party to subvert them for its own use.  Steps MUST be 
   taken to prevent an adversary from injecting or spoofing data 
   packets, which could then receive preferred treatment (i.e., steal 
 
 
Alfano et al.            Expires - April 2003                [Page 14] 
                 Requirements for a QoS AAA Protocol     October 2003 
 
 
   other user's QoS resources). Although beyond the scope of this 
   document cryptographic protection of the data traffic should be 
   considered either at the network or at the link layer.  
    
   Among other things, Section 9 implies to off-load some authorization 
   decisions from the user's home network to the visted network. Making 
   the user's profile available to entities outside the home network 
   might raise some privacy concerns.  
    
12. Reference
                     
   [1]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", 
        BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   [2]  Braden, R., Zhang, L., Berson, S., Herzog, S., Jamin, S., 
        "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1 Functional 
        Specification", RFC 2205, September 1997. 
    
   [3]  Hancock, R., Freytsis, I., Karagiannis, G., Loughney, J., and 
        Van den Bosch, S., "Next Steps in Signaling: Framework", 
        Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, September 
        2003.  Work in progress. 
    
   [4]  3GPP TS 29.208, "End-to-end Quality of Service (QoS) Signaling 
        Flows", April 2003. 
    
   [5]  3GPP TS 29.207, "Policy control over Go interface", March 2003. 
    
   [6]  3GPP2 C.S0017-0 (also TIA IS-707-A), "Data Service Options for 
        Spread Spectrum Systems." 
    
   [7]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A., 
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and Schooler, E., "SIP: 
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002. 
    
   [8]  Handley, M., Jacobson, V., Perkins, C., "SDP: Session 
        Description Protocol", Internet Draft, Internet Engineering 
        Task Force, September 2003.  Work In Progress. 
    
   [9]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   [10] Calhoun, P., Zorn, G., Spence, D., Mitton, D., "Diameter 
        Network Access Server Application", Internet Draft, Internet 
        Engineering Task Force, October, 2003.  Work In Progress. 
    
   [11] H. Tschofenig, M. Buechli, S. Van den Bosch and H. Schulzrinne: 
        "NSIS Authentication, Authorization and Accounting Issues", 

 
 
Alfano et al.            Expires - April 2003                [Page 15] 
                 Requirements for a QoS AAA Protocol     October 2003 
 
 
                                                                         
        Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, March 2003. 
        Work in progress. 
    
   [12] H. Tschofenig, M. Buechli, S. Van den Bosch, H. Schulzrinne and 
        T. Chen: "QoS NSLP Authorization Issues", Internet Draft, 
        Internet Engineering Task Force, June 2003. Work in progress. 
    
   [13] M. Brunner: "Requirements for QoS signaling protocols", 
        Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, August 2003. 
        Work in progress. 
    
   [14] Yadav, S., Yavatkar, R., Pabbati, R., Ford, P., Moore, T., 
        Herzog, S., Hess, R.: "Identity Representation for RSVP", RFC 
        3182, October, 2001.  
    
   [15] L. Hamer, B. Gage, and H. Shieh: "Framework for session set-up 
        with media authorization," RFC 3521, Internet Engineering Task 
        Force, April 2003. 
    
   [16] L. Hamer, B. Gage, B. Kosinski, and H. Shieh: "Session 
        Authorization Policy Element", RFC 3520, Internet Engineering 
        Task Force, April 2003. 
    
   [17] Tschofenig, H. and D. Kroeselberg: "Security Threats for NSIS", 
        Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, June 2003. 
    
  
 
 
13. Author's Addresses 
    
   Frank M. Alfano 
   Lucent Technologies 
   Rm 9C-226L 
   1960 Lucent Lane 
   Naperville, IL  60563 
   Phone: +1 630 979 7209 
   Email: falfano@lucent.com 
    
   Peter J. McCann 
   Lucent Technologies 
   Rm 9C-226R 
   1960 Lucent Lane 
   Naperville, IL  60563 
   Phone: +1 630 713 9359 
   Email: mccap@lucent.com 

 
 
Alfano et al.            Expires - April 2003                [Page 16] 
                 Requirements for a QoS AAA Protocol     October 2003 
 
 
    
   Thomas T. Towle 
   Lucent Technologies 
   Rm 9C-229 
   1960 Lucent Lane 
   Naperville, IL  60563 
   Phone: +1 630 979 7303 
   Email: ttowle@lucent.com 
    
   Richard Ejzak 
   Lucent Technologies 
   Rm 7H-245 
   1960 Lucent Lane 
   Naperville, IL  60563 
   Phone: +1 630 979 7036 
   Email: ejzak@lucent.com 
    
   Hannes Tschofenig 
   Siemens AG 
   Otto-Hahn-Ring 6 
   81739 Munich 
   Germany 
   EMail: Hannes.Tschofenig@siemens.com 
    
    
Intellectual Property Statement 
    
   At the time of submission the authors are not aware of any 
   intellectual property rights that pertain to the implementation or 
   use of the technology described in this document.  However, this does 
   not preclude the possibility that Lucent Technologies, Inc. or other 
   entities may have such rights.  The patent licensing policy of Lucent 
   Technologies, Inc. is on file with the IETF Secretariat. 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it 
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the 
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and 
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of 
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of 
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to 
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such 
   proprietary rights by implementers or users of this specification can 
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat. 
    

 
 
Alfano et al.            Expires - April 2003                [Page 17] 
                 Requirements for a QoS AAA Protocol     October 2003 
 
 
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to practice 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
   Director. 
    
 
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved. This 
   document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    















 
 
Alfano et al.            Expires - April 2003                [Page 18] 