





      
      
     P2PRG                                                     L. Caviglione 
     Internet Draft                                        Senior Researcher 
                                                                CNIT - Unige 
      
     Expires: September 2006                                       W. Yeager 
                                                             Chief Scientist 
                                                             Peerouette,Inc. 
                                                              March 13, 2006 
      
      
                                           


                                           
                  P2Pv6 (Peer-to-Peer over IPv6) Problem Statement 
                   draft-irtf-p2prg-p2pv6-problem-statement-00.txt 


     Status of this Memo 

        By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that       
        any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is       
        aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she       
        becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of       
        BCP 79. 

        This document may only be posted in an Internet-Draft. 

        Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
        Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
        other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
        Drafts. 

        Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
        and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
        time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
        material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

        The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
             http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

        The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
             http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

        This Internet-Draft will expire on September 13, 2006. 



      
      
      
     Caviglione            Expires September 13, 2006               [Page 1] 
      
     Internet-Draft         P2Pv6 Problem Statement               March 2006 
         

     Copyright Notice 

        Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  All Rights Reserved. 

     Abstract 

        IPv6 has some interesting differences if compared to IPv4. Among the 
        others, it has been developed to restore the end-to-end transparency 
        of the Internet, it offers effective functionalities to support end-
        nodes configuration phases, and it offers many features that are 
        implemented in IPv4 as add-ons. With such a foundation, IPv6 appears 
        as an ideal playground for developing Peer-to-Peer (P2P) applications 
        that rely by design on the interaction between end nodes.  

        The purpose of this document is to attract participation within the 
        P2Pv6 research group, in order to establish a coordinated and 
        proficient research about the joint usage of p2p frameworks and the 
        IPv6 protocol.  

     Conventions used in this document 

        The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
        "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
        document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [1]. 

     Table of Contents 

        1. Subgroup Characterization, History and Practices...............3 
        2. Near Term Goals................................................4 
        3. Research Roadmap...............................................4 
           3.1. Provide Support to the IPv6 Deployment....................4 
           3.2. Analysis of Inferences of P2P and Transitional Mechanisms.5 
           3.3. Analysis of Legacies......................................5 
              3.3.1. Implementation Oriented Legacies.....................6 
              3.3.2. Algorithm Oriented Legacies..........................6 
           3.4. Augmenting P2P Capabilities Via IPv6 Functionalities......6 
           3.5. Interoperability Between the P2P Virtual Layer and IPv6...6 
           3.6. Analogies between IPv6 and P2P Addressing Schemes.........6 
        4. Subgroup Milestones............................................7 
           4.1. Additional Considerations on Milestones...................7 
        5. Intermediate Outcomes..........................................8 
           5.1. Persistent Infrastructure features inherited from IPv4....8 
           5.1.1 Strengths of IPv6 and end-to-end transparency............8 
        6. Related Work...................................................9 
        7. Liaisons.......................................................9 
        8. Security Considerations.......................................10 
        APPENDIX A: Original P2Pv6 Manifest..............................11 
      
      
     Caviglione            Expires September 13, 2006               [Page 2] 
         
     Internet-Draft         P2Pv6 Problem Statement               March 2006 
         

        9. References....................................................13 
           9.1. Normative References.....................................13 
           9.2. Informative References...................................13 
        Authors' Addresses...............................................14 
        Intellectual Property Statement..................................14 
        Disclaimer of Validity...........................................14 
        Copyright Statement..............................................15 
        Acknowledgment...................................................15 
         
         
     1. Subgroup Characterization, History and Practices 

        Briefly, the P2Pv6 subgroup is exploring capabilities and issues that 
        arise from the joint use of the p2p communication paradigm and IPv6. 
        The subgroup officially acts inside the IRTF-P2PRG and it is 
        organized on an open basis. The P2Pv6 main discussions are made over 
        the general P2PRG mailing list, which is available at p2prg@irtf.org. 
        The [P2Pv6] tag is REQUIRED, in order to properly identify this topic 
        among others. The tagging mechanisms have been discussed and approved 
        in the IRTF-P2PRG Meeting held in Paris, 2005. Interim results and 
        subsequent documentation will be publicly available from the WG 
        homepage at: 

           http://www.cs.umd.edu/projects/p2prg/ 

        The P2Pv6 activity had been originally proposed on the P2PRG main 
        mailing list. Subsequently, it has been discussed in the IRTF Meeting 
        held in Paris, 2005. On that occasion, the P2PRG Chairs approved the 
        activity. The P2Pv6 subgroup was spawned after the discussion. 
        Furthermore, the P2Pv6 group will reflect the generalized approval of 
        the P2PRG’s "Near Term Goals", representing the top research 
        priorities acknowledged by the subgroup members. 

        Prior to writing this problem statement draft, the subgroup produced 
        some preliminary discussion traffic about the initial topics 
        proposal. Such mail traffic is available from the P2PRG mail archives 
        at: 

           http://www1.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/p2prg/current/maillist.html 

        Also, the P2Pv6 subgroup can benefit from the P2PRG Bibliography 
        Project, which constitutes a collaborative effort among every P2PRG 
        participant to build a “Knowledge Base” of the available literature 
        about p2p. P2Pv6 participants are encouraged as well to share 
        documents and surveys with other P2PRG members. The P2PRG 
        Bibliography Project is available at: 

      
      
     Caviglione            Expires September 13, 2006               [Page 3] 
         
     Internet-Draft         P2Pv6 Problem Statement               March 2006 
         

           http://www.cs.umd.edu/projects/p2prg/bib/index.html 

     2. Near Term Goals  

        The P2Pv6 subgroup attempts to be in compliance with the Near Term 
        Goals of the P2PRG:  

        o  Classifying the P2P problem space (both currently, and as it 
           evolves) into those problems for which there are existing 
           solutions and those for which solutions require longer-term 
           development;  

        o  Developing descriptive model(s) of peer-node organization whose 
           interpretation can be applied to these solutions;  

        o  Articulating the scope as to what sort of P2P applications the 
           models encompass and what sort they do not;  

        o  Understanding the unique security-related problems and 
           opportunities P2P systems pose;  

        o  Exploring interfaces to IETF protocols to realize the models;  

        o  Offering input to the IETF as a starting place for possible groups 
           standardizing new protocols that are useful in building P2P 
           applications. 

     3. Research Roadmap 

        The P2Pv6 has a Research Roadmap can be broadly defined as follows: 

     3.1. Provide Support to the IPv6 Deployment 

        P2P applications rely on the end-to-end transparency that originally 
        characterized the Internet. This action item aims to show how the 
        IPv6 protocol can provide an excellent environment for P2P-based 
        applications with the further goal of yielding a "killer-application" 
        to support the deployment of IPv6. We also envisage putting in place 
        explicit liaisons with the IPv6 Task Forces.  

        A primary goal of the P2PRG is to point out the return to end-to-end 
        connectivity that P2P infrastructures can provide. A key concept for 
        P2P systems is to permit any two peers to communicate with one 
        another in such a way that either ought to be able to initiate the 
        contact. From this perspective, the deployment of IPv6 systems will 
        be beneficial for P2P applications and could be boosted by the even 
        more demand for P2P-based frameworks.  
      
      
     Caviglione            Expires September 13, 2006               [Page 4] 
         
     Internet-Draft         P2Pv6 Problem Statement               March 2006 
         

     3.2. Analysis of Inferences of P2P and Transitional Mechanisms 

        The wide deployment of IPv4, as well as intrinsic problems of large-
        scale transitions, spawned thorough standardization tracks for 
        defining transitional mechanisms: Transitional mechanisms are 
        expected to populate the future Internet for a quite long time since 
        IPv4 and IPv6 are expected to operate simultaneously during this 
        transitional era.  

        On top of this scenario, the P2P layer will be required to adapt to 
        transport layer changes since it is in fact an application layer 
        interface to the transport layer. These adaptations are critical so 
        it will operate properly. Given this interface, P2P can then continue 
        to be viewed as building an “overlay” network, thus yielding a 
        playground that is isolated from the ongoing transport transitions 
        and that can be used for developing new applications and services.    

        We propose to study if the transitional mechanisms developed for 
        managing the transition and coexistence of IPv4/IPv6 are critical for 
        P2P applications, thus providing a pioneer study for future massive 
        deployment campaigns. This particular research item could also 
        establish cooperation with standardization groups (inside the IETF) 
        in order to enhance some transitional mechanisms or to develop brand 
        new solution carefully tweaked for the peculiarities of P2P.  

     3.3. Analysis of Legacies 

        A variety of P2P algorithms currently exist that have been shown to 
        properly operate on the Internet. For many reasons, some P2P 
        algorithms may not properly operate when ported to IPv6 or vice-
        versa.  

        The analysis of legacies is aimed to discover and resolve (if any) 
        legacy algorithm dependencies with the underlying transport level. 
        Moreover, we would provide a pioneer roadmap for porting and 
        developing P2P applications that will be independent of every IP 
        version. 

        In order to provide a clear understanding of legacy / transport 
        dependencies several legacy examples will be given where these 
        dependencies exist, and if possible where they do not exist. We do 
        expect that some P2P infrastructures provide a suitable 
        virtualization of the transport layer so as to isolate applications 
        from underlying changes. It will indeed be interesting to categorize 
        several of the existing P2P systems in this manner.  


      
      
     Caviglione            Expires September 13, 2006               [Page 5] 
         
     Internet-Draft         P2Pv6 Problem Statement               March 2006 
         

     3.3.1. Implementation Oriented Legacies  

        Nearly all of the P2P algorithms have been developed on the IPv4 
        platform. The main foreseen legacy problem is related to how the 
        software implementation handles L3 addresses. For example, many 
        client interfaces hardcode IPv4 addresses in 4 byte variables. In 
        this perspective the migration to IPv6 needs a rewrite, even if 
        small, of a portion of the software. This resembles in many ways the 
        now passed “Y2000” software problem.  

     3.3.2. Algorithm Oriented Legacies 

        Algorithm Oriented Legacies arise when the P2P algorithm relies on 
        features in protocols only available for a specific version of the IP 
        protocol. In addition, such legacies cannot be solved by an 
        implementation workaround or by software rewriting, the difficulty 
        being tightly coupled with a specific incarnation of the employed 
        technologies. For example, one can imagine a P2P routing algorithm 
        with strong dependencies on the IPv4 address structure because the 
        P2P infrastructure upon which it is defined did not implement a 
        suitable virtualization that is independent of the underlying IPv4 
        transport. 

     3.4. Augmenting P2P Capabilities Via IPv6 Functionalities 

        IPv6 offers, as built-in, many features developed for IPv4 as add-
        ons. We propose to study how the functionalities (e.g., security and 
        a unique IPv6 address) of IPv6 can be used by P2P applications in 
        order to build the next-generation of P2P algorithms and 
        applications. 

     3.5. Interoperability Between the P2P Virtual Layer and IPv6 

        Analyze and solve potential interoperability problems between the 
        IPv6 layer and the P2P virtualization layer. 

     3.6. Analogies between IPv6 and P2P Addressing Schemes 

        IPv6 offers along with its larger address scheme a rich set of 
        addressing modes and configuration techniques, ranging from self-
        configuration to DHCP driven configuration procedures. From this 
        perspective, this portion of the research will investigate how to 
        create a P2P addressing scheme based on the IPv6 analogies and 
        discover which, if any, synergies between the two schemes are 
        exploitable. 


      
      
     Caviglione            Expires September 13, 2006               [Page 6] 
         
     Internet-Draft         P2Pv6 Problem Statement               March 2006 
         

     4. Subgroup Milestones 

        Different milestones are envisaged in order to bootstrap further 
        research and provide solid foundations for future standardization 
        activities. Milestones conform to the Research Roadmap. Moreover, 
        each milestone is intended as an input for the overall IETF – IRTF 
        world, trying to explain behaviors of P2P from different points of 
        view.  

        In more detail: 

        o  Problem statement draft about P2P over v4: How problems are solved 
           with IPv4 (e.g., rendezvous nodes, relaying nodes, push 
           messages...) and how at least some of these problems can be 
           avoided using IPv6. 

        o  "Reverse" problem statement draft: How the transition mechanism 
           could endanger the use of P2P applications by adding complexity to 
           the algorithms in order to cope with the presence of such 
           mechanisms. 

        o  P2P on IPv6 Best Common Practices: How the use of IPv6 could 
           either add functionalities to the actual P2P technology pool, or 
           simply permit the same functionalities but by the means of less 
           complicated algorithms. 

        o  Problem statement draft about P2P applications and IPv4 
           dependencies: Investigation of P2P technologies already 
           standardized by the IETF or under discussion (e.g., MIKEY, 
           P2PSIP). 

        o  P2P and IPv6 addressing synergies and analogies. 

        o  A final document explaining the requirements for P2P applications 
           and their associated network deployment in order to have a working 
           and convenient P2P system for IPv6 applications. 

     4.1. Additional Considerations on Milestones 

        Milestones are not solely introduced as checkpoints or goals to sync 
        and evaluate the subgroup’s outcome. Milestones are also intended to 
        provide help to WG’s that might be engaged in studying P2P networking 
        jointly with other IETF technologies. For instance, a contribution of 
        the P2Pv6 subgroup might avoid another subgroup investigating low-
        level requirements when developing new solutions (e.g., the P2PSIP 
        working group).  

      
      
     Caviglione            Expires September 13, 2006               [Page 7] 
         
     Internet-Draft         P2Pv6 Problem Statement               March 2006 
         

     5. Intermediate Outcomes 

        While preparing this document, some preliminary discussions about the 
        joint use of P2P and IPv6 have taken place. In one instance, a 
        discussion about the use of mobile features of IPv6 and P2P has been 
        done. Moreover, this discussion conforms to the Research Roadmap and 
        is will be reported.  

     5.1. Persistent Infrastructure features inherited from IPv4 

        When deploying P2P in a fully compliant IPv6 infrastructure, some 
        strategies used with IPv4 will persist. For example, in spite of the 
        adoption of IPv6 the use of NAT-like boxes to hide real networks can 
        be expected to continue.  

        In this vein, if there is the need to contact a peer (e.g., a home 
        gateway or set top box), and a NAT/firewall is in place, then end-to-
        end connection problems will arise. One simple solution is a super-
        peer network in the open Internet that proxies connections and 
        provides store and forward capabilities for the peers it hosts. 
        Hence, in a complex IPv6 deployment, a mixture of the two approaches, 
        i. e., thep2p layer along with NAT traversal protocols, will require 
        investigation.  

     5.1.1 Strengths of IPv6 and end-to-end transparency 

        Even if not strictly related to the P2Pv6 subgroup, an important 
        analysis about NAT traversal techniques has been discussed in the 
        IRTF P2P RG[2]. Many P2P applications have some countermeasures 
        (e.g., ad-hoc algorithms or signaling mechanisms) to exploit 
        workarounds for the lack of transparency due to the presence of 
        mediating devices. In this perspective, two major considerations can 
        be made: 

        o  In a full IPv6 deployment NAT/firewall devices will continue 
           protect or isolate portions of local area networks. Hence, 
           evaluating traversal techniques exploited by the P2P layer is 
           mandatory to understand if they can be ported from IPv4 to IPv6.  

        o  Many “low-level” techniques, such as the UDP hole punching have 
           been proven to be effective as a means to by-pass the lack of 
           transparency introduced by NAT devices [2]. Thus, the restoration 
           of end-to-end transparency should not be the only “technology 
           driver” for the adoption of IPv6 as the underlying technology for 
           P2P systems.  


      
      
     Caviglione            Expires September 13, 2006               [Page 8] 
         
     Internet-Draft         P2Pv6 Problem Statement               March 2006 
         

     6. Related Work 

        A variety of discussions about the use of P2P and IPv6 have been 
        completed. The idea of mixing the “best of the two worlds” is 
        something that has been discussed and proposed in different 
        Industrial talks and Academic works. In addition, blending IPv6 with 
        P2P has been explicitly taken into account in the Recommendation 
        Document prepared by the Italian IPv6 Task Force [3].  

        In [4] an IPv6 based Node Discovery Stack (NDS) is proposed in order 
        to make the usage of personal P2P application possible. The work 
        clarifies the architecture under the Personal Inter-Network (PIN) 
        framework and shows how the NDS could enhance the personal 
        communication among cooperating devices. In the context of IPv6 
        enabled devices, [5] proposes a network monitoring system for a 
        variety of devices ready to provide their services via a network 
        using a hybrid P2P architecture. The P2P architectural flavor has 
        been selected to achieve scalability and a loose coupling of 
        networked entities.  

        Being more focused on exploiting peculiar techniques, [6] proposes to 
        implement an IPv6 routing infrastructure as a self-organizing overlay 
        network on top of the current IPv4 infrastructure. The work 
        highlights how different entities can be constructed to tunnel 
        through NAT’s and firewalls, as well as how to improve the robustness 
        of the routing infrastructure and to provide efficient and resilient 
        implementations for features such as multicast, anycast, and mobile 
        IP using currently available P2P protocols.  

        Regarding commercial services, [7] fully investigates a ”Durable 
        Storage” system based on P2P principles that is able to operate over 
        IPv4 and IPv6. Put briefly, the work describes a commercial service 
        that will use distributed resources, such as storage and bandwidth, 
        in a cooperative effort. The “Durable” adjective has been selected so 
        as to emphasize that the framework is able to guarantee the existence 
        of the data it contains in "any circumstance" at "any time". 
        Moreover, the proposed solution is not only IPv6 compatible, but it 
        could clearly benefit from an IPv6 only version.  

     7. Liaisons  

        We plan to put in place explicit liaisons with the IPv6 Task Force 
        (e.g., creating a bi-monthly “digest” of this project’s efforts to be 
        sent to the task force leaders). In addition, many IETF WG’s are now 
        engaged with the porting of preexistent IETF technologies on a P2P 
        based framework. For instance, the P2PSIP (Peer-to-Peer Session 
        Initiation Protocol)[8] is studying new architectural blueprints and 
      
      
     Caviglione            Expires September 13, 2006               [Page 9] 
         
     Internet-Draft         P2Pv6 Problem Statement               March 2006 
         

        services based on the SIP protocol. The efforts undertaken by the two 
        groups could be considered somewhat overlapping, for instance 
        concerning the analysis of Legacies, and can profit from a liaison to 
        prevent reinventing the proverbial wheel.  

     8. Security Considerations 

        This document does not raise any new security considerations. 

      





































      
      
     Caviglione            Expires September 13, 2006              [Page 10] 
         
     Internet-Draft         P2Pv6 Problem Statement               March 2006 
         

     APPENDIX A: Original P2Pv6 Manifest  

     P2Pv6 (P2PRG-IRTF Activity) B. Yeager and L. Caviglione 

     Motivation and Scope 

        IPv6 (Internet Protocol version 6) offers some interesting 
        differences with respect to IPv4. On one hand it restores end-to-end 
        transparency, while on the other, it offers many features that are 
        implemented in IPv4 as add-ons. With such a foundation, IPv6 appears 
        as an ideal playground for developing Peer-to-Peer (P2P) applications 
        that rely by design on the interaction between end nodes. 

        We propose to study the joint use of the P2P paradigm and IPv6 in 
        order to: 

        o  Show how the IPv6 protocol can provide an excellent environment 
           for P2P-based applications with the further goal of yielding a 
           "killer-application" to support the deployment of IPv6. 

        o  Study if the transitional mechanisms developed for managing the 
           transition and coexistence of IPv4/IPv6 are critical for P2P 
           applications, thus providing a pioneer study for future massive 
           deployment campaigns. 

        o  Discover and solve (if any) algorithm legacies and dependencies 
           with the peculiar network level and provide a pioneer roadmap to 
           port and develop P2P applications that will be suitable to work on 
           every IP version. 

        o  Study how the functionalities (e.g., security) of IPv6 can be used 
           by P2P applications in order to build the next-generation of P2P 
           algorithms and applications. 

        o  Analyze and solve potential interoperability problems between the 
           IPv6 layer and the virtualization layer provided by the P2P layer. 

        o  Investigate how to create a P2P addressing scheme based on the 
           IPv6 analogies and discover if any synergies between the two 
           schemes are exploitable. 

      

      

     Possible Milestones 

      
      
     Caviglione            Expires September 13, 2006              [Page 11] 
         
     Internet-Draft         P2Pv6 Problem Statement               March 2006 
         

        Different milestones are envisaged in order to bootstrap further 
        research and provide solid foundations for future standardization 
        activities. In more detail: 

        o  Problem statement draft about P2P over v4: How problems are solved 
           with IPv4 (e.g., rendezvous nodes, relaying nodes, push 
           messages...) and how at least some of these problems can be 
           avoided using IPv6. 

        o  "Reverse" problem statement draft: How the transition mechanism 
           could endanger the use of P2P applications by adding complexity to 
           the algorithms in order to cope with the presence of such 
           mechanisms. 

        o  P2P on IPv6 Best Common Practices: How the use of IPv6 could 
           either add functionalities to the actual P2P technology pool, or 
           simply permit the same functionalities but via less complex 
           algorithms. 

        o  Problem statement draft about P2P applications and IPv4 
           dependencies: Investigation of P2P technologies already 
           standardized by the IETF or under discussion (e.g., MIKEY, 
           P2PSIP). 

        o  P2P and IPv6 addressing synergies and analogies. 

        o  A final document explaining requirements for P2P applications and 
           their associated network deployment in order to have a working and 
           convenient P2P over IPv6 applications. 

     Liaisons 

        Put in place explicit liaisons with the IPv6 Task Force (e.g., 
        creating a bi-monthly "digest" of this project's efforts to be sent 
        to the task forces leaders). 

      










      
      
     Caviglione            Expires September 13, 2006              [Page 12] 
         
     Internet-Draft         P2Pv6 Problem Statement               March 2006 
         

     9. References 

     9.1. Normative References 

        [1]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
              Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

     9.2. Informative References 

        [2]   S. Guha, P. Francis, “Characterization and Measurement of TCP 
              Traversal through NATs and Firewalls", IMC 2005. Available on-
              line at: http://nutss.net/pub/imc05-tcpnat.pdf 

        [3]   L. Ferracci (ed.), M. Morelli (ed.), E. Albertin, F. Capuzzo, 
              P. Casagranda, L. Caviglione, M. D’Itri, M. R. Spada, “IPv6 
              Task Force Italiana - Raccomandazione Finale”, only in Italian, 
              available on-line at: 
              http://www.it.ipv6tf.org/minutes/RaccomandazioneFinale.pdf 

        [4]   F. Lin, C. Chen, H.-C. Chao, W.-M. Chen, “Personal 
              Internetworking Using P2P Architecture over IPv6”, Proceedings 
              of the 9th International Symposium on Consumer Electronics 
              (ISCE),June 2005, pp.  14-19.  

        [5]   K. Kubo, J. Murakami, T. Hoshi, T. Yokogawa, “Hybrid Peer-to-
              Peer System for Network Monitoring of Field Devices”, SICE 2003 
              Annual Conference, August 2003, pp. 2818-2823. 

        [6]   L. Zhou, R. van Renesse, M. Marsh, “Implementing IPv6 as a 
              Peer-to-Peer Overlay Network”, Proceedings of the 21st IEEE 
              Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, October 2002, pp. 
              347-351.  

        [7]   E. Jacob, J.J. Unzilla, M.V. Higuero, P. Saiz, M. Aguado, C. 
              Pinedo,”A dual (IPv4/IPv6) <<Durable Storage>>" Commercial 
              Service”, Proceedings of 9th International Conference on 
              Advanced Information Networking and Applications (AINA), March 
              2005, Vol. 2, pp. 856-861. 

        [8]   P2PSIP Mailing List, 
              https://lists.cs.columbia.edu/pipermail/p2p-sip/ 

         

         


      
      
     Caviglione            Expires September 13, 2006              [Page 13] 
         
     Internet-Draft         P2Pv6 Problem Statement               March 2006 
         

     Authors' Addresses 

        Luca Caviglione 
        CNIT 
        University of Genoa Research Unit 
        Via Opera Pia 13 
        16145 Genoa, Italy 
        Email: luca.caviglione@cnit.it 
         

        William Yeager 
        Peerouette, Inc. 
        Menlo Park 
        U.S.A., CA.  
        Email: Bill@Peerouette.com 
         

     Intellectual Property Statement 

        The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
        Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
        pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
        this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
        might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
        made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
        on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
        found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

        Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
        assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
        attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
        such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
        specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

        The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
        copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
        rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
        this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
        ietf-ipr@ietf.org 

     Disclaimer of Validity 

        This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
        "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
        OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
        ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
      
      
     Caviglione            Expires September 13, 2006              [Page 14] 
         
     Internet-Draft         P2Pv6 Problem Statement               March 2006 
         

        INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
        INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
        WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

     Copyright Statement 

        Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). 

        This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
        contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
        retain all their rights. 

     Acknowledgment 

        Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
        Internet Society. 

          





























      
      
     Caviglione            Expires September 13, 2006              [Page 15] 
         
