

IETF Mobile IP Working Group                                    T. Aura 
INTERNET DRAFT                                                Microsoft 
Expires May 2002                                               J. Arkko 
                                                               Ericsson 
                                                          November 2001 
                     MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses 
                  draft-aura-mipv6-bu-attacks-00.txt 
    
Status of This Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. Internet-Drafts are 
   working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), 
   its areas, and its working groups. Note that other groups may also 
   distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.  
             
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress."  
             
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  
             http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at  
                 http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Abstract 
    
   This document overviews various attacks against mobile and fixed IP 
   nodes by exploiting features of the Mobile IPv6 Route Optimization. 
   Many of the attacks can be prevented by authenticating the Mobile 
   IPv6 Binding Updates (BU) but some cannot, and some denial-of-
   service attacks specifically exploit features of authentication 
   protocols. The purpose of this document is to list attacks that 
   should be taken into consideration when designing protocols for BU 
   authentication and to outline available protection mechanisms. We 
   also discuss the choice between different levels of protection. 












 
Aura                   Expires May 14, 2002                [Page 1] 
INTERNET-DRAFT      MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses       November 2001 

                        Table of Contents 
    
Status of This Memo...............................................1 
Abstract..........................................................1 
1. Introduction...................................................3 
1. Attacks that Corrupt Routing Tables............................3 
 1.1. Spoofing Binding Updates....................................4 
 1.2. Attacks against Secrecy and Integrity.......................4 
 1.3. Basic Denial of Service Attacks.............................5 
 1.4. Replaying and Blocking Binding Updates......................5 
 1.5. Bombing CoA with Unwanted Data..............................6 
2. Authentication of Binding Updates..............................7 
 2.1. Public Key Authentication...................................7 
 2.2. Two Independent Routes......................................8 
 2.3. Reducing the Number of Attackers and Targets................9 
3. DoS Attacks against BU Authentication.........................11 
 3.1. Inducing Unnecessary Binding Updates.......................11 
 3.2. Consuming Authentication Resources.........................12 
 3.3. Forcing Non-Optimized Routing..............................13 
4. Preventing Resource Exhaustion................................13 
 4.1. Delaying Commitment........................................14 
 4.2. Controlling Damage.........................................15 
 4.3. Favoring Regular Customers.................................15 
5. The Right Level of Protection.................................16 
 5.1. Prioritizing the Goals.....................................16 
 5.2. Multiple Levels of Authentication..........................18 
 5.3. Home Agent and Binding Acknowledgments.....................19 
6. Security Considerations.......................................20 
7. Conclusions...................................................20 
Acknowledgments..................................................20 
References.......................................................21 
Authors' Addresses...............................................22 
    

















 
Aura                   Expires May 14, 2002                [Page 2] 
INTERNET-DRAFT      MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses       November 2001 

1.   Introduction 
    
   This document describes attacks against Mobile IPv6 [JP00] Route 
   Optimization and related protection mechanisms. The goal of the 
   attacker can be to corrupt the correspondent host's routing table 
   (the Binding Cache) and to cause packets to be routed to a wrong 
   address. This can compromise secrecy and integrity of communication 
   and cause denial-of-service (DoS) both at the address that does not 
   receive the wanted packets and at the one that receives the 
   unwanted packets. The attacker may also exploit features of a 
   Binding Update (BU) protocol to exhaust the resources of either the 
   mobile or the correspondent. The aim of this document is to 
   describe the major attacks and to overview various protocol 
   mechanisms and their limitations.  
    
   In particular, we want to make known several attacks which should
   be considered when designing a protocol for authenticating BUs but
   which have not received sufficient attention at the Working Group
   (e.g. they are not mentioned in [MPH+01]). First, data flows can be
   redirected to flood a third party who is not taking part in the BU
   protocol (Section 2.5). Second, an attacker can consume the
   resources of any mobile or correspondent by inducing authentic but
   unnecessary Binding Updates (Section 4.1). Third, some proposed BU
   authentication protocols can be broken by attackers located on the
   route from the correspondent to the Home Agent (Section 3.2). Some
   of these attacks may be acceptable or too expensive to prevent, but
   their existence should be clearly acknowledged.
     
2.   Attacks that Corrupt Routing Tables  
    
   Route optimization and Binding Updates create a new opportunity for 
   attackers. By sending false BUs, they can create false entries in 
   the correspondent host's Binding Cache and, thus, reroute IP 
   packets to wrong destinations. If the data in the packets is not 
   protected cryptographically, this can lead to compromise of secrecy 
   and integrity. The attacker may also cause denial-of-service by 
   keeping data from arriving at the right destination and by bombing 
   a target host or network with unwanted data. 
    
   We consider only active attackers. The rationale behind this is 
   that in order to corrupt a routing table, the attacker must sooner 
   or later send one or more messages. Thus, it makes little sense to 
   consider attackers that only observe messages but do not send any. 
   In fact, the active attacks are easier to for the average attacker 
   than passive ones would be. In most active attacks, the attacker 
   can initiate an unauthentic BU protocol execution at any time and 
   it does not need to wait for a suitable messages to be sent by the 
   targets hosts. 
    

 
Aura                   Expires May 14, 2002                [Page 3] 
INTERNET-DRAFT      MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses       November 2001 

2.1.     Spoofing Binding Updates 
    
   If Binding Updates are not authenticated, an attacker can send 
   spoofed BUs. All Internet hosts are vulnerable to this attack 
   because they all must support the correspondent functionality. 
   There is also no way of telling which addresses belong to mobile 
   hosts that really could send BUs. Consider an IP host A sending IP 
   packets to another IP host B. The attacker can redirect the packets 
   to an arbitrary address C by sending to A a Binding Update where 
   the HoA is B and the CoA is C. After receiving this BU, A will send 
   all packets intended for B to the address C.  
    
   The attacker may select the CoA to be either its own current 
   address (or another address in its local network) or any other IP 
   address. If the attacker selects a local CoA where it can receive 
   packets, it will be able to send further packets to a 
   correspondent, which the correspondent believes to be coming from 
   the mobile. Ingress filtering at the attacker's local network does 
   not prevent the spoofing of Binding Updates but forces the attacker 
   either to choose a CoA from inside its own network or to use the 
   Alternate CoA sub-option. This may make it easier for the attack 
   targets to selectively filter the spurious BUs at a firewall.  
    
   The correspondent stores the HoA-CoA pair in its Binding Cache. The 
   attacker needs to send a new BU every few minutes to refresh the 
   cache entry.  
    
   The attacker needs to know or guess the IP addresses of both the 
   sender and receiver. This means that it is difficult to redirect 
   all packets to or from a host because the attacker would need to 
   know the IP addresses of all the hosts with which it is 
   communicating. Hosts with well-known addresses, such as servers and 
   those using stateless auto-configuration, are most vulnerable. 
   Hosts that are a part of the network infrastructure, such as DNS 
   servers, are particularly interesting targets for attackers. 
    
   Hosts with frequently changing random addresses and no DNS names 
   are relatively safe. However, hosts that visit publicly accessible 
   networks such as airport WLANs risk revealing their addresses. IPv6 
   addressing privacy features mitigate these risks to an extent but 
   it should be noted that addresses cannot be completely recycled 
   while there are still open sessions that use those addresses. 
    
2.2.     Attacks against Secrecy and Integrity 
    
   By spoofing Binding Updates, an attacker can redirect packets 
   between two IP hosts to itself. By sending a spoofed BU to A, it 
   can capture the data intended to B.  It can pretend to be B and 
   highjack B's connections with A, or establish new spoofed 

 
Aura                   Expires May 14, 2002                [Page 4] 
INTERNET-DRAFT      MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses       November 2001 

   connections. The attacker can also send spoofed BUs to both A and B 
   and insert itself to the middle of all connections between them 
   (man-in-the-middle attack). Consequently, the attacker is able to 
   see and modify the packets sent between A and B. The attacks are 
   possible if the target host or its correspondent supports Route 
   Optimization and the attacker knows their IP addresses. 
    
   Strong encryption and integrity protection, such as authenticated 
   IPSec, can prevent all the attacks against data secrecy and 
   integrity. When the data is cryptographically protected, spoofed 
   BUs can result in denial of service but not in disclosure or 
   corruption of sensitive data beyond revealing the existence of the 
   traffic flows. Two fixed hosts could also protect communication 
   between themselves by refusing to accept BUs from each other. 
   Ingress filtering, on the other hand, does not help because the 
   attacker is using its own address as the CoA and is not spoofing 
   source IP addresses. 
    
   The attacks described above are a serious threat to the Internet 
   for two reasons. First, a lot of Internet traffic is unprotected. 
   Second, an attacker anywhere on the network can mount the attacks 
   against any Internet hosts, also non-mobile ones. If Binding 
   Updates did not exist, the attacker would need to be on the route 
   between the attack targets in order to listen to the traffic 
   between them. 
     
2.3.     Basic Denial of Service Attacks 
    
   By sending spoofed BUs, the attacker can redirect all packets sent 
   between two IP hosts to a random or nonexistent address. This way, 
   it may be able to stop or disrupt communication between the hosts. 
   The requirements are that the target host or its correspondent must 
   support Route Optimization and the attacker must know their IP 
   addresses. 
    
   The attack is serious because any Internet host can be targeted, 
   also fixed hosts. Hosts belonging to the infrastructure necessary 
   for other hosts to communicate are also vulnerable. Again, two 
   hosts can protect the communication between themselves by refusing 
   BUs from each other or by establishing an authenticated IPSec 
   tunnel for the BUs.  
    
2.4.     Replaying and Blocking Binding Updates 
    
   Any protocol for authenticating BUs will have to consider replay 
   attacks. That is, an attacker may be able to replay recent 
   authenticated BUs to the correspondent and, that way, direct 
   packets to the mobile host's previous location. Like spoofed BUs, 
   this can be used both for capturing packets and for DoS. The 

 
Aura                   Expires May 14, 2002                [Page 5] 
INTERNET-DRAFT      MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses       November 2001 

   attacker can capture the packets and impersonate the mobile node if 
   it reserves the mobile's previous address after the mobile has 
   moved away and then replays the previous BU to redirect packets 
   back to the previous location.  
    
   The replays are a concern if a timestamps are used for checking the 
   freshness of BUs and the mobile is moving so frequently that it 
   sends the next BU before the timestamp in the previous BU has 
   expired. Sequence numbers in authenticated BUs usually prevent the 
   attack. The authentication protocol needs to be is carefully 
   designed to avoid more complex replay attacks.  
    
   In a related attack, the attacker blocks binding updates from the 
   mobile at its new location, e.g. by jamming the radio link or by 
   mounting a flooding attack, and takes over its connections at the 
   old location. The attacker will be able to capture the packets sent 
   to the mobile and to impersonate the mobile until the 
   correspondent's Binding Cache entry expires.  
    
   Both of the above attacks require the attacker to be on the same 
   local network with the mobile, where it can relatively easily 
   observe packets and block them even if the mobile does not move to 
   a new location. Therefore, we believe that these attacks are not as 
   serious as ones that can be mounted from remote locations. 
    
2.5.     Bombing CoA with Unwanted Data 
    
   By sending spoofed BUs, the attacker can redirect traffic to an 
   arbitrary IP address. This can be used to bomb an arbitrary 
   Internet address with excessive amounts of data. The attacker can 
   also target a network by redirecting data to one or more IP 
   addresses within the network.  
    
   In the simplest attack, the attacker knows that there is a heavy 
   data stream from host A to B and redirects this to the target 
   address C. A will soon stop sending the data because it is not 
   receiving acknowledgments from B.  
    
   A more sophisticated attacker acts itself as B. It first subscribes 
   to a data stream (e.g. a video stream from a news web site) and 
   then redirects this to the target address C. The attacker may even 
   be able to spoof the acknowledgements. For example, consider a 
   constant-rate TCP stream. The attacker performs the TCP handshake 
   itself and thus knows the initial sequence numbers. After 
   redirecting the data to C, it suffices to send one spoofed 
   acknowledgment per window. In a constant-rate stream, the attacker 
   is able to predict the sequence numbers, the window size, and the 
   right times for sending the acknowledgments. (The sender A is 


 
Aura                   Expires May 14, 2002                [Page 6] 
INTERNET-DRAFT      MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses       November 2001 

   likely to ignore any ICMP Destination Unreachable messages if it 
   also receives acknowledgments.) 
    
   This way, the attacker is able to redirect a steady stream of 
   unwanted data to the target address without doing much work itself. 
   It can carry on opening more streams and refresh the Binding Cache 
   entries by sending a new BU every few minutes. 
    
   The attack is serious because the target can be any host or 
   network, not only mobile one. What makes it particularly serious 
   compared to the other attacks is that the target itself cannot do 
   anything to prevent the attack. For example, it does not help if 
   the target network stops using Route Optimization. The damage is 
   the worst if these techniques are used to amplify the effect of a 
   distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack. Ingress filtering in 
   the attacker's local network prevents the spoofing of source 
   addresses but the attack is still possible by setting the Alternate 
   CoA sub-option to the target address. 
    
   The attacker needs to find a correspondent that is willing to send 
   data streams to unauthenticated recipients. Many popular web sites 
   provide such streams. If the target is a single host, the attacker 
   needs to know or guess the target's IP address. On the other hand, 
   if the target is an entire network, the attacker can congest the 
   link toward that network by bombing random addresses within its 
   routing prefix or group of prefixes. In some cases, a firewall on 
   the border of the target network may be able filter out data that 
   is sent to nonexistent addresses. Whether this may be possible 
   depends on the way that the addresses within that network are 
   managed. It seems likely that e.g. IPv6 addressing privacy features 
   would preclude such filtering in the general case. 
    
3.   Authentication of Binding Updates 
    
   In order to prevent the corruption of correspondent routing tables, 
   the Binding Updates must be authenticated. In this section, we 
   discuss both strong and weak authentication methods. 
    
3.1.     Public Key Authentication 
    
   The assumption in Mobile IPv6, as in many other systems, seems to 
   have been that generic security mechanism such as IPSec, IKE, and a 
   public-key infrastructure (PKI) will eventually solve all 
   authentication issues. The current lack of suitable BU 
   authentication protocol can thus be seen as a direct consequence of 
   the failure of global PKIs. Also, it turns out to be difficult to 
   mix strong BU authentication with weaker schemes (see Section 6.2). 
   There are nevertheless situations where it is possible, and 
   advisable, to follow the original plan. In closed user groups and 

 
Aura                   Expires May 14, 2002                [Page 7] 
INTERNET-DRAFT      MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses       November 2001 

   high-security environments, it may be possible to set up a PKI and 
   require BUs to be strongly authenticated.  
    
   A recently discovered technique [OR01] provides an intermediate 
   level of security between strong public-key authentication and weak 
   methods such as routability tests. The idea is to form the last 64 
   bits of the IP address (the interface identifier) by hashing the 
   host's public signature key. Binding Updates can then be signed 
   with this key. A secure one-way hash function makes it difficult 
   for the attacker to come up with a key that matches a given address 
   and to forge signed BUs. 
    
   The main weakness of the scheme is that only 62-64 bits of the IP 
   address can be used for the hash. Thus, an attacker may be able to 
   mount a brute force attack and find a matching signature key by 
   trial and error. It is relatively expensive to generate strong 
   signature keys but the attacker does not need to care about the 
   strength of the keys. There may be relatively fast ways of 
   generating weak signature keys, which the correspondent is not able 
   to tell apart from strong ones. In order to make such brute-force 
   attacks less attractive, one should include the routing prefix of 
   the network into the hash. This forces the attacker to perform the 
   search separately for each prefix. Without this, it a global table 
   of all hash values and their corresponding keys might become 
   feasible in the future, even if that seems out of practical reach 
   given current storage technology. 
    
   Another shortcoming of the CAM-type addresses is that although they 
   prevent the theft of another host's address, they do not stop the 
   attacker from inventing new false addresses with an arbitrary 
   routing prefix. The attacker can generate a public key and a 
   matching IP address in any network and use it to mount bombing 
   attacks (as described in Section 2.5). 
    
   While the public-key protocols provide a reasonable protection 
   against unauthentic BUs, they expose the correspondent to denial-
   of-service attacks (see Section 4.2).  
    
3.2.     Two Independent Routes 
    
   Some weak BU authentication schemes have been proposed (Bake 
   [NP01], HA Cookies [TO01]) where the security essentially depends 
   on sending two pieces of the authentication data between the 
   correspondent and the mobile or its Home Agent through two 
   independent routes and hoping that most attackers are unable to 
   capture both of them. This may not help as much as has perhaps been 
   hoped. In all these protocols, a single attacker on the route 
   between the correspondent and Home Agent can spoof BUs by 
   pretending to be both the mobile and its Home Agent. If the 

 
Aura                   Expires May 14, 2002                [Page 8] 
INTERNET-DRAFT      MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses       November 2001 

   attacker uses its own address as the false CoA, it can spoof 
   packets from both the mobile and the Home Agent to the 
   correspondent, and it can receive messages sent by the 
   correspondent to both HoA and CoA.  
    
   Without ingress filtering at the attacker's local network, the 
   attacker is, in fact, able to select an arbitrary CoA. Ingress 
   filtering at the attacker's network forces the attacker to use a 
   CoA from its local network. (We assume that the Alternate CoA sub-
   option does cannot be used as a pert of these protocols.) Ingress 
   filtering also prevent attacks against the HA Cookie protocol 
   because the attacker could not spoof packets from Home Agent to the 
   correspondent. 
    
   A false sense of security is created if one assumes that the three 
   sides of the triangle in MIPv6 triangle routing are independent 
   routes. This is usually the case for an authentic mobile, but need 
   not be true not for an attacker who claims to be the mobile. When 
   the false mobile (i.e. the attacker) is on the route between the 
   correspondent and the Home Agent, the triangle collapses.  
    
   On the other hand, if one finds it a reasonable assumption that the 
   attacker cannot listen to traffic between the correspondent and the 
   Home Agent, then an equivalent level of security is achieved by a 
   much simpler protocol: the correspondent sends a secret key in 
   plaintext to HoA and Home Agent forwards it through a secure tunnel 
   to the mobile. (See the next section.) 
    
3.3.     Reducing the Number of Attackers and Targets 
    
   Instead of trying to prevent all attacks, the best strategy is 
   often to limit the number of potential attackers that can attack a 
   particular target, and to reduce the number of targets a potential 
   attacker can threaten. Such weak methods can be used either when 
   the stronger ones are too expensive or to fix shortcomings of the 
   stronger protocols. Limiting the number of attackers is also 
   essential in defending against denial-of-service attacks on the 
   Internet, because it is rarely possible to entirely prevent the 
   attacks.  
    
   Some proposed BU authentication protocols make the assumption that 
   the communication between two specific hosts, e.g. on the route 
   between the correspondent and the mobile's home agent, is safe from 
   attackers, even though it is not cryptographically protected. As 
   mentioned above, this assumption may be reasonable because the 
   average Internet host cannot listen to or modify packets on the 
   specific routers. Moreover, even an attacker in control of controls 
   some routers can only interfere with communication between a 
   limited number of hosts because most Internet traffic will not be 

 
Aura                   Expires May 14, 2002                [Page 9] 
INTERNET-DRAFT      MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses       November 2001 

   routed through the compromised routers. The assumption can be 
   justified also by the fact that an attacker on the route between 
   two fixed hosts (the mobile at home and the same correspondent) can 
   mount equally damaging attacks against the communication between 
   them.  
    
   Another way to limit the number of attackers and their targets is 
   to test the routability of both the HoA and CoA. That is, the 
   correspondent sends packets to both addresses and accepts Binding 
   updates only from mobiles that are able to receive them. Some 
   malicious entities may be able to capture both packets but most 
   Internet users do not have such capabilities. A typical attacker is 
   able to attack only the correspondents in its own local network. 
   The routability test is, in fact, a variation of the cookie 
   exchange, which has been used as part of the TCP handshake [RAOA01] 
   and in authentication protocols, including Photuris [KS99] and IKE 
   [HC98]. The routability test is particularly usable in combination 
   with the CAM-type addresses (see Section 3.1) because it can 
   prevent the bombing of a CoA with unwanted data. A reply to the 
   routability test indicates that someone who can receive packets 
   sent to the CoA wants to receive data from the correspondent. 
    
   Yet another idea that has been floating around is that if the 
   mobile sends a session key insecurely to the correspondent at the 
   beginning of a connection, the key can be used to authenticate 
   subsequent BUs (so called leap-of-faith authentication). 
   Unfortunately, this fails even if we assume that attacker is 
   unlikely to capture the keys sent by authentic mobiles. First, the 
   attacker can send its false key before the authentic mobile sends 
   the authentic key. Second, there must be a recovery mechanism for 
   situations where the mobile or the correspondent loses its state, 
   and the attacker can exploit this mechanism. Third, the attack may 
   impersonate a random IP addresses in order to mount a variety of 
   DoS attack against the correspondent. The leap-of-faith 
   authentication is suitable for situations where a human user, or 
   some other factor outside the attacker's control, at random times 
   initiates the protocol. The party making the leap must always be 
   the one that initiates the protocol. In such situations, it may be 
   reasonable to argue that an attacker is unlikely to be present at 
   the time of the key exchange. In BU authentication, the protocol is 
   usually initiated by the mobile but the leap in faith should be 
   made by the correspondent. Also, the attacker can trigger the BU 
   protocol at any time by sending a spoofed packet from the 
   correspondent to the mobile's HoA. 
    
   Ingress filtering is another way of limiting the number potential 
   of attackers and their targets. As we have noted above, many of the 
   attacks against Route Optimization involve spoofed source IP 
   addresses and are, thus, prevented by ingress filtering. There are 

 
Aura                   Expires May 14, 2002               [Page 10] 
INTERNET-DRAFT      MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses       November 2001 

   two well-known weaknesses in this thinking, though. Firsts, ingress 
   filtering must be applied on the attacker's local network; on the 
   target network it makes no difference. Second, the Home Address 
   Option and the Alternate Care-of Address sub-option can be used for 
   similar source spoofing. While it is advisable to apply ingress 
   filtering in as many networks as possible, one cannot rely on this 
   to stop all attacks against Mobile IPv6. 
    
4.   DoS Attacks against BU Authentication 
 
   Security protocols that successfully protect the secrecy and 
   integrity of data can sometimes make the participants more 
   vulnerable to denial-of-service attacks. In fact, the stronger the 
   authentication, the easier it may be for an attacker to use the 
   protocol features to exhaust the mobile's or the correspondent's 
   resources. 
    
4.1.     Inducing Unnecessary Binding Updates 
    
   When a mobile host receives an IP packet from a new correspondent 
   via the HoA, it automatically sends a Binding Update to that 
   correspondent. The attacker can exploit this by sending the mobile 
   spoofed IP packets (e.g. ping or TCP SYN packets) that appear to 
   come from different correspondent addresses. The attacker will 
   automatically start the BU protocol with these correspondents. If 
   the correspondent addresses are real addresses of existing IP 
   hosts, then most instances of the BU protocol will complete 
   successfully. The entries created in the Binding Cache are correct 
   but useless. This way, the attacker can with little work induce the 
   mobile to execute the BU protocol unnecessarily, which can drain 
   the mobile's resources. 
    
   A correspondent (i.e. any IP host) can also be attacked in a 
   similar way. The attacker sends spoofed IP packets to a large 
   number of mobiles with the target host's address as the source 
   address. These mobiles will all send Binding Updates to the target 
   host. Again, most of the BU protocol executions will complete 
   successfully. By inducing a large number of unnecessary BUs, the 
   attacker is able to consume the target host's resources. 
    
   This attack is possible against any BU authentication protocol. The 
   more resources the Binding Update protocol consumes, the more 
   serious the attack. Hence, strong cryptographic authentication 
   protocol is more vulnerable to the attack than a weak one or 
   unauthenticated BUs. 
    
   A host should protect itself from the attack by setting a limit on 
   the amount of resources, i.e. processing time, memory, and 
   communications bandwidth, which it uses for processing BUs. When 

 
Aura                   Expires May 14, 2002               [Page 11] 
INTERNET-DRAFT      MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses       November 2001 

   the limit is exceeded, the host can simply stop Route Optimization. 
   (See Section 5.2.) Sometimes it is possible to process some BUs 
   even when a host is under the attack. A mobile host may have a 
   local security policy listing a limited number of addresses to 
   which BUs will be sent even when the mobile host is under DoS 
   attack. A correspondent (i.e. any IP host) may similarly have a 
   local security policy listing a limited set of addresses from which 
   BUs will be accepted even when the correspondent is under a DoS 
   attack. The host may also recognize addresses with which they have 
   had meaningful communication in the past and sent BUs to or accept 
   them from those addresses. (See Section Error! Reference source not 
   found..) 
    
   Ingress filtering at the attacker's local network mitigates the 
   attacks. When flooding a mobile, the attacker can only choose 
   correspondent addresses in its own local network. When flooding a 
   correspondent, the attacker can only target correspondents in its 
   own network. Unfortunately, the Home Address Option (HAO) can be 
   used to circumvent the ingress filtering and to spoof packets from 
   any correspondent. It has been questioned whether the HAO should be 
   allowed in all packets, or only on those that are associated with 
   an already successfully created Binding Cache Entry. The latter 
   would prevent the use of HAOs in DoS attacks against BU 
   authentication.  
 
   In the following section, we will explain some additional DoS 
   attacks and defense mechanisms. However, these attacks are 
   generally no more serious than the ones described in this section. 
   It usually does not pay to defend against the other types of 
   attacks unless one can also prevent the attacks of this section. 
    
4.2.     Consuming Authentication Resources 
    
   Authentication protocols are often vulnerable to flooding attacks 
   that exploit the protocol features to consume the target host's 
   resources. Computing power is consumed by flooding the host with 
   messages that cause it to perform expensive cryptographic 
   operations. If a host creates state during protocol execution, it 
   is also vulnerable to attacks where the attacker starts excessive 
   numbers of protocol runs and never finishes them.  
    
   In order to exhaust the computing power of modern processors, the 
   attacker needs to get them to perform public-key cryptographic 
   operations. To do this, they may, for example, spoof large numbers 
   of signed messages where the signatures are replaced by random 
   numbers. The target host must verify the signatures before 
   rejecting the messages. Symmetric encryption, cryptographic hash 
   functions, and non-cryptographic computation are rarely the 
   performance bottleneck. However, if the cryptographic library is 

 
Aura                   Expires May 14, 2002               [Page 12] 
INTERNET-DRAFT      MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses       November 2001 

   optimized only for bulk data, it may behave inefficiently when the 
   functions are invoked on millions of short messages and the keys 
   are changed on every invocation.  
    
   One way protocols can avoid the unnecessary public-key operations 
   is to require a weak authentication, such as a cookie exchange, 
   before doing the expensive computation. Attacks against stateful 
   protocols can be prevented by making the protocol parties stateless 
   until the honesty of the other participant has been proved or by 
   designing the stare management with flooding attacks in mind. (See 
   Section 5.1.) 
 
4.3.     Forcing Non-Optimized Routing 
    
   If the BUs are not authenticated, an attacker can prevent a 
   correspondent from using Route Optimization by filling its Binding 
   Cache with false entries so that most entries for real mobiles are 
   dropped. With authenticated BUs, the attacker can mount the same 
   attack by inducing unnecessary Binding Updates that create 
   unnecessary cache entries (see Sec. 4.1).  
    
   Any successful DoS attack against a mobile or a correspondent can 
   also prevent the processing of BUs. We have repeatedly suggested 
   that the target of a DoS attack may respond by stopping Route 
   Optimization for all or some communication. Obviously, an attacker 
   can exploit this fallback mechanism and force the target to use the 
   less efficient triangle routing. The attacker only needs to mount a 
   noticeable DoS attack against the mobile or correspondent, and the 
   target will default to non-optimized routing.  
    
   The target host can mitigate the effects of the attack by reserving 
   more space for the Binding Cache, by reverting to non-optimized 
   routing only when it cannot otherwise cope with the DoS attack, by 
   trying aggressively to return to optimized routing, and by favoring 
   mobiles with which it has an established relationship. This attack 
   is not as serious as the ones described earlier, but applications 
   that rely on Route Optimization could still be affected. For 
   instance, conversational multimedia sessions can suffer drastically 
   from the additional delays caused by triangle routing.  
    
5.   Preventing Resource Exhaustion 
    
   In this section, we describe defenses against denial-of-service 
   attacks that exploit features of the BU protocol to exhaust the 
   target host's resources. It is usually impossible to completely 
   prevent DoS attacks and the right approach may be to increase the 
   cost and difficulty of the attacks and to mitigate their effects.  
    


 
Aura                   Expires May 14, 2002               [Page 13] 
INTERNET-DRAFT      MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses       November 2001 

5.1.     Delaying Commitment 
    
   A standard protection against DoS attacks is to delay committing 
   one's resources to the protocol until the other party has provided 
   some assurance about its honesty. This assurance could, for 
   example, be authentication or expensive computation of resources by 
   the other party.  
    
   Expensive public-key operations can be delayed by starting with a 
   weak but inexpensive authentication mechanism and by proceeding 
   with the public-key operations only after the weak authentication 
   succeeds [Mea99]. This either limits the number of attackers who 
   can get to the public-key stage or increases the cost of attack by 
   forcing the attacker to break the weak mechanism. For example, a BU 
   authentication protocol could start with a cookie exchange or, 
   preferably, with a routability test for both HoA and CoA (see 
   Section 3.3), and continue with a public-key authentication if the 
   routability test succeeds.  
    
   Memory space for storing protocol state is another resource that 
   attackers can exhaust. The conventional way to defeat attacks that 
   consume state storage is to reserve enough memory for storing the 
   state data and to manage the storage efficiently. Another method is 
   to remain stateless until the authentication is complete [AN97a]. 
   In particular, hosts with little memory and implementations aiming 
   for simplicity are likely to find the stateless approach easier. We 
   therefore recommend the that BU authentication protocol should 
   allow stateless implementation of the correspondent. On the other 
   hand, there is no compelling reason to require statelessness for 
   hosts that can manage the state data in other ways. 
    
   There are some difficulties in making the BU authentication 
   protocol stateless, which should be understood. The main difficulty 
   is that usually only the responder can be stateless, and it is not 
   clear which party initiates the Binding Update process and which 
   one responds. While the mobile normally initiates the 
   authentication, this may be triggered by a packet belonging to 
   another protocol that arrived from the correspondent. Moreover, if 
   a packet from the correspondent triggers the BU, the correspondent 
   may not know that this was the case. A further complication is that 
   once an upper layer protocol has created a protocol state, it is of 
   little value to refrain from doing so in the lower layers, but the 
   IP layer cannot know when this is happening. For simplicity, we 
   recommend making the correspondent stateless and advice against 
   trying to guess which party initiated the protocol and whether the 
   statelessness is necessary or not. We choose protection of the 
   correspondent over the mobile for two reasons. First, any Internet 
   host can be a correspondent. Second, it is less practical to make 
   the mobile stateless because the mobile usually does not 

 
Aura                   Expires May 14, 2002               [Page 14] 
INTERNET-DRAFT      MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses       November 2001 

   authenticate the correspondent and, thus, there is no clear point 
   after which it is safe to create a state. We acknowledge that the 
   mobile is likely to have more stringent memory constraints than the 
   correspondent and it may be left vulnerable to the state storage 
   exhaustion. 
    
   Cryptographic puzzles [JB99][ANL00] are another proposed protection 
   against resource-exhaustion attacks. A server requires its clients 
   to solve a cryptographic puzzle (e.g. brute-force search for some 
   input bits of a one-way function) before committing its own 
   resources to the protocol. The server can adjust the difficulty of 
   the puzzles according to its load. Solving the puzzle creates a 
   small cost for each protocol invocation, which makes flooding 
   attacks expensive but has little effect on honest hosts. 
   Unfortunately, there are several drawbacks to this strategy in the 
   Mobile IP protocol. First, the IP layer does not know which one of 
   the nodes is the server (i.e. the respondent), the mobile or the 
   correspondent. Second, mobile nodes can have extremely limited 
   processor and battery capacity, which makes the cost of solving 
   puzzles too high for them.  The puzzle protocols work well only 
   when all clients have approximately equal computational capacity.  
    
5.2.     Controlling Damage 
    
   As we suggested in Section 4.1, a host can protect itself from 
   flooding attacks by limiting the amount of resources it uses for BU 
   authentication. It can set limits on the processor time, memory and 
   communications capacity used for this purpose. When this limit is 
   exceeded, the host should stop all further participation in BU 
   authentication protocols. It may stop processing BUs and let all 
   Binding Cache entries expire. Alternatively, it may continue to 
   update entries already in the Binding Cache if there is a light-
   weight mechanism (e.g. a session key) for authenticating them. The 
   effect of this is to stop Route Optimization for all communication, 
   or only for new connections. The host may return to normal 
   operation when it believes the attack is over.  
    
   Since authentication cannot prevent all the attacks, every host 
   SHOULD implement the limit on resource usage. A host that does not 
   implement the limit will be vulnerable to a flooding attack but it 
   will not cause any damage to other hosts. 
    
5.3.     Favoring Regular Customers 
    
   A correspondent can give priority to mobiles with which it has a 
   long-term relationship or recent meaningful communication in the 
   upper protocols layers. The mobile may similarly favor selected 
   correspondent addresses. The best way to secure Binding Updates 
   when the hosts have a long-term relationship is to send to use an 

 
Aura                   Expires May 14, 2002               [Page 15] 
INTERNET-DRAFT      MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses       November 2001 

   authenticated IPSec tunnel. The following techniques should only be 
   used when it is not possible to configure an IPSec Security 
   Association. 
    
   A host's local policy may have a list of addresses or address 
   ranges, to and from which BUs are processed even when the host is 
   under stress from attacks. These should not include addresses for 
   which it is feasible to establish long-term IPSec Security 
   Associations. The number of addresses in the list should not be 
   large or public because otherwise the attacker might be able to 
   mount the attack by using only these addresses. Taking into account 
   authentication and other displays of commitment in the upper 
   protocol layers can be difficult to implement because it violates 
   the stateless nature of the IP protocol layer and creates 
   dependences between protocol layers. In some common situations, it 
   may be worth while to violate the layering principle. For example, 
   a server could accept BUs from its clients after it has 
   successfully executed the TCP handshake.  
    
   It may also help to keep updating the existing entries in the 
   Binding Cache so that existing optimized routes can be maintained 
   during the attack, although it is not certain that the existing 
   cache entries belong to the most important mobiles or even to 
   authentic ones. Some indication of this may be inferred from the 
   packet counts associated with the traffic flowing through the 
   entry. 
    
6.   The Right Level of Protection 
    
   We will conclude this document by discussing the criteria that 
   should be used for selecting and comparing BU authentication 
   protocols and issues that arise when there are several alternative 
   protocols. 
    
6.1.     Prioritizing the Goals 
    
   The strength of the protection against DoS attacks that do not 
   corrupt routing tables is independent of the strength of the BU 
   authentication. As we have observed, strong authentication 
   mechanisms may actually enable DoS attacks that would not otherwise 
   be possible. Nevertheless, the following principles apply to both 
   kinds of attacks. 
    
   The attacks described in this document can be divided into three 
   classes: The most serious attack is the bombing of third parties 
   with unwanted data (Section 2.5) because they cannot do anything to 
   stop the flood of data. The mobiles and correspondents MUST 
   implement and use some kind of protection against this attack. 


 
Aura                   Expires May 14, 2002               [Page 16] 
INTERNET-DRAFT      MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses       November 2001 

   Hosts that do not want to implement such protection, MUST ignore 
   all Binding Updates and, thus, cannot use Route Optimization. 
    
   The attacks against correspondent hosts form the second most 
   serious class of attacks. This includes attacks on data secrecy and 
   integrity as well as denial-of-service attacks. Every IP host is a 
   correspondent and if the Mobile IP protocol makes them vulnerable, 
   then every IP host is vulnerable. It is important that a reliable 
   protection mechanism is available for the correspondents and every 
   IP host SHOULD implement and use it. If the protection for the 
   correspondents requires support from mobiles, all mobile hosts MUST 
   implement and use it.  
    
   The third class includes all attacks against the mobiles. As with 
   correspondents, it is important to have a protection mechanism for 
   the mobiles and they SHOULD implement and use it. If the protection 
   for the mobiles requires support from correspondents, all 
   correspondents MUST implement and use such support.  Although 
   attacks against mobile hosts cannot bring down the Internet as we 
   know it, the number and significance of mobiles will increase. If 
   Mobile IPv6 is to become the primary mobility protocol in the 
   Internet, it is essential to protect its reliability against 
   malicious parties. (Actually, there is a choice between defending 
   only the Internet from Mobile IPv6 and defending also the 
   reliability of Mobile IPv6 itself. We have chosen the former 
   viewpoint. If one goes for the latter alternative, then it is 
   unnecessary to prevent attack against the mobile hosts. This does 
   not necessarily result in significant simplifications in the BU 
   authentication protocols because most protections are needed in any 
   case to protect the non-mobile hosts, i.e. correspondents and third 
   parties.) 
    
   The guiding principle above is that a protection mechanism MUST be 
   implemented and used if the security of other hosts depends on it. 
   If only the host's own security is at stake, it SHOULD implement 
   and use the protection. However, some hosts, e.g. minimal 
   implementations, MAY elect not to protect themselves against all 
   the attacks as long as that does not compromise the protection for 
   others. A host MAY always protect itself and others by ignoring all 
   Binding Updates, which means giving up Route Optimization. A 
   slightly smarter host MAY implement only the mandatory mechanisms 
   that help protect others and stop using Route Optimization when it 
   detects a DoS attack against itself.  
    
   The cost of the defenses must not be excessive. In particular, the 
   minimum requirements for correspondent nodes have to be low because 
   all IP nodes must satisfy them. One possibility is to require 
   everyone either to use a strong protocol or to refrain from using 
   Route Optimization. The Route Optimization may, however, be crucial 

 
Aura                   Expires May 14, 2002               [Page 17] 
INTERNET-DRAFT      MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses       November 2001 

   for the performance of many low-end mobile hosts that cannot afford 
   to implement strong authentication but receive audio or video 
   streams. 
    
   An ideal solution to BU authentication would allow a simple and 
   cheap solution for the low-importance hosts and a more 
   comprehensive protection for those who can afford it. A three level 
   protection would appear to be particularly suitable to cover the 
   needs of different situations: 
   1. A method based on return routability and symmetric cryptography 
     (similar to Bake). 
   2. A method based on relationships of addresses and public keys 
     (such as CAM or SUCV). 
   3. Strong authentication through shared secrets and/or PKIs (e.g. 
     IPSec/IKE). 
   Unfortunately, as we will explain below, it is difficult to 
   accommodate multiple levels of protection without compromising 
   everyone's security. 
    
6.2.     Multiple Levels of Authentication 
    
   As explained above, there is the temptation to allow multiple 
   authentication mechanism of different strength and cost. 
   Unfortunately, this does not necessarily result in any better 
   security than if the weakest method were used alone. The same is 
   true to protocols that provide different levels of DoS protection. 
    
   The decision about accepting or not accepting a BU is made by the 
   correspondent. Therefore, the decision process at the correspondent 
   is crucial for any BU authentication mechanism. If weak and a 
   strong authentication are alternatives, the correspondent will have 
   to make the decision when to allow the weak BU authentication and 
   when to require the strong method. This section discusses the ways 
   in which the correspondent can make the decision. The same 
   principles apply to the combination of any stronger and weaker BU 
   authentication mechanism regardless of their absolute strength and 
   technical details.  
    
   The correspondent MAY have a local policy that lists the HoA 
   addresses or address ranges for which weak protection is allowed. 
   For example, a correspondent could be configured to allow weak BU 
   authentication for some low-end mobile devices that benefit from 
   Route Optimization but cannot afford to run the stronger 
   authentication protocol.  
    
   It is not possible to negotiate the level of protection online 
   between the mobile and the correspondent. If an attacker can 
   impersonate the mobile in the weaker mechanism, it can always 
   negotiate to choose the weak mechanism. A strong authentication 

 
Aura                   Expires May 14, 2002               [Page 18] 
INTERNET-DRAFT      MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses       November 2001 

   would be required to prove that the authentic mobile agrees to use 
   a weak one. Therefore, the list of mobiles for which the 
   correspondent allows weak BU authentication MUST either be 
   statically configured into the correspondent's local policy, or 
   dynamically determined by strong authentication or equivalent 
   commitment shown in upper protocol layers.  
    
   On the other hand, weak BU authentication in one correspondent does 
   not compromise strong authentication in another correspondent. Even 
   if the attacker defeats the weak mechanism, it cannot redirect 
   packets to or from correspondents that use a strong protocol. 
   Therefore, a degree of separation exists between the decisions of 
   different nodes, and the decisions of one correspondent do not 
   affect the strength of BU authentication at other correspondents. 
   However, this separation does not apply to most DoS attacks and 
   protection for the other party and for third parties must always be 
   implemented, as explained in the previous section. 
     
   The correspondents that do not allow weak BU authentication are 
   unable use Route Optimization with low-end mobiles that do not 
   implement the stronger mechanism.  
   From the above it follows that if a public web site or other server 
   does not register its clients, it must choose either strong or weak 
   BU authentication for everyone. If it allows a weak mechanism, it 
   is unnecessary to implement a strong one. On the other hand, 
   different servers may choose the strength of BU authentication 
   mechanisms independently. However, the economics of the Internet 
   may force practically every public server to select the weakest 
   allowed mechanism, which means that Mobile IPv6 may always remain 
   vulnerable to attacks.  
    
   In conclusion, there are technical and business reasons that will 
   force most IP nodes to use the weakest level of authentication that 
   is mandatory to implement and use in all IP hosts. We therefore 
   recommend that the weakest allowed authentication should be fairly 
   strong. There are nevertheless situations, such as closed groups 
   and networks and high-security environments, where it is possible 
   to deploy weaker or stronger mechanism than the minimum required by 
   the standard, as long a single level of security is used 
   consistently and outsiders on the Internet are not exposed to DoS 
   attacks. 
    
6.3.     Home Agent and Binding Acknowledgments 
    
   We assume that the mobile has chosen a reliable Home Agent and that 
   Binding Updates and Acknowledgments between the mobile and its Home 
   Agent are strongly authenticated with techniques outside the scope 
   of this document. For example, there could be a manually keyed 
   IPSec tunnel to a router on the mobile's Home Network. There are 

 
Aura                   Expires May 14, 2002               [Page 19] 
INTERNET-DRAFT      MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses       November 2001 

   situations where no secure tunnel exist, for example if the mobile 
   automatically contracts the services of temporary Home Agents along 
   its path, but we feel that the security in such situations is based 
   on much weaker assumptions and should be considered separately.  
    
   It seems necessary to send the Binding Acknowledgments from other 
   sources than the Home agent without authentication. In most BU 
   authentication protocols, only the mobile is authenticated, and 
   without authenticating the correspondent, there is no way of 
   authenticating the acknowledgments. The consequence is that an 
   attacker can send false acknowledgments and cause the mobile to 
   send the next BU sooner or later than the correspondent expects. At 
   worst, the effect is that the Binding Cache entry expires and Route 
   Optimization is not used. Thus, an attacker anywhere on the network 
   can prevent the use of Route Optimization by sending false Binding 
   Acknowledgments. (Of course, if an authenticated IPSec tunnel 
   between the mobile and the correspondent exists, it can be used 
   also for the acknowledgments and the problem is solved.) 
    
7.   Security Considerations 
 
   This document discusses security of Mobile IPv6 Route Optimization 
   but does not present any specific protocols or detailed solutions. 
   A separate specification of the actual BU authentication protocol 
   is needed. 
    
   There are other security concerns with Mobile IPv6 that are not 
   addresses in this document. The Home Agent Discovery needs to be 
   secured so that the mobile can establish a secure tunnel to a 
   reliable Home Agent. Also, some features of the Mobile IPv6 
   protocol may reduce the effectiveness of ingress filtering. The 
   Home Address Option, the Alternative CoA sub-option, and possibly 
   IPv6 in IPv6 tunnels, may be used to spoof the origin of packets 
   without spoofing the source IP address. 
    
8.   Conclusions 
 
   We have described attacks against Mobile IPv6 Route Optimization 
   and mechanisms for protecting the protocol participants and third 
   parties. Some of the attacks may be new in the sense that they have 
   not been considered in existing BU authentication requirements and 
   protocol drafts. It is our hope that this document will help in 
   designing BU authentication protocols and in the process of 
   choosing the protocol or protocols that will be part of the Mobile 
   IPv6 standard. We are also working on a family of protocols that 
   takes into account the points of this document [RAOA01]. 
    
Acknowledgments 
    

 
Aura                   Expires May 14, 2002               [Page 20] 
INTERNET-DRAFT      MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses       November 2001 

   Many of the ideas originate from Mike Roe, Greg O'Shea, and Pekka 
   Nikander and various Internet Drafts. 
    
References 
 
   [AN97a]   Tuomas Aura and Pekka Nikander. Stateless connections. 
             In Proc. International Conference on Information and 
             Communications Security (ICICS'97), volume 1334 of LNCS, 
             pages 87-97, Beijing, China, November 1997. Springer.  
    
   [ANL00]   Tuomas Aura, Pekka Nikander, and Jussipekka Leiwo. DOS-
             resistant authentication with client puzzles. In Proc. 
             Security Protocols Workshop 2000, volume 2133 of LNCS, 
             pages 170-181, Cambridge, UK, April 2000. Springer.  
     
   [HC98]    Dan Harkins and Dave Carrel. The Internet key exchange 
             (IKE). RFC 2409, IETF Network Working Group, November 
             1998.  
    
   [JB99]    Ari Juels and John Brainard. Client puzzles: a 
             cryptographic countermeasure against connection 
             depletion attacks. In Proc. 1999 Network and Distributed 
             Systems Security Symposium (NDSS), pages 151-165, San 
             Diego, CA USA, February 1999. Internet Society.  
    
   [KS99]    Phil Karn and William A. Simpson. Photuris: session-key 
             management protocol. RFC 2522, IETF Network Working 
             Group, March 1999.  
    
   [KA98]    Stephen Kent and Randall Atkinson. Security architecture 
             for the Internet Protocol. RFC 2401, IETF Network 
             Working Group, November 1998.  
    
   [Mea99]   Catherine Meadows. A formal framework and evaluation 
             method for network denial of service. In Proc. 12th IEEE 
             Computer Security Foundations Workshop, pages 4-13, 
             Mordano, Italy, June 1999. IEEE Computer Society.  
    
   [MPH+01]  Allison Mankin, Basavaraj Patil, Dan Harkins, Erik 
             Nordmark, Pekka Nikander, Phil Roberts, and Thomas 
             Narten. Threat models introduced by Mobile IPv6 and 
             requirements for security in Mobile IPv6. Internet Draft 
             draft-ietf-mobileip-mipv6-scrty-reqts-01.txt, IETF IP 
             Routing for Wireless/Mobile Hosts (mobileip) WG, October 
             2001. Work in progress.  
     
   [MC01]    Gabriel Montenegro and Claude Castelluccia. SUCV 
             identifiers and addresses. Internet Draft draft-


 
Aura                   Expires May 14, 2002               [Page 21] 
INTERNET-DRAFT      MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses       November 2001 

             montenegro-sucv-01.txt, IETF, July 2001. Work in 
             progress.  
    
   [NP01]    Pekka Nikander and Charles Perkins. Binding 
             authentication key establishment protocol for Mobile 
             IPv6. Internet Draft draft-perkins-bake-01.txt, IETF 
             Mobile IP Working Group, July 2001. Work in progress.  
     
   [OR01]    Greg O'Shea and Michael Roe. Child-proof authentication 
             for MIPv6 (CAM). ACM Computer Communications Review, 
             31(2), April 2001.  
    
   [JP00]    David B. Johnson and Charles Perkins. Mobility support 
             in ipv6. Internet Draft draft-ietf-mobileip-ipv6-14.txt, 
             IETF Mobile IP Working Group, July 2000. Work in 
             progress.  
    
   [RAOA01]  Michael Roe, Tuomas Aura, Greg O'Shea, and Jari Arkko. 
             Authentication of Mobile IPv6 binding updates and 
             acknowledgments. Internet Draft draft-roe-mobileip-
             updateauth-01.txt, IETF Mobile IP Working Group, 
             November 2001. Work in progress.  
    
   [SKK+97]  Christoph L. Schuba, Ivan V. Krsul, Markus G. Kuhn, 
             Eugene H. Spaffold, Aurobindo Sundaram, and Diego 
             Zamboni. Analysis of a denial of service attack on TCP. 
             In Proc. 1997 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 
             pages 208-223, Oakland, CA USA, May 1997. IEEE Computer 
             Society Press.  
     
   [TO01]    Michael Thomas and Dave Oran. Home agent cookies for 
             binding updates. Internet Draft draft-thomas-mobileip-
             ha-cookies-00.txt, IETF, July 2001. Work in progress.  
    
Authors' Addresses 
    
   Tuomas Aura 
   7 J J Thompson Avenue 
   Cambridge, CB3 0FB 
   United Kingdom 
    
   Phone: +44 1223 479708 
   Email: tuomaura@microsoft.com 
    
   Jari Arkko 
   Oy LM Ericsson Ab 
   02420 Jorvas 
   Finland 
    

 
Aura                   Expires May 14, 2002               [Page 22] 
INTERNET-DRAFT      MIPv6 BU Attacks and Defenses       November 2001 

   Phone: +358 40 5079256  
   Email: Jari.Arkko@ericsson.com 

 















































Aura                   Expires May 14, 2002               [Page 23]
