Internet Draft                                    James M. Polk
Expiration: September 8, 2000                     Cisco Systems   
File: draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-00.txt            


   
   
   
   

   
        SIP Precedence mapping to MLPP Interworking   
   
                     March 7, 2000 
   
     

     
Status of this Memo 
     
This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance 
with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
    
Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engi-
neering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. 
Note that other groups may also distribute working documents 
as Internet-Drafts. 
    
Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-
Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as 
"work in progress." 
    
The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed 
at http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 


Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", 
   "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  
   "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be 
   interpreted as described in [RFC-2119].



Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-00.txt          Page 1

Internet Draft     SIP mapping to MLPP               March 2000

Abstract 
    
This document describes an extension to the Session Initiation 
Protocol [1] for direct interworking and interoperability with 
TDM-based Multi-Level Precedence and Preemption [2] Service 
Capability networks. This document will further include 
details and similar mechanisms to evolve and/or replace 
existing TDM-based MLPP network topologies with SIP-based 
Voice Signaling topologies with no loss of capability. Al-
though additional mobility and capabilities can easily be 
realized with this complete topology architecture implemented. 

The author believes these additional Prioritization and 
Preemption capabilities will have wider deployment benefits 
without direct connectivity to MLPP networks.





Table of Contents 
     
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1 
Table of Contents. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2 
1.0 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3 
2.0 MLPP Overview. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3 
3.0 Objective of ANSI's MLPP specification . . . . . . . . .  4 
4.0 Requisites from ANSI's MLPP Specification. . . . . . . .  4 
5.0 Defined SIP Priority request-header field. . . . . . . .  6 
6.0 Merging Priority Value Sets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7 
7.0 Results of MLPP Extensions to SIP Priority Field . . . .  9 
8.0 IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 
9.0 Security Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 
10.0 References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 
11.0 Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
12.0 Author Information. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 


















Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-00.txt          Page 2

Internet Draft     SIP mapping to MLPP               March 2000

1.0 Introduction

This document describes an extension to the Session Initiation 
Protocol [1] for direct interworking and interoperability with 
TDM-based Multi-Level Precedence and Preemption (MLPP) [2] 
Service Capability networks. This document will further include 
details and similar mechanisms to evolve and/or replace exist-
ing TDM-based MLPP network topologies with SIP-based Voice 
Signaling topologies with no loss of capability; although addi-
tional mobility and capabilities can easily be realized with 
this complete topology architecture implemented. 

The author believes these additional Prioritization and Pre-
emption capabilities will have wider deployment benefits with-
out direct connectivity to MLPP networks.

2.0 MLPP Overview

Multi level Precedence and Preemption [2] Service Capability 
stipulates a relative priority ranking order of Call flows 
on a hop-by-hop basis through a Voice Network from their 
relative beginning Voice device to the end Voice device. 
Within the TDM world, these call flows were closed network 
circuit switched from PBX or Tandem Switch to PBX or Tandem 
Switch. Each Switch, upon initiation of a higher priority call 
flow where there were not available outbound resources or 
trunks, preempted a lesser priority call flow by seizing the 
resources of an existing external truck circuit to satisfy 
that higher Priority Call. Eliminating the previous call with-
out giving either end station a choice or chance to continue 
the call flow of the overridden call. Typically, an audible 
tone [defined in 2] occurred on the inbound caller's phone 
receiving the Preempting call flow.

By contrast, in a Packetized Voice Network, there will likely 
not be fixed or pre-configured outbound circuits waiting for 
higher priority call flows to occur on a per-MLPP-enabled IP 
Internetworking device basis. This presents a more challenging 
problem of preemption in a less statically configured Network 
Topology. 

SIP per [1] created a Priority Header-Field as a non-mandatory 
field within the signaling set-up. This document recommends 
that this capability be included in all implementations of SIP 
devices, even if not enabled. Further, this document recommends 
the ability to make the Header-Field "Priority:" mandatory 
within an Administrator's Domain if they choose, for all SIP 
based call signaling devices. In this scenario, a SIP device 
that doesn't have this value present will be denied access to 
the invite request. 


Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-00.txt          Page 3

Internet Draft     SIP mapping to MLPP               March 2000

3.0 Objective of ANSI's MLPP Specification

The MLPP concept was created so that there was a real-time 
method of prioritizing voice communications. It was created 
back before electronic switching in the U.S. Government 
"AUTOVON" network. It is designed so that normal telephone 
traffic would not cause problems in the event of a crisis. 

Here is an example using Military Rank as a conceptual com-
parison:

The lowest level, ROUTINE, would be used for all normal call 
traffic. If a Company commander needed to reach his platoon 
leaders, he/she would use the PRIORITY precedence level. If a 
crisis arose, normal traffic would be preempted by command 
traffic. The lower level command traffic would use the PRIORITY 
and potentially the IMMEDIATE precedence levels. The field 
grade traffic (brigade, battalion, and division) would use 
the IMMEDIATE, and in some cases FLASH precedence levels. 
Communications within the Corps and Theater commanders would 
use FLASH. The President, the Joint Chiefs, and some select 
theater commanders (e.g. CICNORAD, or CICSAC) would use the 
FLASH OVERRIDE precedence. This guaranteed (in theory) that 
the most important commands (the President forbidding nuclear 
launch) would get through even over all other traffic.

This pre-grading of importance is a method of assigning maximum 
levels of priority to traffic based on user Profile (e.g. what 
they are authorized to do). Someone who was authorized to use 
IMMEDIATE precedence would normally use ROUTINE unless there 
was a legitimate reason to escalate the precedence to a higher 
level.


4.0 Requisites from ANSI's MLPP Specification [2]

ANSI T.619-1992 states the 5 levels of Precedence (or 
Priority) for MLPP networks as the following:

     bits  Name
     ----  ----
     0000  "Flash Override" (0)
     0001  "Flash" (1)
     0010  "Immediate" (2)
     0011  "Priority" (3)
     0100  "Routine" (4)

     0101 to
     1111  "Spare"





Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-00.txt          Page 4

Internet Draft     SIP mapping to MLPP               March 2000

There are actually 16 values/levels possible within this spec, 
but any additional levels will have a preemption functionality 
below, or less than, "Routine". The intent is that "Flash 
Override" is always the highest level capable within a MLPP-
compliant network.

In any case, a call session of any given Precedence level or 
value can preempt any Precedence level of a lesser level or 
value. If these values are equal, then other mechanisms, if 
any, can react according to their individual capabilities 
(e.g. Call waiting).

Preemption can take one of two forms. First, the called party 
may be busy with a lower Precedence call which must be pre-
empted in favor of completing the incoming higher Precedence 
call from the calling party. Second, the network resources 
somewhere in between the calling and called party may be satur-
ated with some combination of call sessions of lower Precedence 
requested by the calling party and other traffic (data). If the 
data traffic is of some lower priority level (perhaps a lower 
level of DSCP value), it should receive less priority in order 
to allow this higher priority call session to seize outbound 
resources. If there is still not enough available outbound 
interface resources, then one or more of the lower Precedence 
calls shall be preempted to complete the higher Precedence call. 

There are three characteristics of preemption:

a)     Any party whose connection was preempted (whether that
       resource was reused or not) shall receive a distinctive
       audible notification. An addition notification can be 
       provided via some visual indication if possible or 
       desirable;

b)     Any called party of an active call that is being pre-
       empted by a higher Precedence call shall be required to 
       acknowledge the preemption before being connected to 
       the new calling party, and 

c)     When there are no idle resources, preemption of the 
       lowest of these lower level Precedence resources shall 
       occur;

Any call session can be preempted anytime after the Precedence 
value has been established for a call and call clearing has 
begun.

If there is a user or SIP device that is configured (somehow 
compliant with the parameters within that Administrative Domain 
(AD), and outside the scope of this document) to disable the 


Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-00.txt          Page 5

Internet Draft     SIP mapping to MLPP               March 2000

ability to be preempted, that user or SIP phone device will 
not experience preemption of calls by higher precedence calls, 
if the cause of preemption would be due to called party busy 
condition (e.g. call waiting is enacted here). However, the 
user may still experience preemption of calls due to a lack 
of network resources other than the user's own access resources 
[2].

Precedence calls that are not responded to by the called party 
(e.g. the called party chooses to hang up their phone without 
taking the call) may have their phone speaker initialized for 
that inbound Precedence call in order to complete the call; 
sometimes regardless if this called party wants the Precedence 
call [2]. An alternative to this approach could be to have an 
'alternate called party' signaled (e.g. that person's admini-
strator). This mechanism would be a per Domain decision, and 
not mandatory for SIP-MLPP interworking compliance.

An MLPP call session should automatically be set up with the 
lowest precedence level by default, until the user chooses a
level up to their maximum allowed within that Domain.


5.0 Defined SIP Priority request-header field

SIP[1] defines the Priority request-header field and its 
possible non-mandatory values in section "6.25 Priority" as 
the following (exact text from page 40 of [1]):

    "    Priority       = "Priority" ":" priority-value
         priority-value = "emergency" | "urgent" | "normal"
                                      | "non-urgent"

   It is RECOMMENDED that the value of "emergency" only be 
   used when life, limb or property are in imminent danger.

       Examples:

        Subject: A tornado is heading our way!
        Priority: emergency

        Subject: Weekend plans
        Priority: non-urgent

   These are the values of [3], with the addition of 
   "emergency".   "

This author sees no inconsistencies in adding the "Flash 
Override" Value with [1].



Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-00.txt          Page 6

Internet Draft     SIP mapping to MLPP               March 2000


6.0 Merging Priority Value Sets

When comparing sections 4.0 and 5.0, the only difference in 
the values is this fifth value in MLPP, the Highest Priority 
value ("Flash Override"), although each has a subtly different 
name associated for the first 4 values, the intended function-
ality appears to be no different. This document recommends 
adoption of the MLPP name designation "Flash Override" for 
this new Highest Precedence Value in the interests of con-
sistency. This document explicitly requests the 5th MLPP value 
("Flash Override") be included from this document, on a 
Standards Track requirement, to possibly be folded into a 
future RFC revision of [1], unless obsoleted prior to that 
time.



7.0 Results of MLPP Extensions to SIP Priority Field

The following are recommendations or requirements for a SIP 
Signaling Environment or Domain enabled with MLPP, or a 
subset of MLPP, for the purposes of creating a Network where 
Voice Sessions have a need for sub-classification within a 
Domain's control:

    * SIP end-device MUST include the Header-Field "Priority:" 
      in all Session Signaling, regardless of session's intent 
      or destination;

    * Header-Field "Priority:" MUST be default set to 'Routine' 
      unless calling user specifies a Domain authorized Higher 
      Value for that call session;

    * User must be authorized to access higher priority values 
      for any Higher Precedence call (method of authorization 
      is outside the scope of this document);

    * MUST allow Administrator to make it mandatory for any SIP 
      receiving device to be MLPP-enabled (goal to have any 
      non-MLPP device not able to engage in any call session - 
      in a MLPP environment, this capability should be required 
      of all devices by that Domain's Administrator)

      * Otherwise call isn't established with the following op-
        tional (rough language) results:





Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-00.txt          Page 7

Internet Draft     SIP mapping to MLPP               March 2000

        * Automated attendant stating to caller "remote device 
          not MLPP-enabled... call cannot be completed" - call 
          gets either fast-busy or new tone indicating bad 
          remote device called;

        * Automated attendant stating caller "remote device not 
          MLPP-enabled... do you wish to proceed with non-pri-
          oritized call anyway"

        * Simply fast busy

    * SIP Gateways within MLPP-enabled Domain MUST have direct 
      mapping of ISDN Signaling according to [2 and 5];

    * It is believed COPS should be utilized for mid-session
      path rejections due to congestion, when a Higher Prece-
      dence Call session is requesting resources, but that 
      mechanism is currently outside of the scope of this
      document, but might be more detailed in a future version
      of this I-D;

    

8.0 IANA Considerations

This author doesn't believe there are any within this document.

9.0 Security Considerations

It can be argued that Authentication and Authorization of Call
Sessions will not require any security mechanisms until Pri-
ority, Precedence and Preemption are enabled within a network 
Domain. Once any or each of these are implemented within a 
Domain Network, Security considerations could become signifi-
cantly more important to that Domain. 

In an MLPP-enabled Domain, unauthorized setting of any Higher 
Priority session should have a great impact on other traffic 
unless there is no congestion occurring at any point within the 
network, at any time. This author believes Security and Encryp-
tion will become very important within Packetized Voice Communi-
cations in the near future.

Since [2] mandates that each MLPP be defined and (relatively)
closed in nature, boundary controls can and should be possible.






Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-00.txt          Page 8

Internet Draft     SIP mapping to MLPP               March 2000


10.0 References:

[1] M. Handley, H. Schulzrinne, E. Schooler, J. Rosenberg "SIP: 
Session Initiation Protocol" RFC 2543, March 1999

[2] ANSI specification ANSI T1.619-1992.

[3] Palme, J., "Common Internet message headers", RFC 2076, 
February 1997.

[4] Braden, R., Ed., Zhang, L., Estrin, D., Herzog, S., and 
S. Jamin, "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1 
Functional Specification", RFC 2205, September 1997. (section 
3.5 and Appendix B)

[5] ANSI specification ANSI T1.619A-1994.

[6] V. Jacobson, K. Nichols, K. Poduri, "An Expedited Forwarding 
PHB" RFC 2598, June 1999


11.0 Acknowledgments

A couple of people have made comments and suggestions contribu-
ting to this document.  In particular, this author would like 
to thank Bob Bell and Rohan Mahy of Cisco Systems.



12.0 Author Information

James M. Polk
Cisco Systems
18581 N. Dallas Parkway, Suite 100
Dallas, TX 75287
jmpolk@cisco.com


"Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights
Reserved.

This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished
to others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise 
explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared, 
copied, published and distributed, in whole or in part, without 
restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright 
notice and this paragraph are included on all such copies and 



Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-00.txt          Page 9

Internet Draft     SIP mapping to MLPP               March 2000


derivative works.  However, this document itself may not be 
modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright notice 
or references to the Internet Society or other Internet organi-
zations, except as needed for the purpose of developing Internet 
standards in which case the procedures for copyrights defined 
in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as 
required to translate it into languages other than English.

The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not
be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

This document and the information contained herein is provided 
on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE 
USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR 
ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A 
PARTICULAR PURPOSE."




The Expiration date for this Internet Draft is:

September 8, 2000 
























Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-00.txt         Page 10

Internet Draft     SIP mapping to MLPP               March 2000

