

                                                                        
   Internet Draft                                              C. Apple 
   Document: draft-apple-schema-reg-rqmts-00.txt   DSI Consulting, Inc. 
   Expires: December 2003                                     June 2003 
    
    
   Requirements for the Initial Release of a Directory Schema Listing 
   Service 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of [RFC2026].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
    
   This memo documents requirements for listing directory services 
   schema in a centrally operated, administered, and maintained 
   repository. This repository will be available as a resource to 
   directory protocol and service implementors to facilitate schema 
   discovery.  
    
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119]. 


 
 
Apple                  Expires - December 2003               [Page 1] 

Internet Draft  Directory Schema Listing Requirements       June 2003 
 
 
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction...................................................3 
      1.1 Scope......................................................3 
      1.2 Terms and Definitions......................................4 
      1.3 Usage Scenarios............................................5 
          1.3.1 Location/Retrieval of the vCard Schema for LDAPv3....5 
          1.3.2 Submission of a New Schema Listing via SMTP..........5 
   2. Listing Service Requirements...................................6 
      2.1 Functional Requirements....................................6 
      2.2 Operational Requirements...................................6 
      2.3 Repository Access Functionality............................7 
   3. Listing Service Namespace Requirements.........................8 
   4. Listing Requirements...........................................9 
   5. Listing Storage Requirements...................................9 
   6. Security Considerations.......................................10 
      6.1 Compromisable Assets......................................10 
      6.2 Attack Scenarios..........................................10 
          6.2.1 Denial-of-Service Attack Scenarios..................10 
          6.2.2 Confuse-the-User Attack Scenarios...................10 
      6.3 Security Requirements on Schema Listing Procedures........11 
   7. References....................................................12 
   8. Acknowledgments...............................................13 
   9. Author's Addresses............................................14 
    























 
 
Apple                  Expires - December 2003               [Page 2] 

Internet Draft  Directory Schema Listing Requirements       June 2003 
 
 
    
1. Introduction 
    
    
   The fastest route to interoperable directory services is through 
   standard object classes and attribute types. There is a growing 
   number of places where schema for Internet Directory Services and 
   Internet Operations are being defined, with varying degrees of 
   documentation.  This plethora of schema is unavoidable in the light 
   of the needs of different service communities, but it makes it 
   difficult for directory service builders to find and make use of an 
   existing schema that will serve their needs and increase 
   interoperability with other systems. A listing service providing a 
   single point of discovery for directory service schema will promote 
   schema reuse, reduce duplication of effort, and thus promote 
   directory service interoperability. 
    
   The intent is to offer a schema listing service with public read 
   access and restricted, moderated write access. Many hard-coded 
   choices and constraints have been reflected in this requirements 
   document for the purpose of expediting deployment. Future releases of 
   the service may require an update of this document. 
    
   Initially, such a listing service will be centrally operated, 
   administered, and maintained. The schema listing repository database 
   may also be mirrored to ensure some level of redundancy for read 
   access in the event of service interruption. Eventually, the 
   operations, administration, and maintenance of such a listing service 
   may evolve to use a more distributed deployment scenario. 
    
   The schema listing service is also intended to be largely automated, 
   with minimal human involvement. Human involvement is likely to be 
   limited to the following types of activities: 
    
      + handling repository access problems 
      + trouble resolution for computing and communications facilities 
      + dealing with reasonable requests that fall outside of the scope 
        of normal schema listing repository operations 
      + reviewing schema listing requests on a mailing list prior to 
        publishing in the listing repository 
    
   Future releases of the service may automate some of these tasks. 
    
    
1.1 Scope 
 
 
   Requirements for the initial release of a directory schema listing 
   service are inside the scope of this document. 
 
 
Apple                  Expires - December 2003               [Page 3] 

Internet Draft  Directory Schema Listing Requirements       June 2003 
 
 
    
   Specifications for syntaxes and grammars to be used in the initial 
   release of the directory schema listing service are outside the scope 
   of this document. 
 
   Documentation of schema listing procedures is outside the scope of 
   this document. 
    
    
1.2 Terms and Definitions 
    
    
   Information Object - a descriptive abstraction of some real-world 
   object 
    
   Object Attribute - a descriptive property of an information object; 
   typically, object attributes are defined in terms of semantic and 
   syntactic definitions 
    
   Schema - a collection of definitions for related information objects 
    
   Schema Unit - a related or grouped set of object attributes that form 
   a discrete unit within the context of a schema for a particular 
   protocol; examples include an LDAP object class or a WHOIS++ template 
    
   Schema Pak - a related or grouped set of schema units that 
   collectively specify a schema associated with a particular protocol; 
   an example of a schema pak is the set of LDAP object classes 
   specified in [RFC2256] 
    
   Metadata - characteristics that differentiate one schema unit or 
   schema pak from another; used to catalog listing service content 
   structured using a profile of [RFC2425]; also contains references to 
   files stored within and outside of a listing repository 
    
   Schema Unit Content - a formal specification of a schema unit using  
   a profile of [RFC2425] 
    
   Schema Unit Listing - the combination of a single schema unit content 
   file intended for use within the context of a particular protocol and 
   a file containing metadata describing the schema unit specified 
   within that schema unit content file 
    
   Schema Pak Listing - a single metadata file containing information 
   describing and referring to a set of related or grouped schema unit 
   content files 
    
   Repository - a database in which listings are stored 
    
 
 
Apple                  Expires - December 2003               [Page 4] 

Internet Draft  Directory Schema Listing Requirements       June 2003 
 
 
   Listing Request - a proposed schema unit listing or schema pak 
   listing formatted using [MIME] constructs that is submitted for 
   consideration as a listing to be published in a repository 
 
   Operator - an organization that administers and maintains a 
   repository 
    
   Primary Repository - the repository that masters the schema listings 
   database 
    
   Shadow Repository - a repository that mirrors the primary repository 
    
   Contact Person - the name of the individual who holds the authority 
   to update a listing and who should be contacted if questions or 
   concerns arise related to a listing or listing request 
    
   Listing Authority Contact - the name of the individual who holds 
   authority to replace a contact person; can be either the contact 
   person for a listing or an alternate contact within the organization 
   to which the contact person belongs (this allows one person 
   organizations to list schema) 
    
    
1.3 Usage Scenarios 
    
    
1.3.1 Location/Retrieval of the vCard Schema for LDAPv3 
    
    
   A user of the schema listing service wants to locate a copy of the 
   vCard schema for LDAPv3 [RFC2251] so that they can use it in a 
   prototyping project. First, they point their web browser at a schema 
   listing repository web site and download the list of available 
   schema. Next, they use the search command on their browser to locate 
   occurances of the string "vCard". The browser automatically scroll 
   down to the appropriate place in the list of available schema and the 
   user clicks on a link to view the listing metadata to verify that 
   this is indeed the vCard schema for use with version 3 of the LDAP 
   protocol. Included in the web-based representation of the listing 
   metadata are ftp URLs pointing to available profiles containing 
   listing content for this schema. The user clicks on the link for the 
   profile that they can use. 
    
    
1.3.2 Submission of a New Schema Listing via SMTP 
    
    
   A schema writer wishes to list a schema they have created and 
   prepares the listing metadata and listing content according to one or 
 
 
Apple                  Expires - December 2003               [Page 5] 

Internet Draft  Directory Schema Listing Requirements       June 2003 
 
 
   more appropriate [RFC2425] profiles. The schema writer will obtain a 
   permanent, unique schema listing name for the request. 
    
   The schema writer sends an SMTP message including the listing meta 
   data and all available listing content in multipart-related [MIME] 
   format to a listing request review mailing list. After a short review 
   period, the listing repository operator validates the request, and if 
   properly formed, publishes the listing according to the listing 
   procedures. An announcement of the newly published schema listing is 
   sent to a mailing list reserved for this purpose. 
    
    
2. Listing Service Requirements 
    
    
2.1 Functional Requirements 
    
    
   Listed schema MAY be published as an RFC. 
    
   A list of available listings MUST be maintained. 
    
   Listings MUST be named according to the namespace requirements 
   defined in section 3. 
    
   The listing service SHALL maintain information about schema units, 
   beyond their definition. This information is referred to as metadata 
   and will consist of information used for cataloging listings in the 
   repositories. The particular set of metadata elements used during the 
   initial deployment of the listing service will be defined in other 
   documents. 
    
   Listing metadata and listing content MUST be parsable. 
    
    
2.2 Operational Requirements 
    
    
   The process of listing schema MUST be centralized for the initial 
   deployment. 
    
   All versions of all listings MUST be retained. A simple method for 
   getting the most recent version of a particular listing MUST be 
   provided. 
    
   The contact person for a listing MAY give an earlier listing a higher 
   version number, or MAY request that the listing get a new name. 
    
   The listing repository MUST be centrally administered. 
 
 
Apple                  Expires - December 2003               [Page 6] 

Internet Draft  Directory Schema Listing Requirements       June 2003 
 
 
    
   The listing repository MAY be mirrored. 
    
   The primary repository operator MUST obtain an OID subtree for which 
   they hold sub-allocation authority for use in the schema listing 
   service. 
    
   Listing requests MAY be signed using PGP/MIME as described in 
   [RFC2015]. The primary listing repository operator MUST be able to 
   accept schema listing requests in PGP/MIME messages, although they 
   are NOT REQUIRED to validate the signatures. The method for 
   validating and determining trust of signatures is outside the scope 
   of this document and is determined by the parties in the exchange. 
   The method for determining and validating trust in an unsigned 
   request is outside the scope of this document, as is the method for 
   determining trust in schema listing repository or its content. 
    
   A mailing list MUST be created for the purpose of submitting listing 
   requests for review prior to publishing in the schema listing 
   repository. The schema listing repository publication process MUST be 
   moderated via this mailing list. Listing requests MUST be subjected 
   to community review on this mailing list for a period of at least 2 
   weeks. If no comments are received, properly formed schema listing 
   requests SHALL be published as listings; otherwise, the request MAY 
   either denied or the listing MAY published subject to incorporation 
   of comments. 
    
   A mailing list MUST be created for announcing new and updated 
   listings. 
    
   A mailbox MUST be created for the purpose of receiving service 
   trouble requests from users. 
    
   Listing repository operators (of primary and shadow sites) MUST 
   provide a free means of accessing the listing service consistent with 
   the functionality documented in paragraph 2.3. 
    
    
2.3 Repository Access Functionality 
    
    
   The following schema listing repository access protocols MUST b 
   supported:  FTP [RFC959], HTTP 1.1 [RFC2068], and SMTP [RFC821]. 
    
   The following access functions are REQUIRED: 
    
         a) browse and retrieve schema unit content, 
            metadata, and a list of available listings: 
    
 
 
Apple                  Expires - December 2003               [Page 7] 

Internet Draft  Directory Schema Listing Requirements       June 2003 
 
 
            + via HTTP requests 
    
            + via FTP clients 
    
            + via requests through an SMTP server 
    
         b) search a list of available listings: 
    
            + via HTTP, retrieving either HTML or text listings 
              that can then be searched by the requestor 
    
            + via HTTP by accessing repository-based searching 
              facilities such as keyword searching; this can 
              return listing names, schema unit listings, 
              schema pak listings, metadata, or other useful 
              information 
    
         c) add and update listings by submitting a formatted 
            request to a mailing list for community review: 
    
            + via SMTP using appropriate MIME constructs 
              as described in section 4.0 
    
   Other access functions, including the following, MAY be supported, 
   but will be defined in other documents in the future: 
    
         a) search schema unit content 
    
         b) search metadata 
    
    
3. Listing Service Namespace Requirements 
    
    
   The listing service namespace MUST be protocol-independent. 
    
   The listing service namespace SHALL be based on OIDs. 
    
   Listing names: 
    
         + MUST be permanent 
    
         + MUST be globally unique 
    
         + MUST be publicly available 
    
         + MUST NOT be recycled or re-used 
    
         + MUST be created within the OID subtree reserved for use 
 
 
Apple                  Expires - December 2003               [Page 8] 

Internet Draft  Directory Schema Listing Requirements       June 2003 
 
 
           in the schema listing service and administered by the 
           primary listing repository operator 
    
    
4. Listing Requirements 
    
    
   Schema unit content SHALL be limited to the information actually 
   required to specify and encode the schema for storage and transfer. 
    
   Metadata SHALL be composed of information used to catalog listings. 
    
   Metadata element syntax SHALL be defined based on the concept of 
   tagged attribute type-value pairs. 
    
   Language tags as specified in [RFC1766] MUST be used in all listings. 
    
   Metadata element values MUST be encoded using the UCS Transformation 
   Format - 8 bit form [RFC2044]. 
    
   For the purposes of submitting a listing request, schema unit content 
   and metadata SHOULD be structured according to appropriate profiles 
   of [RFC2425] defined in other documents. 
    
   Content associated with a listing, but not stored in the schema 
   listing repository (such as large copyright notices and vendor logo 
   images) MAY be included by reference in the metadata. If such 
   external references are included in a particular schema listing, a 
   fingerprint of the external content generated prior to schema listing 
   request creation MUST be included along with these references in the 
   request. Details associated with the creation of these external 
   content references, including the algorithm to be used for generation 
   of a content fingerprint and the syntax of the reference, will be 
   defined in the [RFC2425] profile used to format and encode listing 
   metadata for storage and transfer. 
    
    
5. Listing Storage Requirements 
    
    
   Listing repository file names MUST be permanent, globally unique, and 
   publicly available. 
    
   Listing repository file names SHOULD be constructed in a manner that 
   allows human and machine users to determine the nature of file 
   content by inspecting the file names. 
    
   Schema unit content and metadata MUST be stored in separate files. 
    
 
 
Apple                  Expires - December 2003               [Page 9] 

Internet Draft  Directory Schema Listing Requirements       June 2003 
 
 
    
6. Security Considerations 
    
    
6.1 Compromisable Assets 
    
    
   One or more of the following assets could be compromised if the 
   service is attacked: 
    
         + Metadata 
         + Schema unit content 
         + Repository Hardware & Software 
         + Networking Facilities Connecting Repository to the Internet 
         + Repository Mirror Sites 
    
    
6.2 Attack Scenarios 
    
    
   Allowable methods for submitting listing requests are: 
    
         a) sending an e-mail message to a mail box 
    
         b) submitting requests using web-based forms 
    
   Based on these request submission methods, there are a number of 
   known repository attack scenarios that must be considered during the 
   implementation of schema listing procedures and the software and 
   operational processes required to support them. 
    
    
6.2.1 Denial-of-Service Attack Scenarios 
    
    
   Scenario A: someone could send in a large number of improperly formed 
   requests 
    
   Scenario B: someone could send in a large number of properly formed, 
   but frivolous, useless, or trivial requests 
    
    
6.2.2 Confuse-the-User Attack Scenarios 
    
    
   Scenario A: someone could send in a large number of valid, but 
   frivolous, useless, or trivial requests and some or all of these 
   requests actually become listings in the repository 
    
 
 
Apple                  Expires - December 2003              [Page 10] 

Internet Draft  Directory Schema Listing Requirements       June 2003 
 
 
   Scenario B: someone could maliciously submit one or more slightly 
   modified versions of existing listings which are popular or widely 
   used 
    
    
6.3 Security Requirements on Schema Listing Procedures 
    
    
   The following contextual definitions apply to the requirements listed 
   in the remainder of this paragraph: 
    
   Verification - a process of determining authenticity of facts implied 
   or explicitly specified by a contact person during the process of 
   submitting a schema listing request; the methods used to implement 
   such a process MAY or MAY NOT be based on an IETF-sanctioned security 
   protocol; specification of the methods used to implement such a 
   process as well as the trust relationships relevant to the process 
   are outside the scope of this document. 
    
   High-Quality Directory Schema - a directory schema that serves some 
   useful purpose (e.g., a related set of attribute and object class 
   definitions for holding information about people in a LDAP 
   directory); a schema that is not merely trivial or frivolous (e.g., a 
   trivial schema might consist of a related set of attribute and object 
   class definitions for holding information about the two possible 
   binary bit values in a directory). 
    
   The schema listing procedures SHOULD be designed to enable: 
    
         a) verification that all properly formed schema 
            listing requests are submitted by the contact 
            person claiming to originate them 
    
         b) methods of ensuring that only properly-formed, 
            high-quality directory schema are published 
            in the schema listing repository 
    
         c) verifcation that requests to change the identity 
            of the contact person for a listing originate 
            from the listing authority contact or the contact 
            person 
    
         d) coping with the situation in which the contact 
            person and/or listing authority contact for 
            a schema is no longer available or is unable 
            to submit updates to the listing 
            for which they hold update authority 
    

 
 
Apple                  Expires - December 2003              [Page 11] 

Internet Draft  Directory Schema Listing Requirements       June 2003 
 
 
   For the initial release of the service, there is NO REQUIREMENT on 
   any participant, user, or application to retain signature information 
   as it applies to an entire schema listing request. 
    
   Fingerprints included with external content reference metadata 
   elements MUST be retained and included in published listing request. 
   Users of the schema listing service SHOULD verify that fingerprints 
   of referenced content match corresponding fingerprints included with 
   external references as a part of the published schema listing.  If 
   purported (included in the listing) and actual (computed by the user) 
   fingerprints are different, users of the service SHOULD consider the 
   possibility that the referenced content has changed since publication 
   of the schema listing and that such a change could affect the way in 
   which associated content can be used. 
    
   Referenced content is outside of the control of the schema listing 
   service.  A caveat explaining this concept MUST be included in the 
   metadata of all published listings if external references are 
   included in corresponding listing requests. 
    
    
7. References 
    
    
   [CHARSET] Internet Assigned Numbers Authority, "CHARACTER SETS", 
   <URL: http://www.iana.org/assignments/character-sets>. 
    
   [MIME] [RFC2045], [RFC2046], and [RFC2047]. 
    
   [RFC821] J. Postel, "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 821, August 
   1982. 
    
   [RFC959] J. Postel, J.K. Reynolds, "File Transfer Protocol", RFC 959, 
   October 1985. 
    
   [RFC1630] T. Berners-Lee, "Universal Resource Identifiers in WWW", 
   RFC 1630, June 1994. 
    
   [RFC1766] H. Alvestrand, "Tags for the Identification of Languages", 
   RFC 1766, March 1995. 
    
   [RFC2015] M. Elkins, "MIME Security with Pretty Good Privacy (PGP)", 
   RFC 2015, October 1996. 
    
   [RFC2026] S. Bradner, "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", 
   BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   [RFC2044] F. Yergeau, "UTF-8, a transformation format of Unicode and 
   ISO 10646", RFC 2044, October 1996. 
 
 
Apple                  Expires - December 2003              [Page 12] 

Internet Draft  Directory Schema Listing Requirements       June 2003 
 
 
    
   [RFC2045] N. Freed, N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail 
   Extensions (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message Bodies", RFC 
   2045, November 1996. 
    
   [RFC2046] N. Freed & N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail 
   Extensions (MIME) Part Two: Media Types", RFC 2046, November 1996. 
    
   [RFC2047] K. Moore, "MIME (Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions) 
   Part Three: Message Header Extensions for Non-ASCII Text", RFC 2047, 
   November 1996. 
    
   [RFC2068] R. Fielding, J. Gettys, J. Mogul, H. Frystyk, T. Berners- 
   Lee, "Hypertext Transfer Protocol -- HTTP/1.1", RFC 2068, January 
   1997. 
    
   [RFC2119] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
   Requirement Level", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   [RFC2251] M. Wahl, T. Howes, S. Kille, "Lightweight Directory Access 
   Protocol (Version 3)", RFC 2251, December 1997. 
    
   [RFC2425] T. Howes, M. Smith, "A MIME Content-Type for Directory 
   Information", RFC 2425, September 1998. 
 
 
8. Acknowledgments 
    
   Leslie Daigle of Verisign and Chris Weider of Microsoft provided 
   valuable comments on multiple versions of this document. 
    
   The engineering team for listing service requirements: 
    
         Chris Apple - DSI Consulting 
         Sanjay Jain - Oracle 
         Michael Mealling - Verisign 
         John Strassner - Intelliden 
         Sam Sun - CNRI 
         Mark Wahl - Sun Microsystems 
         Chris Weider - Microsoft 
    
   Paul Hoffman, for review and comment during his effort to implement 
   the primary directory schema listing service platform. 
    
   The members of the ietf-schema-reg@imc.org mailing list. 
    



 
 
Apple                  Expires - December 2003              [Page 13] 

Internet Draft  Directory Schema Listing Requirements       June 2003 
 
 
    
9. Author's Addresses 
    
   Chris Apple 
   DSI Consulting, Inc. 
   3601 West Hundred Road 
   Chester, VA 23831 
   USA 
    
   E-Mail: capple@dsi-consulting.net 
   Phone: +1 609 828 2987 





   This INTERNET-DRAFT expires on October 21, 1998.




































 
 
Apple                  Expires - December 2003              [Page 14]