





Network Working Group                                         Enke Chen
Internet Draft                                              Albert Tian
Intended status: Standards Track                          Cisco Systems
Expiration Date: September 10, 2009                       March 9, 2009
                                                       

          TTL-Based Security Option for the LDP Hello Message

                       draft-chen-ldp-ttl-02.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 10, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   To facilitate the deployment of the TTL-based security mechanism for


Chen & Tian                                                     [Page 1]





Internet Draft          draft-chen-ldp-ttl-02.txt             March 2009


   LDP, in this document we propose a new optional parameter for the LDP
   Hello Message that can be used by a LSR to indicate its support of
   the TTL-based mechanism.


1. Introduction

   The LDP [LDP] sessions established following the LDP basic discovery
   are between two directly connected LSRs. As a result, the TTL-based
   security mechanism described in [RFC3682] is fully applicable to such
   sessions.

   To deploy the TTL-based security mechanism, however, both LSRs
   involved in the LDP session must be coordinated and synchronized in
   setting and checking the TTL values. The coordination effort may not
   be trivial for a large network.

   To facilitate the deployment of the TTL-based security mechanism for
   LDP, in this document we propose a new optional parameter for the LDP
   Hello Message that can be used by a LSR to indicate its support of
   the TTL-based mechanism.


2. Specification of Requirements

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


3. Protocol Extension

   The new optional parameter for the LDP Hello Message is defined as
   the following:

       Optional Parameter: Support for TTL-based Security
                     Type: See the IANA Considerations section
                   Length: 0
                    U bit: 1
                    F bit: 0

   This optional parameter MAY be used by a LSR to indicate its support
   for the TTL-based security mechanism [RFC3682].  When both LSRs
   exchanging the LDP Hello Messages support the TTL-based security
   mechanism, the LSRs MUST follow the TTL-based security procedures for
   the LDP peer to be established between them. More specifically,

     o The TTL field of an outbound packet for the LDP session MUST
       be set to the maximum value (255).


Chen & Tian                                                     [Page 2]





Internet Draft          draft-chen-ldp-ttl-01.txt             March 2009


     o For an inbound packet to be accepted, the TTL field of the
       packet MUST be 255 if the TTL value is not decremented by
       the receiving LSR. Otherwise, the TTL field MUST be 254. The
       choice between these two values is implementation specific,
       and is a local matter.

   The optional parameter SHOULD NOT be included in a LDP targeted Hello
   Message sent by a LSR, and SHOULD be ignored in a targeted Hello
   Message received by a LSR.


4. IANA Considerations

   This document defines a new optional parameter for the LDP Hello
   Message. The type code needs to be assigned by IANA.


5. Security Considerations

   This extension to LDP does not change the underlying security
   properties with The Generalized TTL Security Mechanism (GTSM)
   [RFC5082]. This extension is only application to LDP peers as 
   a result of the LDP basic discovery. For LDP sessions resulting 
   from the LDP targeted discovery, the TCP MD5 is recommended by 
   [LDP].


6. Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Rajiv Asati and Carlos Pignataro 
   for their suggestions and discussions.


7. References


7.1. Normative References

   [LDP] L. Andersson, P. Doolan, N. Feldman, A. Fredette, and B.
   Thomas, "LDP Specification", RFC 3036, January 2001.

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.


7.2. Non-normative References
                                                            
   [RFC5082] V. Gill, J. Heasley, D. Meyer, P. Savola, C. Pignataro, 
   "The Generalized TTL Security Mechanism (GTSM)", RFC 5082, Oct 2007.


Chen & Tian                                                     [Page 3]





Internet Draft          draft-chen-ldp-ttl-02.txt             March 2009


8. Authors' Addresses

   Enke Chen
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   170 W. Tasman Dr.
   San Jose, CA 95134

   Email: enkechen@cisco.com


   Albert Tian
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   3700 Cisco Way,
   San Jose, CA 95134

   Email: altian@cisco.com




























Chen & Tian                                                     [Page 4]


