



Network Working Group                                        D. von Hugo
Internet-Draft                                          Deutsche Telekom
Intended status: Standards Track                             B. Sarikaya
Expires: 29 July 2022                                    25 January 2022


     The Need for New Authentication Methods for Internet of Things
                    draft-hsothers-iotsens-ps-01.txt

Abstract

   The document attempts to establish the need for new authentication
   methods in the Internet of Things (IoT) as a future networking area
   beyond 5G going into 6G for standardization.  Several scenarios are
   described where the current authentication protocols do not work or
   are insufficient.  Next we discuss a few new approaches such as
   Wireless LAN/6G sensing and LED light based which can be further
   explored.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 29 July 2022.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.











von Hugo & Sarikaya       Expires 29 July 2022                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication        January 2022


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Conventions and Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Need for New Authentication Models  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Academic Approaches to Sensing Based IoT Authentication . . .   5
   5.  IoT Authentication Protocols  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  IoT Authentication Problem  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     6.1.  Architectural and Procedural Issues for Future IP-based
           IoT-Authentication  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   9.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   10. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     10.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     10.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13

1.  Introduction

   Future networking to make full use of 5G capabilities or even
   resembling an evolution to beyond 5G will have to exploit a much more
   heterogeneous environment in terms of network and device connectivity
   technologies and applications.  In addition, ease of use for
   customers and human-independent operation of a multitude of devices
   and machines (things) has to be provided.

   Therefore current authentication models like 802.1X [IEEE802.1X]
   which are based on human intervention do not fit well.  Also this
   model does not scale well for the Internet of Things (IoT).

   We can summarize the use cases we are currently considering here:
   Authenticating the device that is playing a melody, or a person has
   just touched; authenticating devices, i.e. smart teapot with certain
   manifests, like blinking red and blue; authenticate the device when a
   camera is pointed at it; and the like [Henning].





von Hugo & Sarikaya       Expires 29 July 2022                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication        January 2022


   In looking for possible approaches for new authentication methods, we
   have identified a few which will be shortly introduced in this
   document.

   Detection and interpretation of audio signals by microphones and
   corresponding
   software has been under investigation since some time and
   can be achieved with high precision nowadays.  Coding of haptic
   information is currently under standardisation at IEEE P.1918
   [P1918].
   Using an objects' position to grant authentication could be achieved
   via geometrical information
   (as e.g., position and orientation of a trusted device like the
   camera) or via radio sensing.

   IEEE 802.11 has a project on Wireless LAN (WLAN sensing) and 802.11bf
   task group (TG) in charge of this project [BFSFD].  Use cases for
   802.11bf TG includes room sensing, i.e., presence detection, counting
   the number of people in the room, localization of active people,
   audio with user detection, gesture recognition at different ranges,
   device proximity detection, home appliance control.  There are also
   health care related use cases like breathing/heart rate detection,
   surveillance of persons of interest, building a 3D picture of an
   environment, in car sensing for driver sleepiness detection
   [BFUseCases].

   TGbf is also working on Specification Framework Document with an
   outline of each the functional blocks that will be a part of the
   final amendment like wireless LAN sensing procedure [BFSFD].  TGbf
   sensing is based on obtaining physical Channel State Information
   (CSI) measurements between a transmitter and receiver WLAN nodes,
   called stations (STA).  Using these measurements, presence of
   obstacles between a transmitter and receiver can be detected and
   tracked.  This way, using feature extraction and classification of
   artificial intelligence (AI), more higher level tasks like human
   activity recognition and object detection are available for
   authentication purposes, while corresponding authentication context
   information can be obtained through computation of phase differences,
   etc.

   TGbf Wi-Fi Sensing (SENS) is achieved by signaling between just an
   initiator and a responder.  TGbf may also define more effective
   collaborative SENS (in short, CSENS) where multiple SENS-enabled
   devices can collaborate as a group in an orderly fashion to capture
   additional information about the surrounding environment [Rest21].






von Hugo & Sarikaya       Expires 29 July 2022                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication        January 2022


2.  Conventions and Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   Sensing (SENS) is defined as the usage of received Wi-Fi signals from
   a Station (STA) to detect features (i.e., range, velocity, angular,
   motion, presence or proximity, gesture, etc.) of intended targets
   (i.e., object, human, animal, etc.) in a given environment (i.e.,
   house, office, room, vehicle, enterprise, etc.).

   Collaborative sensing (CSENS) defines the operation in which multiple
   SENS enabled devices can collaborate as a group in an orderly fashion
   to capture additional information about the surrounding environment
   and allow for more precise detection thus enabling a more reliable
   authentication.

   Multi-band sensing is defined as sensing using both sub-7-GHz Channel
   State Information (CSI) measurements that provide indication of
   relatively large motions and that can propagate through obstacles
   (e.g., walls) and 60-GHz Received Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI)
   measurements at mmWave that provide highly-directional information
   through the usage of beam forming toward a given receiver, but have
   small range due to the presence of blockers (e.g., walls).

3.  Need for New Authentication Models

   Aim of this document is to lay ground for the need for new
   authentication models in the framework of devices (e.g., machines in
   IoT communication) within a (wireless or wireline-based) network.
   Currently employed authentication models (such as e.g., 802.1X
   certificate model) is based on a human being using the machine and
   providing credentials (e.g., user name/password or a permitted
   digital certificate) to the authenticator.  Similarly, for user
   equipment (UE) to access a cellular network the device has to be
   equipped with a USIM and the user has to provide a secret key, i.e.,
   PIN (Personal Identification Number).  With the use case of massive
   IoT (mIoT) as foreseen, e.g., in 5G and with an increasing amount of
   devices within a household (smart home) and/or in the ownership of a
   customer (smart watch etc.) the need for an ease-of-use admission
   model arises.

   Focusing on corresponding procedures starting with detection
   (sensing) of a new device and subsequent mutual authenticating of the
   device by and to the network a set of potential technologies are



von Hugo & Sarikaya       Expires 29 July 2022                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication        January 2022


   identified and described to allow for analysis in terms of criteria
   as reliable operation (working), scalability, ease of use and
   convenience, security, and many more.  Sensing could be a basis for
   new authentication models yet to be found because sensing (together
   with intelligent interpretation using possibly neural network models)
   will allow the detection of the device playing a melody, blinking red
   and blue, being pointed at, or somebody just touched and the like.
   Furthermore, the method should be applicable to future generations of
   network and of users, upcoming new applications and devices, assuming
   that todays established standard procedures do not fulfill the
   requirements sufficiently.

   New authentication methods could leverage collaborative and multi-
   band sensing technologies to enable sensing with much higher
   precision and capacity using the state-of-art equipment.  Also
   equally important is the use of all artificial intelligence and
   neural networks research results developed by the academia.

4.  Academic Approaches to Sensing Based IoT Authentication

   The following list of literature on sensor data and WiFi sensing for
   securing and authenticating a user and a device shows the wide range
   of approaches and interest in this topic [Rest21].

   [Ma], [Wang], [Zhu], [Wang2], [Qian] provide a holistic overview on
   the evolution of Wi-Fi technology and on investigations in
   opportunistic applications of Wi-Fi signals for gesture and motion
   detection.

   [Henning2] is investigating geospatial access control for IoT.  There
   are attribute, role and identity based, time based and geospatial
   access control techniques.  Real-world IoT access control policies
   will be a combination of all three, leading to powerful access
   control techniques to use in practice such as in university campus.
   Such access control or authorization techniques will likely be used
   in conjunction with these new IoT Authentication models.

   Other notable literature includes [Al-Qaness] on the so-called
   device-free CSI-based Wi-Fi sensing mechanism, [Pahlavan] using Wi-Fi
   signals for gesture and motion detection as well as for
   authentication and security, [Lui] distinguishing between Line-of-
   Sight (LOS) and Non-Line-of-Sight (NLOS) conditions in case of
   obstacles appearing between the transmitter and the receiver [Guo]
   studying HuAc (Human Activity Recognition) as a combination of WiFi-
   based and Kinect-based activity recognition system, [FURQAN]
   analyzing the wireless sensing and radio environment awareness
   mechanisms, highlighting their vulnerabilities such as dependency of
   sensing modes on external signals, and provides solutions for



von Hugo & Sarikaya       Expires 29 July 2022                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication        January 2022


   mitigating them, e.g., the different threats to REM (radio
   environment mapping) and its consequences in a vehicular
   communication scenario.

   [Ma2] has studied reliable SENS algorithm for human and animal
   identification.  The aim is to make it resilient to spoofing and
   adverse channel conditions, i.e., presence of noise and interference
   from other technologies.

   [Restuccia] investigates data driven algorithms, neural networks,
   especially convolutional neural network (CNN) or digital signal
   processing (DSP) block to classify complex sensing phenomena.  Also
   [Liao] and [Liao2] proposed to enhance security of industrial
   wireless sensor networks (IWSNs) by neural network based algorithms
   for sensor nodes' authentication and implementations in IWSNs have
   shown that an improved convolution preprocessing neural network
   (CPNN)-based algorithm requires few computing resources and has
   extremely low latency, thus enabling a lightweight multi-node PHY-
   layer authentication.

   Further research on these and similar issues can be found in [Tian],
   [Bai] [Axente].

5.  IoT Authentication Protocols

   Since IoT applications cover a broad range of domains from smart
   cities, industry, and homes to personal (e.g., wearable) devices,
   including security and privacy sensitive areas as e-health, and can
   reach a huge number of entities the security requirements in terms of
   preventing unauthorized access to data are very high.  Therefore very
   robust authentication mechanisms have to be applied.  At the same
   time depending on the specific scenario a trade-off between resources
   as processing power and memory and security protocol complexity has
   to be considered.  Also a plethora of attack scenarios has to be in
   focus as well as scalability of the considered implicit and explicit
   hardware- and software-based authentication procedures.  [RFC8576]
   serves as a reference for details about IoT specific security
   considerations including the area of authentication and documents
   their specific security challenges, threat models, and possible
   mitigations.  Also the OAuth [RFC6749] protocol is referred to which
   extends traditional client-server authentication by providing a third
   party client with a token instead of allowing it to use the resource
   owner's credentials to access protected resources while such token
   resembles a different set of credentials than those of the resource
   owner.






von Hugo & Sarikaya       Expires 29 July 2022                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication        January 2022


6.  IoT Authentication Problem

   Most of the state-of-art identification techniques to authenticate
   the user use finger prints a.k.a. touch id and facial identification
   and they use detection by touch, accelerometer, and gyro sensors or
   cameras.  They are based on creating a signature, or the user's
   already stored password [Wang3].

   On the other hand to authenticate a device based on a set of
   characteristic parameters which should be flexibly chosen by the
   owner and subsequently made known to the authentication system will
   require a certain level of processing and storage capacity either
   within the local system components (e.g., the device itself and the
   wireless point of attachment or access point) and/or within the
   network (e.g., an edge cloud instance or a central data base).  The
   result of the detection process (e.g., radio wave analysis outcome in
   terms of parameters as modulation scheme, number of carriers, and
   fingerprinting) has to be compared with the required (correct)
   parameter values which are safely stored within the network
   components.  On all levels of handling these data, i.e., storage,
   processing, and transport via a communication network, the integrity
   of the content has to be preserved.  One should keep in mind, that
   any unintended authentication request should be prevented to minimize
   the risk of occasional attachment to networks and subsequent exposure
   to attack to sensitive user data.

6.1.  Architectural and Procedural Issues for Future IP-based IoT-
      Authentication

   Authentication for IoT may rely on a protocol such as 6LowPAN (Low-
   power Wireless Personal Area Network) which is defined for optimizing
   the efficient routing of IPv6 packets for resource constrained
   machine- type communication applications.


















von Hugo & Sarikaya       Expires 29 July 2022                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication        January 2022


   [RFC8995] on 'Bootstrapping Remote Secure Key Infrastructure' (BRSKI)
   deals with authentication of devices, including sending
   authorizations to the device as to what network they should join, and
   how to authenticate that network by specifying automated
   bootstrapping of an Autonomic Control Plane (ACP).  Secure Key
   Infrastructure (SKI) bootstrapping using manufacturer- installed
   X.509 certificates combined with a manufacturer's authorizing
   service, both online and offline, is called the Bootstrapping Remote
   Secure Key Infrastructure (BRSKI) protocol.  Bootstrapping a new
   device can occur when using a routable address and a cloud service,
   only link- local connectivity, or limited/disconnected networks and
   includes support for deployment models with less stringent security
   requirements.  When the cryptographic identity of the new SKI is
   successfully deployed to the device, completion of bootstrapping is
   achieved.  A locally issued certificate can be deployed to the device
   via the established secure connection as well.

   LED light based authentication attempts to authenticate hard to reach
   IoT devices using LED light indicator available on the device.  Here
   LED light is used as an out-of-band channel in addition to a wireless
   LAN peer-to-peer connection to the device using a smartphone over TLS
   connection which is not secured.  Smartphone initially obtains
   device's public key certificate.  Smartphone as the client requests
   certificate fingerprint over visible LED light channel.  Device
   transmits fingerprint by modulating LED.  Client receives data with
   camera and decodes.  Client compares TLS certificate fingerprint with
   received fingerprint to complete authentication.  LED light based
   authentication does not support multiple ways of getting the hash
   value from the device.  Although most devices have LED type of output
   leading to visible light communication, some devices have speaker
   type of output and not readily visible [Lins18], [Oden18].

   Note that LED light based authentication is similar to EAP-NOOB,
   Nimble out-of-band authentication for EAP [RFC9140] where Zigbee or
   802.15.4 channel is the main channel and blinking LED light is used
   as out-of-band channel.  In the main channel, the device is connected
   to the Internet over 802.15.4 channel to a controller (a laptop,
   acting as a Wi-Fi access point) which connects over the Internet to
   AAA server as EAP server where the user has an account.  In the OOB
   channel, the device is connected to a smartphone using blinking LED
   light and the smartphone is connected to AAA server using its 4G/5G
   air interface.  OOB channel enables the device to send critical data
   needed i.e. a secret nonce to EAP server.  EAP-NOOB protocol
   architecture includes RADIUS which is used to encode EAP messages and
   constrained Application Protocol, CoAP which is a simplified HTTP.
   CoAP is used in transporting the nonce.  EAP-NOOB requires AAA server
   and user account on the server, i.e. human interaction.




von Hugo & Sarikaya       Expires 29 July 2022                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication        January 2022


   When compared to a fully certificate-based or secure key
   infrastructure based authentication, however, a mechanism relying on
   WiFi sensing gesture detection does not require the user to know any
   key, identifier, or password for the device to be authenticated.  A
   pre-defined type of access to the device (e.g., physical,
   photographic or video representation, unique description in terms of
   parameters, etc.) shall be sufficient for authentication.

7.  IANA Considerations

   TBD.

8.  Security Considerations

   This document raises no new security concerns but tries to identify
   how to increase security in future IoT by discussing the issues of
   robust but easy to apply authentication mechanisms.

9.  Acknowledgements

   Discussions with Jan Janak, Henning Schulzrinne helped us improve the
   draft.

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

10.2.  Informative References

   [Al-Qaness]
              Al-Qaness, M.A.A., Abd Elaziz, M., Kim, S., Ewees, A.A.,
              Abbasi, A.A., Alhaj, Y.A., and A. Hawbani, "Channel State
              Information (CSI) from Pure Communication to Sense and
              Track Human Motion: A Survey", Sensors 2019, 19(15),
              3329 , July 2019.







von Hugo & Sarikaya       Expires 29 July 2022                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication        January 2022


   [Axente]   Axente, M.-S., Dobre, C., Ciobanu, R.-I., and R.
              Purnichescu-Purtan, "Gait Recognition as an Authentication
              Method for Mobile Devices", Sensors 2020, 20, 4110 , July
              2020.

   [Bai]      Bai, L., Zhu, L., Liu, J., Choi, J., and W. Zhang,
              "Physical Layer Authentication in Wireless Communication
              Networks: A Survey", Journal of Communications and
              Information Networks Vol.5, No.3, September 2020.

   [BFSFD]    IEEE, "Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers,
              IEEE P802.11 - TASK GROUP BF (WLAN SENSING) 11-21/0504r2
              "Specification Framework for TGbf"", July 2021.

   [BFUseCases]
              IEEE, "Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers,
              IEEE P802.11 - TASK GROUP BF (WLAN SENSING) 11-20/1712r2
              "WiFi Sensing Use Cases"", January 2021.

   [FURQAN]   Furqan, H.M., Solaija, M.S.J., Tuerkmen, H., and H.
              Arslan, "Wireless Communication, Sensing, and REM: A
              Security Perspective", IEEE Open Journal of the
              Communications Society Vol. 2 , January 2021.

   [Guo]      Guo, L., Wang, L., Liu, J., Zhou, W., and B. Lu, "HuAc:
              Human Activity Recognition Using Crowdsourced WiFi Signals
              and Skeleton Data", Hindawi Wireless Communications and
              Mobile Computing, Volume 2018 , February 2021.

   [Henning]  Schulzrinne, H., "Do We Still Need Wi-Fi in the Era of 5G
              (and 6G)?", February 2021.

   [Henning2] Jan Janak, Luoyao Hao and Henning Schulzrinne, ., "How do
              we program the Internet of Things at scale?", September
              2021.

   [I-D.irtf-t2trg-secure-bootstrapping-00]
              Sethi, M., Sarikaya, B., and D. Garcia-Carrillo, "Secure
              IoT Bootstrapping: A Survey", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-irtf-t2trg-secure-bootstrapping-00, 7 April
              2021, <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-irtf-t2trg-
              secure-bootstrapping-00.txt>.

   [IEEE802.11]
              IEEE, "IEEE Std. 802.11-2016", December 2016,
              <https://standards.ieee.org/findstds/
              standard/802.11-2016.html>.




von Hugo & Sarikaya       Expires 29 July 2022                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication        January 2022


   [IEEE802.1X]
              IEEE, "Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers,
              "802.1X - Port Based Network Access Control"", January
              2020.

   [Liao]     Liao, R.-F., Wen, H., Wu, J., Pan, F., Xu, A., Jiang, Y.,
              Xie, F., and M. Cao, "Deep-learning-based physical layer
              authentication for industrial wireless sensor networks",
              Sensors 2019, 19(11), 2440 , May 2019.

   [Liao2]    Liao, R.-F., Wen, H., Wen, H., Xie, F., Pan, F., Pan, F.,
              and F. Xie, "Multiuser Physical Layer Authentication in
              Internet of Things With Data Augmentation", IEEE Internet
              of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 2077-2088 , March
              2020.

   [Lins18]   Linssen, A., "Secure Authentication of Remote IoT Devices
              Using Visible Light Communication: Transmitter Design and
              Implementation", Columbia University , 2018,
              <https://www.cs.columbia.edu/~hgs/papers/
              Lins18_Secure.pdf>.

   [Lui]      Liu, J., Wang, L., Fang, J., Guo, L., Lu, B., and L. Shu,
              "Multi-Target Intense Human Motion Analysis and Detection
              Using Channel State Information", Sensors 2018, 18(10),
              3379 , October 2018.

   [Ma]       Ma, Y., Arshad, et al, S., and , "Location-and Person-
              Independent Activity Recognition with WiFi, Deep Neural
              Networks, and Reinforcement Learning,", 2021.

   [Ma2]      Ma, Y. and G. Zhou, et al, "WiFi Sensing with Channel
              State Information: A Survey,", ACM Computing Surveys
              (CSUR), , vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 1-36, 2019.

   [Oden18]   Odental, H., "Secure Authentication of Remote IoT Devices
              Using Visible Light Communication: Receiver Design and
              Implementation", Columbia University , 2018,
              <https://www.cs.columbia.edu/~hgs/papers/
              Oden18_Secure.pdf>.

   [P1918]    IEEE Standards Working Group 1918.1, "Tactile Internet",
              July 2016.

   [Pahlavan] Pahlavan, K. and P. Krishnamurthy, "Evolution and Impact
              of Wi Fi Technology and Applications: A Historical
              Perspective", Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part
              of Springer Nature 2020 , November 2020.



von Hugo & Sarikaya       Expires 29 July 2022                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication        January 2022


   [Qian]     Xian, K. and C. Wu, et al, "Widar: Decimeter-level Passive
              Tracking via Velocity Monitoring with Commodity WiFi,",
              Proc. of ACM MobiCom, , 2017.

   [Rest21]   Restuccia, F., "IEEE 802.11bf: Toward Ubiquitous Wi-Fi
              Sensing", arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.14918 7 pages, March
              2021.

   [Restuccia]
              Restuccia, F. and T. Melodia, "Deep Learning at the
              Physical Layer: System Challenges and Applications to 5G
              and Beyond,", IEEE Communications Magazine, , vol. 58,
              no. 10, pp. 58-64, 2020.

   [RFC6749]  Hardt, D., Ed., "The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework",
              RFC 6749, DOI 10.17487/RFC6749, October 2012,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6749>.

   [RFC8576]  Garcia-Morchon, O., Kumar, S., and M. Sethi, "Internet of
              Things (IoT) Security: State of the Art and Challenges",
              RFC 8576, DOI 10.17487/RFC8576, April 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8576>.

   [RFC8995]  Pritikin, M., Richardson, M., Eckert, T., Behringer, M.,
              and K. Watsen, "Bootstrapping Remote Secure Key
              Infrastructure (BRSKI)", RFC 8995, DOI 10.17487/RFC8995,
              May 2021, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8995>.

   [RFC9140]  Aura, T., Sethi, M., and A. Peltonen, "Nimble Out-of-Band
              Authentication for EAP (EAP-NOOB)", RFC 9140,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9140, December 2021,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9140>.

   [Tian]     Tian, Q., Lin, Y., Guo, X., Wang, J., AlFarraj, O., and A.
              Tolba, "An Identity Authentication Method of a MIoT Device
              Based on Radio Frequency (RF) Fingerprint Technology",
              Sensors 2020, 20(4), 1213 , February 2020.

   [Wang]     Wang, X. and C. Yang, et al, "TensorBeat: Tensor
              Decomposition for Monitoring Multiperson Breathing Beats
              with Commodity WiFi,", ACM Transactions on Intelligent
              Systems and Technology (TIST), , vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1-27,
              2017.

   [Wang2]    Wang, X. and C. Yang, et al, "PhaseBeat: Exploiting CSI
              Phase Data for Vital Sign Monitoring with Commodity WiFi
              Devices,", Proc. of IEEE ICDCS, , 2017.




von Hugo & Sarikaya       Expires 29 July 2022                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication        January 2022


   [Wang3]    Wang, H., Lymberopoulos, D., and J. Liu, "Sensor-Based
              User Authentication", EWSN 2015, LNCS 8965, 168 , 2015.

   [Zhu]      Xiao, et al, F., "R-TTWD: Robust device-free through-the-
              wall detection of moving human with WiFi,", IEEE Journal
              on Selected Areas in Communications, , vol. 35, no. 5,
              pp. 1090-1103, 2017.

Acknowledgements

Authors' Addresses

   Dirk von Hugo
   Deutsche Telekom
   Deutsche-Telekom-Allee 9
   64295 Darmstadt
   Germany

   Email: Dirk.von-Hugo@telekom.de


   Behcet Sarikaya

   Email: sarikaya@ieee.org



























von Hugo & Sarikaya       Expires 29 July 2022                 [Page 13]
