
Network Working Group                           Dipnarayan Guha (CHiPES)
Internet Draft                          Thambipillai Srikanthan (CHiPES)
Category: Informational                             

Expires: March 2006                                         October 2005


                 Protocol Requirements for mobility in LoWPAN

                draft-guha-lowpan-mobility-protocol-req-00.txt


 Status of this Memo


   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights.

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

 Abstract

   In this draft, we propose some protocol requirements for mobility 
   in LowPAN networks within the context of the IETF LowPAN working 
   group (IPv6 over IEEE 802.15.4). To achieve mobility in LowPAN 
   networks, there may be inter-domain movement of network elements 
   across different LowPAN domains or across domains that do not 
   comprise LowPAN autonomous systems. To address routing issues in
   inter-domain LowPAN networks that conform to fitting within a 
   single IEEE 802.15.4 frame, there are needs for collaborative 
   and distributed methodologies for route computation, information 
   storage and retrieval, and security issues in protocols targeted
   to LowPAN mobility. 

   This draft proposes some requirements of mobility in LowPAN 
   protocols from the perspective of protocol-independent metrics,
   algorithm complexities, scalability and security criteria. 
  


Guha, Srikanthan                Informational                   [Page 1]

Internet Draft  draft-guha-lowpan-mobility-protocol-00.txt  October 2005



Table of Contents

   1  Introduction ................................................   3
   2  Protocol requirements from the inter-domain LowPAN 
      architecture ................................................   3
   3  Inter-domain protocol support requirements for LowPAN 
      mobility ....................................................   3        
   4  High-level protocol requirements for mobility in LowPANs ....   4
   5  Security Considerations .....................................   4 
   6  Conclusion ..................................................   5 
   7  IANA Considerations .........................................   6
   8  Acknowledgements ............................................   6
   9  Intellectual Property Considerations ........................   6
   10 Normative References ........................................   6
   11 Informational References ....................................   7
   12 Authors' Addresses ..........................................   7
   13 Full Copyright Statement ....................................   8






































Guha, Srikanthan                Informational                   [Page 2]

Internet Draft  draft-guha-lowpan-mobility-protocol-00.txt  October 2005


1. Introduction

   For a distributed and collaborative model of the protocol, the design
   approach should take into consideration the intra and inter domain 
   networking scenarios. Some of these considerations should be: 

   a) Algorithm features of the protocol mechanism

   b) LowPAN node memory and processing CPU cycle costs of protocol

   c) Scalability of the algorithm and protocol metrics in large multi
     domain and multi-layer LowPAN networks 

   d) Limits of protocol metrics

   e) Genericness of the mechanism and easy integrability 


2. Protocol requirements from the inter-domain LowPAN architecture

   An idea of utilizing collaborative protocol models in LowPANs is 
   using the protocol to trace out the network architecture. In 
   realizing protocol driven architectures, load balancing through 
   mobility discovery is performed on the fly with the protocol finite 
   state machine execution on the participating LowPAN nodes. This 
   feature must be explored in the context of limited power and
   resource capabilities of the LowPAN nodes, as also the inherent
   lightweight capacities of the finite state machine sets. 


3. Inter-domain protocol support requirements for LowPAN mobility

   For scenarios involving dynamic provisioning of LowPAN services, 
   the mobility based applications request forwarding paths in case 
   of different topology deployments. The robustness can be thought 
   in the context of path reoptimization, so a quick change in the 
   topology must be accomodated with every domain area database 
   update. 

   This LowPAN path will have several observed metrics as constraints, 
   such as cost of path establishment and teardown, delay boundedness, 
   both delay bounded and cost optimized constraints in tandem for 
   path computation, etc. 

   One of the features in LowPAN node management would be the 
   co-existence of different collaborative and distributed algorithms 
   on the set of LowPAN nodes working in tandem, so that depending upon 
   the data that is processed, a particular algorithm is invoked. The 
   protocol would thus have to be distributed among the nodes in such a
   manner as to reduce CPU intensive computations and processing. A 
   possible solution would be to let the data that is under processing 
   in the set of LowPAN nodes determine the routing algorithm directly, 
   which would mean that the constraints imposed by the requirements of


Guha, Srikanthan                Informational                   [Page 3]

Internet Draft  draft-guha-lowpan-mobility-protocol-00.txt  October 2005



   the IETF LowPAN WG would directly determine the protocol state 
   machine algorithm and topology reoptimization, which in turns would
   drive the resulting network architecture.

   Some of the other inter-domain mobility issues could be: 

   a) Load sharing among different LowPAN paths across different
      domains

   b) Ability to modify these paths in different domain areas even when
      the corresponding managed entities (LowPAN nodes) lie on different,
      multiple domains

   c) Scalability, i.e. the number of managed entities (LowPAN nodes)
      entering/leaving the setup at any given time. 


4. High-level protocol requirements for mobility in LowPANs
 
   Some of the high level protocol requirements for mobility in LowPANs
   are:

   1. Capability to implement multiple LowPAN path calculation 
      algorithms/mechanisms and to select the appropriate algorithm/
      mechanism based on computation demands, taking into consideration
      the node resource constraints 

   2. Reliability in LowPAN node signaling. Ideally, this should be 
      derived from the data processed by the node sets as the node
      moves from one domain to the other. 

   3. Support of LowPAN mobility in a distributed manner. This would 
      automatically need to be derived from the domain partitions once 
      the LowPAN node peers are discovered. 

   4. Capability to calculate a LowPAN path by co-ordinating multiple 
      LowPAN node entitites. This can be done by assigning an input 
      data type associated with each LowPAN node that is set up through 
      the corresponding LowPAN node(s) peer entity. 
  
      An individual descriptor ID could be returned after each 
      computation is complete in the LowPAN node sets. If the 
      computation is successful, a random 32 bit number is generated 
      which holds the LowPAN computation status at that node. If 
      the computation fails, a value of -1 is generated in the 
      descriptor ID field which is communicated to the immediate LowPAN
      peer and automatic reoptimization of the link begins. This could 
      be done by the last stored random number for this node by the 
      neighboring LowPAN peer which it has discovered by auto stateless
      configurations earlier. This can also be used for distributed node
      authentications and authorizations for guaranteeing security. 



Guha, Srikanthan                Informational                   [Page 4]

Internet Draft  draft-guha-lowpan-mobility-protocol-00.txt  October 2005


   5. Detection of LowPAN support capability of the intermediate domain
      nodes. If the node does not support LowPAN capability, it should 
      just transparently pass through the protocol messages. There
      should be a provision of a temporary "make-and-break" finite state
      machine support on the node before actual communications take place. 

   6. Support of load balancing between multiple LowPAN paths on account
      of peer mobility.

   7. Capability to hold calculated LowPAN path information. This could
      be done dynamically for the LowPAN networks passing through a peer 
      node entity through the descriptor IDs. There should be mechanisms
      for information retrieval from these descriptor IDs corresponding 
      to the LowPAN node peers collaboratively in a mobile scenario.

   8. Capability to synchronize between different LowPAN networks that
      are managed as inter-domain peers across the mobile networks. 


5. Security Considerations

   As outlined in the scope of the LowPAN charter, one of the areas for
   investigation is routing protocols for multi-hop mesh networks and 
   the corresponding bootstrapping of devices. This protocol must be 
   capable of representing requests for computation from LowPAN nodes 
   including a full set of constraints, must be able to return multiple 
   paths with consideration of confidentiality and security, and must 
   itself be secure. The impact of the use of a protocol driven 
   architecture is relatively secure as the partitioned mobile network 
   domain areas are computed and distributed internal to the peer set 
   of nodes. An increase in inter-domain information flow does not 
   increase existing vulnerability to security attacks. If the protocol
   works by an invoked logic scheme local to each participating LowPAN
   node entity, then the finite state machine invoke can be brought 
   into play only when there is a significant change in the data profile 
   within a pre-assigned timeout period. More pointers should follow in
   defining the lightweight requirements of a secure protocol for
   mobility of LowPANs taking into consideration the resource requirements.

6.  Conclusion


   One of the ideas of this draft is enabling the support of an arbitrary 
   number of peer LowPAN nodes so far as application specific domains are 
   concerned. The nominal value of such nodes is a function of the 
   deployment scenario. Some metrics for evaluating a protocol for
   mobility support in LowPANs would be scalability, protocol cost of
   setup/teardown inter-domain paths, reliability and robustness. The 
   intent of this draft is to provide some general guidelines for protocol
   designs in mobility of LowPANS for inter-domain support, and is based 
   on a scenario where LowPAN path computation and security is triggered 
   by collaborative processing of network data profiles.

   This is the first draft, and the work is currently in progress. 


Guha, Srikanthan                Informational                   [Page 5]

Internet Draft  draft-guha-lowpan-mobility-protocol-00.txt  October 2005


7. IANA Considerations

   This document makes no requests for IANA action.  


8. Acknowledgements

   This work was supported by the Center for High Performance Embedded
   Systems (CHiPES), Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 
  

9. Intellectual Property Considerations

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights. Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this specification 
   can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.



10. Normative References


   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3667] Bradner, S., "IETF Rights in Contributions", BCP 78, 
   RFC 3667, February 2004.

   [RFC3668] Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF 
   Technology", BCP 79, RFC 3668, February 2004.


   [EUI64] "GUIDELINES FOR 64-BIT GLOBAL IDENTIFIER (EUI-64)
   REGISTRATION AUTHORITY", IEEE http://standards.ieee.org/
   regauth/oui/tutorials/EUI64.html.

   [I-D.ietf-ipv6-2461bis] Narten, T., "Neighbor Discovery for 
   IP version 6 (IPv6)",raft-ietf-ipv6-2461bis-03 (work in progress), 
   May 2005.

   [I-D.ietf-ipv6-rfc2462bis] Thomson, S., "IPv6 Stateless Address 
   Autoconfiguration", draft-ietf-ipv6-rfc2462bis-08 (work in 
   progress),May 2005.


Guha, Srikanthan                Informational                   [Page 6]

Internet Draft  draft-guha-lowpan-mobility-protocol-00.txt  October 2005


   [RFC2460] Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 
   6 (IPv6) Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998.

   [ieee802.15.4] IEEE Computer Society, "IEEE Std. 802.15.4-2003",
   October 2003.


11. Informational References

   [RFC3411]  Harrington, D., Presuhn, R., and B. Wijnen, "An
   Architecture for Describing Simple Network Management Protocol 
   (SNMP) Management Frameworks", STD 62, RFC 3411, December 2002.

   [RFC3561]  Perkins, C., Belding-Royer, E., and S. Das, "Ad hoc On-
   Demand Distance Vector (AODV) Routing", RFC 3561, July 2003.

   [RFC3626]  Clausen, T. and P. Jacquet, "Optimized Link State Routing
   Protocol (OLSR)", RFC 3626, October 2003.

   [RFC3684]  Ogier, R., Templin, F., and M. Lewis, "Topology
   Dissemination Based on Reverse-Path Forwarding (TBRPF)",RFC 3684, 
   February 2004.

   [RFC3756]  Nikander, P., Kempf, J., and E. Nordmark, "IPv6 Neighbor
   Discovery (ND) Trust Models and Threats", RFC 3756, May 2004.

   [6LoWPAN] Kushalnagar, N., Montenegro, G., "Overview, Assumptions, 
   Problem Statement and Goals",draft-ietf-6lowpan-problem-00, July 2005

   Montenegro, G., Kushalnagar, N., "Transmission of IPv6 packets over 
   IEEE 802.15.4 Networks", draft-ietf-6lowpan-format-00, July 2005

   Chakrabarti, S., "LowPan Mobility Requirements and Goals", 
   draft-chakrabarti-mobopts-lowpan-req-00, July 2005

   [SOAP] "SOAP", W3C http://www.w3c.org/2000/xp/Group/.

   [liaison] "LIASONS", IETF http://www.ietf.org/liaisonActivities.html


12. Authors' Addresses

    Dipnarayan Guha
    Center for High Performance Embedded Systems (CHiPES)
    Nanyang Technological University
    50 Nanyang Drive, Research Techno Plaza, 3rd. Storey, Border X Block
    Singapore 637553
    Phone: +65-67906643
    Email: guha@ntu.edu.sg

    Thambipillai Srikanthan
    Center for High Performance Embedded Systems (CHiPES)
    Nanyang Technological University
    50 Nanyang Drive, Research Techno Plaza, 3rd. Storey, Border X Block
    Singapore 637553
    Phone: +65-67906638
    Email: astsrikan@ntu.edu.sg
    


Guha, Srikanthan                Informational                   [Page 7]

Internet Draft  draft-guha-lowpan-mobility-protocol-00.txt  October 2005


13. Full Copyright Statement

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  All Rights Reserved. 
    This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
    contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
    retain all their rights.

    This document and translations of it MAY be copied and furnished to 
    others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
    or assist in its implementation MAY be prepared, copied, published 
    and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, 
    provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
    included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
    document itself MAY not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
    the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
    Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
    developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
    copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process MUST be followed, 
    or as required to translate it into languages other than English. 

    The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
    revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.    

    This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
    "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
    OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
    ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
    INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
    INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
    WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
























Guha, Srikanthan                Informational                   [Page 8]

Internet Draft  draft-guha-lowpan-mobility-protocol-00.txt  October 2005