

   MobOpts Research Group                             Thomas C. Schmidt 
   Internet Draft                                           HAW Hamburg 
                                                     Matthias Waehlisch 
   Expires: April 2006                                      FHTW Berlin 
                                                           October 2005 
    
    
              Multicast Mobility in MIPv6: Problem Statement 
                  <draft-schmidt-mobopts-mmcastv6-ps-00.txt> 
    
IPR Statement 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
   
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   This document is a submission of the IRTF MobOpts RG. Comments should 
   be directed to the MobOpts RG mailing list, mobopts@irtf.org. 
    
    
    
Abstract 
    
   In this document we discuss mobility extensions to current IP layer 
   multicast solutions. Problems arising from mobile group communication 
   in general, in the case of multicast listener mobility and for mobile 
   Any Source Multicast as well as Source Specific Multicast senders are 
   documented subsequently. The principal approaches to multicast 
   mobility are introduced in brief. 
    
    

 
                         
Schmidt, Waehlisch       Expires - April 2006                 [Page 1] 
                               MMCASTv6-PS                   October 2005 
 
 
Table of Contents 
    

   1. Introduction and Motivation....................................2 

   2. Problem Description............................................3 
      2.1 Generals...................................................3 
      2.2 Multicast Listener Mobility................................5 
      2.3 Multicast Source Mobility..................................5 
         2.3.1 Any Source Multicast Mobility.................. ......5 
         2.3.2 Source Specific Multicast Mobility.............. .....6 

   3. Solutions......................................................7 

   4. Security Considerations........................................7 

   5. IANA Considerations............................................8 

   6. References.....................................................8 

   Acknowledgments..................................................10 

   Author's Addresses...............................................10 

   Intellectual Property Statement..................................10 

   Copyright Notice.................................................11 

   Disclaimer of Validity...........................................11 

   Acknowledgement..................................................11 

    
 
     
 
1. Introduction and Motivation 
    
   Group communication forms an integral building block of a wide 
   variety of applications, ranging from public content distribution and 
   streaming over voice and video conferencing, collaborative 
   environments and gaming up to the self-organization of distributed 
   systems. Its support by network layer multicast will be needed, 
   whenever globally distributed, scalable, serverless or instantaneous 
   communication is required. As broadband media delivery more and more 
   emerges to be a typical mass scenario, scalability and bandwidth 
   efficiency of multicast routing continuously gains relevance. 
   Internet multicasting will be of particular importance to mobile 

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch       Expires - April 2006                 [Page 2] 
                               MMCASTv6-PS                   October 2005 
 
 
   environments, where users commonly share frequency bands of limited 
   capacity. The rapidly increasing mobile reception of 'infotainment' 
   streams may soon require a wide deployment of mobile multicast 
   services. 
    
   The fundamental approach to deal with mobility in IPv6 [2] is stated 
   in the Mobile IPv6 RFCs [3,4]. MIPv6 [3] only roughly treats 
   multicast mobility, in a pure remote subscription approach or through 
   bi-directional tunneling via the Home Agent. Whereas the remote 
   subscription suffers from slow handovers, as it relies on multicast 
   routing to adapt to handovers, bi-directional tunneling introduces 
   inefficient overheads and delays due to triangular forwarding. 
   Therefore both approaches cannot be considered solutions for a 
   deployment on large scale. A mobile multicast service for a future 
   Internet should admit 'close to optimal' routing at predictable and 
   limited cost, robustness combined with a service quality compliant to 
   real-time media distribution.  
    
   Intricate multicast routing procedures, though, are not easily 
   extensible to comply with mobility requirements. Any client 
   subscribed to a group while in motion, requires delivery branches to 
   pursue its new location; any mobile source requests the entire 
   delivery tree to adapt to its changing positions. Significant effort 
   has been already invested in protocol designs for mobile multicast 
   receivers. Only limited work has been dedicated to multicast source 
   mobility, which poses the more delicate problem [21]. 
    
   In multimedia conference scenarios each member commonly operates as 
   receiver and as sender for multicast based group communication. In 
   addition, real-time communication such as voice or video over IP 
   places severe temporal requirement on mobility protocols: Seamless 
   handover scenarios need to limit disruptions or delay to less than 
   100 ms. Jitter disturbances are not to exceed 50 ms. Note that 100 ms 
   is about the duration of a spoken syllable in real-time audio. 
    
   It is the aim of this document, to specify the problem scope for a 
   multicast mobility management as to be refined in future work. The 
   attempt is made to subdivide the various challenges according to 
   their originating aspects and to present existing proposals for 
   solution, as well as major bibliographic references. 
    
    
2. Problem Description 
    
2.1 Generals 
    
   Multicast mobility must be considered as a generic term, which 
   subsumes a collection of quite distinct functions. At first, 
   multicast communication divides into Any Source Multicast (ASM) [5] 
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch       Expires - April 2006                 [Page 3] 
                               MMCASTv6-PS                   October 2005 
 
 
   and Source Specific Multicast (SSM) [6,7]. At second, multicast 
   communication is asymmetric, so the roles of senders and receivers 
   need distinction. Both individually may be mobile. Their interaction 
   is facilitated by a multicast routing function s.a. DVMRP [8], PIM-
   SM/SSM [9,10] or CBT [11] and the multicast listener discovery 
   protocol [12,13]. 
    
   Any multicast mobility solution must account for all of these 
   functional blocks. It should enable seamless continuity of multicast 
   sessions when moving from one IPv6 subnet to another. It should 
   preserve the multicast nature of packet distribution and approximate 
   optimal routing. It should support per flow handover for multicast 
   traffic, as properties and designations of flows may be of individual 
   kind. 
    
   Multicast routing dynamically adapts to session topologies, which 
   then may change under mobility. However, routing convergence arrives 
   at a time scale of seconds, even minutes and is far too slow to 
   support seamless handovers for interactive or real-time media 
   sessions. The actual temporal behavior strongly depends on the 
   routing protocol in use and on the geometry of the current 
   distribution tree. A mobility scheme that arranges for adjustments, 
   i.e. partial changes or full reconstruction, of multicast trees is 
   forced to make provision for time buffers sufficient for protocol 
   convergence. Special attention is needed with a possible rapid 
   movement of the mobile node, as this may occur at much higher rates 
   than compatible with protocol convergence.  
    
   IP layer multicast packet distribution is an unreliable service, 
   which is bound to connectionless transport protocols. Packet loss 
   thus will not be handled in a predetermined fashion. Mobile multicast 
   handovers should not cause significant packet drops. Due to 
   statelessness the bi-casting of multicast flows does not cause 
   foreseeable degradations of the transport layer.  
    
   Group addresses in general are location transparent, even though 
   there are proposals to embed unicast prefixes or Rendezvous Point 
   addresses [14]. Source addresses contributing to a multicast session 
   are interpreted by the routing infrastructure and by receiver 
   applications, which frequently are source address aware. Multicast 
   therefore inherits the mobility address duality problem for source 
   addresses, being a logical node identifier (HoA) at the one hand and 
   a topological locator (CoA) at the other. 
    
   Multicast sources in general operate decoupled from their receivers 
   in the following sense: A multicast source submits data to a group of 
   unknown receivers, thus operating without any feedback channel. It 
   neither has means to inquire on properties of its delivery trees, nor 
   will it be able to learn about the state of its receivers. In the 
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch       Expires - April 2006                 [Page 4] 
                               MMCASTv6-PS                   October 2005 
 
 
   event of an inter-tree handover, a mobile multicast source therefore 
   is vulnerable to loosing receivers without taking notice. 
    
2.2 Multicast Listener Mobility 
    
   A mobile multicast listener entering a new IP subnet may encounter 
   either one of the following conditions: The new network may not be 
   multicast enabled or the specific multicast service in use may be 
   unsupported or prohibited. Alternatively the requested multicast 
   service may be supported and enabled in the new network, but the 
   multicast groups under subscription may not be forwarded to it. Then 
   current distribution trees for the desired groups may reside at large 
   routing distance. It may as well occur that some or all groups under 
   subscription of the mobile node are received by one or several local 
   group members at the instance of arrival and that multicast streams 
   natively flow. 
    
   The problem of achieving seamless multicast listener handovers is 
   thus threefold: 
     o Ensure multicast reception even in visited networks without  
       appropriate multicast support. 
     o Expedite primary multicast forwarding to comply with a seamless 
       timescale at handovers. 
     o Realize native multicast forwarding whenever applicable to  
       preserve network resources and avoid data redundancy. 
    
   Additional aspects related to infrastructure remain. In changing its 
   point of attachment a mobile receiver may not have enough time to 
   leave groups in the previous network. Also, packet duplication and 
   disorder may result from the change of topology.  
    
2.3 Multicast Source Mobility 
    
2.3.1 Any Source Multicast Mobility 
    
   A node submitting data to an ASM group defines the root of either a 
   shared or source specific delivery tree. Beside root location 
   forwarding along this delivery tree will be bound to a topological 
   network address due to reverse path forwarding (RPF) checks. A mobile 
   multicast source moving away is solely enabled to either inject data 
   into a previously established delivery tree by using its previous 
   topologically correct source address, or to (re-)define a multicast 
   distribution tree compliant to its new location. In pursuing the 
   latter the mobile sender will have to proceed without control of the 
   new tree construction due to decoupling of sender and receivers. 
    
   A mobile multicast source consequently must meet address transparency 
   at two layers: In order to comply with RPF checks, it has to use an 
   address within the IPv6 basic header's source field, which is in 
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch       Expires - April 2006                 [Page 5] 
                               MMCASTv6-PS                   October 2005 
 
 
   topological accordance with the employed multicast distribution tree. 
   For application transparency the logical node identifier, commonly 
   the HoA, must be presented as packet's source address to the socket 
   layer at the receiver side.  
    
   Conforming to address transparency and temporal handover constraints 
   will be the key problem for any route optimizing mobility solution. 
   Additional issues arrive from possible packet loss and from multicast 
   scoping. A mobile source away from home must attend scoping 
   restrictions which arise from its home and its visited location [3]. 
    
   In presence of inter- domain multicast routing a change of address 
   must trigger the exchange of a new multicast source record. 
    
2.3.2 Source Specific Multicast Mobility 
    
   Fundamentally Source Specific Multicast has been designed for 
   changeless addresses of multicast senders. Source addresses in client 
   subscription to SSM groups are directly used for route 
   identification. Any SSM subscriber is thus forced to know the 
   topological address of its group contributors. SSM source 
   identification invalidates, when source addresses change under 
   mobility.  
    
   Consequently source mobility for SSM packet distribution introduces a 
   significant conceptual complexity in addition to the problems of 
   mobile ASM. As a listener is subscribed to an (S,G) channel 
   membership and as routers have established an (S,G)-state shortest 
   path tree rooted at source S, any change of source addresses under 
   mobility requests for state updates at all routers and all receivers. 
   A moving source would have to update its change of CoA with all 
   listeners, which subsequently had to newly subscribe and initiate 
   corresponding source-specific trees. As the principle multicast 
   decoupling of a sender from its receivers likewise holds for SSM, the 
   need for client update turns into a severe problem. 
    
   An SSM listener subscribing to or excluding any specific multicast 
   source, may want to rely on the correctness of network operations. 
   The SSM design permits trust in equivalence to the correctness of 
   unicast routing tables. Any SSM mobility solution should preserve 
   this degree of confidence. Binding updates for SSM sources thus 
   should have to prove address correctness in the unicast routing 
   sense, which is equivalent to binding update security with a 
   correspondent node in MIPv6 [3]. 
    
   All of the above severely add complexity to a robust SSM mobility 
   solution, which should converge to optimal routes and, for the sake 
   of efficiency, should avoid data encapsulation, as well. Like in ASM 
   handover delays are to be considered critical. The distance of 
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch       Expires - April 2006                 [Page 6] 
                               MMCASTv6-PS                   October 2005 
 
 
   subsequent points of attachment, the ’step size’ of the mobile, may 
   serve as an appropriate measure of complexity.  
    
   Finally, Source Specific Multicast has been designed as a light-
   weight approach to group communication. In adding mobility 
   management, it is desirable to preserve the principle leanness of SSM 
   by minimizing additional signaling overheads. 
    
3. Solutions 
    
   Three approaches to mobility in Any Source Multicast are commonly 
   around:  
    
    o Bi-directional Tunnelling guides the mobile node to tunnel all 
   multicast data via its home agent. This principle multicast solution 
   hides all movement and results in static multicast trees. It 
   transparently may be employed by mobile multicast sources, on the 
   price of triangular routing and possibly significant performance 
   degradations due to widely spanned data tunnels. 
    
    o Remote Subscription forces the mobile node to re-initiate 
   multicast distribution subsequent to handover, using its current 
   Care-of Address. This approach of tree discontinuation relies on 
   multicast dynamics to adapt to network changes. It not only results 
   in rigorous service disruption, but leads to mobility driven changes 
   of source addresses, and thus disregards session persistence under 
   multicast source mobility. 
    
    o Agent-based solutions attempt to balance between the previous two 
   mechanisms. Static agents typically act as local tunnelling proxies, 
   allowing for some inter-agent handover while the mobile node moves 
   away. A decelerated inter-tree handover, i.e. tree walking, will be 
   the outcome of agent-based multicast mobility, where some extra 
   effort is needed to sustain session persistence through address 
   transparency of mobile sources. 
    
   There are proposals of agent based approaches compliant to the 
   unicast real-time mobility infrastructure of Fast MIPv6 [15], the M-
   FMIPv6 [16], and of Hierarchical MIPv6 [17], the M-HMIPv6 [18], and 
   to context transfer [19]. An approach based on dynamically negotiated 
   inter-agent handovers is presented in [20]. 
    
   It should be noted that none of the above approaches addresses SSM 
   source mobility, except the bi-directional tunnelling. 
    
4. Security Considerations 
    
   This document discusses multicast extensions to mobility. Security 
   issues arise from source address binding updates, specifically in the 
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch       Expires - April 2006                 [Page 7] 
                               MMCASTv6-PS                   October 2005 
 
 
   case of source specific multicast. Threats of hijacking unicast 
   sessions will result from any solution jointly operating binding 
   updates for unicast and multicast sessions. Future solutions must 
   address the security implications. 
    
5. IANA Considerations 
    
   There are no IANA considerations introduced by this draft. 
    
    
6. References 
 
Normative References 
                     
   1  Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF Technology", 
      BCP 79, RFC 3979, March 2005. 
    
   2  Hinden, R. and Deering, S. "Internet Protocol Version 6 
      Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998. 
    
   3  Johnson, D.B., Perkins, C., Arkko, J. "Mobility Support in IPv6", 
      RFC 3775, June 2004. 
    
   4  Arkko, J., Devarapalli, V., Dupont, F "Using IPsec to Protect 
      Mobile IPv6 Signaling Between Mobile Nodes and Home Agents", RFC 
      3776, June 2004. 
    
   5  S. Deering "Host Extensions for IP Multicasting", RFC 1112, August 
      1989. 
    
   6  S. Bhattacharyya "An Overview of Source-Specific Multicast (SSM)", 
      RFC 3569, July 2003. 
    
   7  H. Holbrook, B. Cain "Source-Specific Multicast for IP", draft-
      ietf-ssm-arch-07.txt (work in progress), October 2005. 
    
   8  D. Waitzman, C. Partridge, S.E. Deering "Distance Vector Multicast 
      Routing Protocol", RFC 1075, November 1988. 
    
   9  D. Estrin, D. Farinacci, A. Helmy, D. Thaler, S. Deering, M. 
      Handley, V. Jacobson, C. Liu, P. Sharma, L. Wei "Protocol 
      Independent Multicast-Sparse Mode (PIM-SM): Protocol 
      Specification", RFC 2362, June 1998. 
    
   10 B. Fenner, M. Handley, H. Holbrook, I. Kouvelas: "Protocol 
      Independent Multicast - Sparse Mode PIM-SM): Protocol 
      Specification(Revised)", draft-ietf-pim-sm-v2-new-11.txt (work in 
      progress), October 2004. 

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch       Expires - April 2006                 [Page 8] 
                               MMCASTv6-PS                   October 2005 
 
 
                                                                         
    
   11 A. Ballardie " Core Based Trees (CBT version 2) Multicast 
      Routing", RFC 2189, September 1997. 
    
   12 S. Deering, W. Fenner and B. Haberman "Multicast Listener 
      Discovery (MLD) for IPv6", RFC 2710, October 1999. 
    
   13 R. Vida and L. Costa (Eds.) "Multicast Listener Discovery Version 
      2 (MLDv2) for IPv6", RFC3810, June 2004. 
    
   14 P. Savola, B. Haberman "Embedding the Rendezvous Point (RP) 
      Address in an IPv6 Multicast Address", RFC 3956, November 2004. 
    
   15 Koodli, R. "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6", RFC 4068, July 2004. 
    
   16 Suh, K., Kwon, D.-H., Suh, Y.-J. and Park, Y. "Fast Multicast 
      Protocol for Mobile IPv6 in the fast handovers environments", 
      Internet Draft - (work in progress, expired), February 2004. 
    
   17 Soliman, H., Castelluccia, C., El-Malki, K., Bellier, L. 
      "Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 mobility management", RFC 4140, August 
      2005. 
    
   18 Schmidt, T.C. and Waehlisch, M. "Seamless Multicast Handover in a 
      Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 Environment(M-HMIPv6)", draft-schmidt-
      waehlisch-mhmipv6-03.txt, (work in progress), April 2005. 
    
   19 Jonas, K. and Miloucheva, I. "Multicast Context Transfer in mobile 
      IPv6", draft-miloucheva-mldv2-mipv6-00.txt, (work in progress), 
      June 2005. 
    
   20 Zhang, H. et al "Mobile IPv6 Multicast with Dynamic Multicast 
      Agent" draft-zhang-mipshop-multicast-dma-01.txt, (work in 
      progress), September 2005. 
    
Informative References 
    
   21 Romdhani, I., Kellil, M., Lach, H.-Y. et. al. "IP Mobile 
      Multicast: Challenges and Solutions", IEEE Comm. Surveys, 6, 1, 
      2004. 
    
   22 Jannetau, C., Tian, Y., Csaba, S. et al "Comparison of Three  
      Approaches Towards Mobile Multicast", IST Mobile Summit 2003,  
      Aveiro, Portugal, 16-18 June 2003, online http://www.comnets.rwth- 
      aachen.de/~o_drive/publications/ist-summit-2003-IPMobileMulticast- 
      paperv2.0.pdf. 
    

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch       Expires - April 2006                 [Page 9] 
                               MMCASTv6-PS                   October 2005 
 
 
   23 Mieghem, P., Hooghiemstra, G., Hofstad, R. "On the Efficiency of  
      Multicast", Transactions on Networking, 9, 6, pp. 719 - 732,  
      December 2001. 
    
   24 Schmidt, T.C. and Waehlisch, M. "Predictive versus Reactive -  
      Analysis of Handover Performance and Its Implications on IPv6 and  
      Multicast Mobility", Telecommunication Systems, 30:1/2/3, Springer  
      2005, in print. 
    
   25 Jelger, C., Noel, T. "Multicast for Mobile Hosts in IP Networks: 
      Progress and Challenges", IEEE Wireless Comm., pp 58-64, Oct. 
      2002. 
    
Acknowledgments 
    
   The authors would like to thank Mark Palkow (DaViKo GmbH) and Hans L. 
   Cycon (FHTW Berlin) for valuable discussions and a joyful 
   collaboration. 
    
    
    
Author's Addresses 
    
   Thomas C. Schmidt 
   HAW Hamburg, Dept. Informatik 
   Berliner Tor 7 
   D-20099 Hamburg 
   Phone: +49-40-42875-8157 
   Email: Schmidt@informatik.haw-hamburg.de 
     
    
   Matthias Waehlisch 
   FHTW Berlin, HRZ 
   Treskowallee 8 
   D-10318 Berlin 
   Email: mw@fhtw-berlin.de 
    
    
    
    
Intellectual Property Statement 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights. Information 

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch       Expires - April 2006                [Page 10] 
                               MMCASTv6-PS                   October 2005 
 
 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 
    
Copyright Notice 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005). This document is subject 
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
    
Disclaimer of Validity 
    
   "This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE 
   INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE." 
    
Acknowledgement 
    
   Funding of the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society 
    












 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch       Expires - April 2006                [Page 11] 

