
    
    
      Network Working Group                                       D. Black 
      Internet Draft                                       EMC Corporation 
      Document: draft-black-snmp-uri-08.txt                  K. McCloghrie 
      Expires: April 2005                                    Cisco Systems 
                                                          J. Schoenwaelder 
                                           International University Bremen 
                                                              October 2004 
       
       
               Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) Scheme for the 
                  Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) 
       
       
   Status of this Memo 
       
      By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable 
      patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been 
      disclosed, or will be disclosed, and any of which I become aware 
      will be disclosed, in accordance with RFC 3668. 
       
      Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
      Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
      other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
      Drafts. 
       
      Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
      months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
      documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
      as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
      progress." 
       
      The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
           http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
       
      The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
           http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
       
    Abstract 
       
      SNMP and the Internet Standard Management Framework are widely 
      used for management of communication devices, creating needs to 
      specify SNMP access (including access to SNMP MIB object 
      instances) from non-SNMP management environments.  For example, 
      when out-of-band IP management is used via a separate management 
      interface (e.g., for a device that does not support in-band IP 
      access) there is a need for a uniform way to indicate how to 
      contact the device for management.  URIs fit this need well, as 
      they allow a single text string to indicate a management access 
      communication endpoint for a wide variety of IP-based protocols.  
    
    
   Black                    Expires - April 2005                 [Page 1] 




                            URI Scheme for SNMP             October 2004 
    
    
      This document defines a URI scheme so that SNMP can be designated 
      as the protocol used for management.  The scheme also allows a URI 
      to designate one or more MIB object instances. 
    
   Conventions used in this document 
       
      The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL 
      NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" 
      in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119]. 
       
   Table of Contents 
       
      1. Introduction...................................................2 
      2. Syntax of an SNMP URI..........................................3 
         2.1 Relative Reference Considerations..........................4 
      3. Semantics and Operations.......................................5 
         3.1 SNMP Service URIs..........................................5 
         3.2 SNMP Object URIs...........................................5 
             3.2.1 SNMP Object URI Data Access.........................7 
         3.3 OID Groups in SNMP URIs....................................8 
         3.4 Interoperability Considerations............................9 
      4. Examples......................................................10 
      5. Security Considerations.......................................11 
      6. IANA Considerations...........................................12 
      7. Change History (to be deleted prior to RFC publication).......12 
      8. Normative References..........................................12 
      9. Informative References........................................13 
      10. Acknowledgments..............................................14 
      11. Copyright Notice and Disclaimers.............................14 
      12. Author's Addresses...........................................15 
    
   1. Introduction 
       
      SNMP and the Internet-Standard Management Framework were 
      originally devised to manage IP devices via in-band means where 
      management access is primarily via the same interface(s) used to 
      send and receive IP traffic.  SNMP's wide adoption has resulted in 
      its use to manage communication devices that do not support in-
      band IP access (e.g., Fibre Channel devices); a separate out-of-
      band IP interface is often used for management.  URIs provide a 
      convenient way to locate that interface and specify the protocol 
      to be used for management; one possible scenario is for an in-band 
      query to return a URI that indicates how the device is managed.  
      This document specifies a URI scheme to permit SNMP (including a 
      specific SNMP context) to be designated as the management protocol 
      by such a URI.  This scheme also allows a URI to refer to specific 
      object instances within an SNMP MIB. 
       

    
    
   Black                    Expires - April 2005                 [Page 2] 




                            URI Scheme for SNMP             October 2004 
    
    
      For a detailed overview of the documents that describe the current 
      Internet-Standard Management Framework, please refer to section 7 
      of [RFC 3410]. 
        
   2. Syntax of an SNMP URI 
       
      An SNMP URI has the following ABNF [RFC 2234] syntax, based on the 
      ABNF syntax rules for userinfo, host, port, and (path) segment in 
      [rfc2396bis] and the ABNF syntax rule for HEXDIG in [RFC 2234]: 
       
         snmp-uri        = "snmp://" snmp-authority [ context [ oids ]] 
       
         snmp-authority  = [ securityName "@" ] host [ ":" port ] 
         securityName    = userinfo    ; SNMP securityName 
       
         context         = "/" contextName [ ";" contextEngineID ] 
         contextName     = segment     ; SNMP contextName 
         contextEngineID = 1*(HEXDIG HEXDIG)    ; SNMP contextEngineID 
       
         oids            = "/" ( oid / oid-group ) [ suffix ] 
         oid-group       = "(" oid *( "," oid ) ")" 
         oid             = < as specified by [RFC 3061] > 
         suffix          = "+" / ".*" 
       
      The userinfo and (path) segment ABNF rules are reused for syntax 
      only.  In contrast, host and port have both the syntax and 
      semantics specified in [rfc2396bis].  See [RFC 3411] for the 
      semantics of securityName, contextEngineID, and contextName. 
       
      The snmp-authority syntax matches the URI authority syntax in 
      section 3.2 of [rfc2396bis] with the additional restriction that 
      (when present) the userinfo component of an authority MUST be an 
      SNMP securityName.  If the securityName is empty or not given, the 
      entity making use of an SNMP URI is expected to know what SNMP 
      securityName to use if one is required.  Inclusion of 
      authentication information (e.g., passwords) in URIs has been 
      deprecated (see Section 3.2.1 of [rfc2396bis]), so any secret or 
      password required for SNMP access must be obtained via other 
      means.  If the port is empty or not given, port 161 is assumed. 
       
      If the contextName is empty or not given, the zero-length string 
      ("") is assumed, as it is the default SNMP context.  An SNMP 
      contextEngineID is a variable-format binary element that is 
      usually discovered by an SNMP manager. An SNMP URI encodes a 
      contextEngineID as hexadecimal digits corresponding to a sequence 
      of bytes.  If the contextEngineID is empty or not given, the 
      context engine is to be discovered by querying the SNMP agent at 
      the specified host and port; see Section 3.1 below.  The 
      contextEngineID component of the URI SHOULD be present if more 
    
    
   Black                    Expires - April 2005                 [Page 3] 




                            URI Scheme for SNMP             October 2004 
    
    
      than one context engine at the designated host and port supports 
      the designated context. 
       
      An SNMP URI that designates the default SNMP context ("") MAY end 
      with the "/" character that introduces the contextName component.  
      An SNMP URI MUST NOT end with the "/" character that introduces an 
      oid or oid-group component, as the empty string is not a valid OID 
      for SNMP. 
       
      The encoding rules specified in [rfc2396bis] MUST be used for SNMP 
      URIs, including the use of percent encoding ("%" followed by two 
      hex digits) as needed to represent characters defined as reserved 
      in [rfc2396bis] and any characters not allowed in a URI.  SNMP 
      permits any UTF-8 character to be used in a securityName or 
      contextName; all multi-byte UTF-8 characters in an SNMP URI MUST 
      be percent encoded as specified in Sections 2.1 and 2.5 of 
      [rfc2396bis].  These requirements are a consequence of reusing the 
      ABNF syntax rules for userinfo and segment from [rfc2396bis]. 
       
      SNMP URIs will generally be short enough to avoid implementation 
      string length limits (e.g., that may occur at 255 characters).  
      Such limits may be a concern for large OID groups; relative 
      references to URIs (see Section 4.2 of [rfc2396bis]) may provide 
      an alternative in some circumstances. 
       
      Use of IP addresses in SNMP URIs is acceptable in situations where 
      dependence on availability of DNS service is undesirable or must 
      be avoided; otherwise IP addresses should not be used (see [RFC 
      1900] for further explanation). 
       
   2.1 Relative Reference Considerations 
       
      Use of the SNMP default context (zero-length string) within an 
      SNMP URI can result in a second instance of "//" in the URI, e.g.: 
       
          snmp://<host>//<oid> 
       
      This is allowed by [rfc2396bis] syntax; if a URI parser does not 
      handle the second "//" correctly, the parser is broken and needs 
      to be fixed.  This example is important because use of the SNMP 
      default context in SNMP URIs is expected to be common. 
       
      On the other hand, the second occurrence of "//" in an absolute 
      SNMP URI affects usage of relative references to that URI (see 
      Section 4.2 of [rfc2396bis]) because a "//" at the start of a 
      relative reference always introduces a URI authority component 
      (host plus optional userinfo and/or port, see [rfc2396bis]).  
      Specifically, a relative reference of the form //<oid2> will not 
      work because the "//" will cause <oid2> to be parsed as a URI 
    
    
   Black                    Expires - April 2005                 [Page 4] 




                            URI Scheme for SNMP             October 2004 
    
    
      authority, resulting in a syntax error when the parser fails to 
      find a host in <oid2> .  To avoid this problem, relative 
      references that start with "//" but do not contain a URI authority 
      component MUST NOT be used.  Functionality equivalent to any such 
      forbidden relative reference can be obtained by prefixing "." or 
      ".." to the forbidden relative reference (e.g., ..//<oid2>).  The 
      prefix to use depends on the base URI. 
       
   3. Semantics and Operations 
       
      An SNMP URI that does not include any OIDs is called an SNMP 
      service URI because it designates a communication endpoint for 
      access to SNMP management service.  An SNMP URI that includes one 
      or more OIDs is called an SNMP object URI because it designates 
      one or more object instances in an SNMP MIB. 
       
   3.1 SNMP Service URIs 
       
      An SNMP service URI does not designate a data object, but rather 
      an SNMP context to be accessed by a service; the telnet URI scheme 
      [RFC 1738] is another example of URIs that designate service 
      access.  The expected means of using an SNMP service URI is to 
      employ an SNMP manager to access the SNMP context designated by 
      the URI via the SNMP agent at the host and port designated by the 
      URI; if the contextName is empty or not given in the URI, "" (the 
      zero-length string) is assumed as it is the default SNMP context. 
       
      If a contextEngineID is given in an SNMP service URI, the context 
      engine that it designates is to be used.  If the contextEngineID 
      is empty or not given in the URI, the context engine is to be 
      discovered; the context engine to be used is the one that supports 
      the context designated by the URI.  The contextEngineID component 
      of the URI SHOULD be present if more than one context engine at 
      the designated host and port supports the designated context. 
       
      Many common uses of SNMP URIs are expected to omit (i.e., default) 
      the contextEngineID because they do not involve accessing SNMP 
      proxy agents, the most common reason for multiple SNMP context 
      engines to exist at a single host and port.  Specifically, when an 
      SNMP agent is local to the network interface that it manages, the 
      agent will usually have only one context engine, in which case it 
      is safe to omit the contextEngineID component of an SNMP URI.  In 
      addition, many SNMP agents that are local to a network interface 
      support only the default SNMP context (zero-length string). 
       
   3.2 SNMP Object URIs 
       
      An SNMP object URI contains one or more OIDs.  The URI is used by 
      first separating the OID or OID group (including its preceding 
    
    
   Black                    Expires - April 2005                 [Page 5] 




                            URI Scheme for SNMP             October 2004 
    
    
      slash plus any parentheses and/or suffix), and then processing the 
      resulting SNMP service URI as specified in Section 3.1 (above) to 
      determine the SNMP context to be accessed.  The OID or OID group 
      is then used to generate SNMP operations directed to that SNMP 
      context. 
       
      The semantics of an SNMP object URI depend on whether the OID or 
      OID group has a suffix and what that suffix is.  There are three 
      possible formats; in each case, the MIB object instances are 
      designated within the SNMP context specified by the service URI 
      portion of the SNMP object URI.  The semantics of an SNMP object 
      URI that contains a single OID are: 
       
      (1) An OID without a suffix designates the MIB object 
         instance named by the OID. 
      (2) An OID with a "+" suffix designates the lexically next 
         MIB object instance following the OID. 
      (3) An OID with a ".*" suffix designates the set of MIB 
         object instances for which the OID is a strict lexical prefix; 
         this does not include the MIB object instance named by the OID. 
       
      An OID group in an SNMP URI consists of a set of OIDs in 
      parentheses.  In each case, the OID group semantics are the 
      extension of the single OID semantics to each OID in the group 
      (e.g., a URI with a "+" suffix designates the set of MIB object 
      instances consisting of the lexically next instance for each OID 
      in the OID group). 
       
      When there is a choice among URI formats to designate the same MIB 
      object instance or instances, the above list is in order of 
      preference (no suffix is most preferable) as it runs from most 
      precise to least precise.  This is because an OID without a suffix 
      precisely designates an object instance, whereas a "+" suffix 
      designates the next object instance, which may change, and the 
      ".*" suffix could designate multiple object instances.  Multiple 
      syntactically distinct SNMP URIs SHOULD NOT be used to designate 
      the same MIB object instance or set of instances as this may cause 
      unexpected results in URI-based systems that use string comparison 
      to test URIs for equality.   
       
      SNMP object URIs designate the data to be accessed, as opposed to 
      the specific SNMP operations to be used for access; Section 3.2.1 
      provides examples of how SNMP operations can be used to access 
      data for SNMP object URIs.  Nonetheless, any applicable SNMP 
      operation, including GetBulk, MAY be used to access data for all 
      or part of one or more SNMP object URIs (e.g., via use of multiple 
      variable bindings in a single operation); it is not necessary to 
      use the specific operations described in Section 3.2.1 as long as 
      the results (returned variable bindings or error) could have been 
    
    
   Black                    Expires - April 2005                 [Page 6] 




                            URI Scheme for SNMP             October 2004 
    
    
      obtained by following Section 3.2.1's descriptions.  The use of 
      relative references that do not change the contextName (i.e., 
      ./<oid>) should be viewed as a hint that optimization of SNMP 
      access across multiple SNMP URIs may be possible. 
        
      An SNMP object URI MAY also be used to specify a MIB object 
      instance or instances to be written; this causes generation of an 
      SNMP Set operation instead of a Get.  The "+" and ".*" suffixes 
      MUST NOT be used in this case; any attempt to do so is an error 
      that MUST NOT generate any SNMP Set operations.  Values to be 
      written to the MIB object instance or instances are not specified 
      within an SNMP object URI. 
        
      SNMP object URIs designate data in SNMP MIBs, and hence do not 
      provide the means to generate all possible SNMP protocol 
      operations.  For example, data access for an SNMP object URI 
      cannot directly generate either Snmpv2-Trap or InformRequest 
      notifications, although side effects of data access could cause 
      such notifications (depending on the MIB).  In addition, whether 
      and how GetBulk is used for a SNMP object URI with a ".*" suffix 
      is implementation-specific. 
       
   3.2.1 SNMP Object URI Data Access 
       
      Data access based on an SNMP object URI returns an SNMP variable 
      binding for each MIB object instance designated by the URI or an 
      SNMP error if the operation fails.  An SNMP variable binding binds 
      a variable name (OID) to a value or an SNMP exception (see [RFC 
      3416]).  The SNMP operation or operations needed to access data 
      designated by an SNMP object URI depend on the OID or OID group 
      suffix or absence thereof.  The following descriptions are not the 
      only method of performing data access for an SNMP object URI; any 
      suitable SNMP operations may be used as long as the results 
      (returned variable bindings or error) are functionally equivalent. 
       
      (1) For an OID or OID group without a suffix, an SNMP Get 
         operation is generated using each OID as a variable binding 
         name.  If an SNMP error occurs, that error is the result 
         of URI data access, otherwise the returned variable binding or 
         bindings are the result of URI data access.  Note that any 
         returned variable binding may contain an SNMP "noSuchObject" 
         or "noSuchInstance" exception. 
      (2) For an OID or OID group with a "+" suffix, an SNMP GetNext 
         operation is generated using each OID as a variable binding 
         name.  If an SNMP error occurs, that error is the result 
         of URI data access, otherwise the returned variable binding 
         or bindings are the result of URI data access.  Note that any 
         returned variable binding may contain an SNMP "endOfMibView" 
         exception. 
    
    
   Black                    Expires - April 2005                 [Page 7] 




                            URI Scheme for SNMP             October 2004 
    
    
       
      (3) For an OID or OID group with a ".*" suffix, an SNMP GetNext  
         operation is initially generated using each OID as a variable 
         binding name.  If the result is an SNMP error, that error is 
         the result of URI data access.  If all returned variable 
         bindings contain either a) an OID for which the corresponding 
         URI OID is not a lexical prefix or b) an SNMP "endOfMibView" 
         exception, then the returned variable bindings are the 
         result of URI data access. 
       
         Otherwise the results of the GetNext operation are saved, and 
         another SNMP GetNext operation is generated using the newly 
         returned OIDs as variable binding names.  This is repeated  
         (save the results and generate a GetNext with newly returned 
         OIDs as variable binding names) until all of the returned 
         variable bindings from a GetNext contain either a) an OID for 
         which the corresponding URI OID is not a lexical prefix or b) 
         an SNMP "endOfMibView" exception.  The results from all of 
         the GetNext operations are combined to become the overall 
         result of URI data access; this may include variable bindings 
         whose OID is not a lexical extension of the corresponding URI 
         OID.  If the OID subtrees (set of OIDs for which a specific URI 
         OID is a lexical prefix) are not the same size for all OIDs in 
         the OID group, the largest subtree determines when this 
         iteration ends.  SNMP GetBulk operations MAY be used to 
         optimize this iterated access. 
       
         Whenever a returned variable binding contains an OID for which 
         the corresponding URI OID is not a lexical prefix or an SNMP 
         "endOfMibView" exception, iteration of that element of the 
         OID group MAY cease, reducing the number of variable bindings 
         used in subsequent GetNext operations.  In this case the 
         results of URI data access for the SNMP URI will not consist 
         entirely of OID-group-sized sets of variable bindings.  Even if 
         this does not occur, the last variable binding returned for 
         each member of the OID group will generally contain an SNMP 
         "endOfMibView" exception or an OID for which the corresponding 
         URI OID is not a lexical prefix. 
       
       
   3.3 OID Groups in SNMP URIs 
       
      Parenthesized OID groups in SNMP URIs are intended to support MIB 
      object instances for which access via a single SNMP operation is 
      required to ensure consistent results or otherwise desirable.  
      Therefore, the OIDs within an OID group in an SNMP URI SHOULD be 
      accessed by a single SNMP operation containing a variable binding 
      corresponding to each OID in the group.  A specific example 
      involves the InetAddress and InetAddressType textual conventions 
    
    
   Black                    Expires - April 2005                 [Page 8] 




                            URI Scheme for SNMP             October 2004 
    
    
      defined in [RFC 3291] where the format of an InetAddress instance 
      is specified by an associated InetAddressType instance.  If two 
      such associated instances are read via separate SNMP operations, 
      the resulting values could be inconsistent (e.g., due to an 
      intervening Set) causing the InetAddress value to be incorrectly 
      interpreted. 
       
      This single operation requirement ("SHOULD") also applies to each 
      OID group resulting from iterated access for an SNMP URI with a 
      ".*" suffix.  When members of an SNMP URI OID group differ in the 
      number of OIDs for which each is a lexical prefix, this iteration 
      may overrun by returning numerous variable bindings for which the 
      corresponding OID in the OID group is not a lexical prefix.  Such 
      overrun can be avoided by using relative references within the 
      same context (i.e., ./<oid>.* ) when it is not important to access 
      multiple MIB object instances in a single SNMP operation. 
       
   3.4 Interoperability Considerations 
       
      This document defines a transport-independent "snmp" scheme that 
      is intended to accommodate SNMP transports other than UDP.  UDP is 
      the default transport for access to information specified by an 
      SNMP URI for backwards compatibility with existing usage, but 
      other transports MAY be used.  If more than one transport can be 
      used (e.g., SNMP over TCP [RFC 3430] in addition to SNMP over UDP) 
      the information or SNMP service access designated by an SNMP URI 
      SHOULD NOT depend on which transport is used (for SNMP over TCP, 
      this is implied by Section 2 of [RFC 3430]). 
       
      An SNMP URI designates use of SNMPv3 as specified by [RFC 3416], 
      [RFC 3417], and related documents, but older versions of SNMP MAY 
      be used in accordance with [RFC 3584] where usage of such older 
      versions is unavoidable.  For SNMPv1 and SNMPv2c, the 
      securityName, contextName and contextEngineID elements of an SNMP 
      URI are mapped to/from the community name as described in [RFC 
      3584].  When the community name is kept secret as a weak form of 
      authentication, this mapping should be configured so that these 
      three elements do not reveal information about the community name.  
      If this is not done, then any SNMP URI component that would 
      disclose significant information about a secret community name 
      SHOULD be omitted.  Note that some community names contain 
      reserved characters (e.g., "@") that require percent encoding when 
      used in an SNMP URI.  SNMP versions (e.g., v3) have been omitted 
      from the SNMP URI scheme to permit use of older versions of SNMP, 
      as well as any possible future successor to SNMPv3. 
       
       
       
       
    
    
   Black                    Expires - April 2005                 [Page 9] 




                            URI Scheme for SNMP             October 2004 
    
    
   4. Examples 
       
         snmp://example.com 
       
      This example designates the default SNMP context at the SNMP agent 
      at port 161 of host example.com .   
       
         snmp://tester5@example.com:8161 
       
      This example designates the default SNMP context at the SNMP agent 
      at port 8161 of host example.com and indicates that the SNMP 
      securityName "tester5" is to be used to access that agent.  A 
      possible reason for use of a non-standard port is testing of a new 
      version of SNMP agent code. 
       
         snmp://example.com/bridge1 
       
      This example designates the "bridge1" SNMP context at example.com.  
      Because the contextEngineID component of the URI is omitted, there 
      SHOULD be at most one SNMP context engine at example.com that 
      supports the "bridge1" context. 
       
         snmp://example.com/bridge1;800002b804616263 
       
      This example designates the "bridge1" context at snmp.example.com 
      via the SNMP context engine 800002b804616263 (string 
      representation of a hexadecimal value).  This avoids ambiguity if 
      any other context engine supports a "bridge1" context.  The above 
      two examples are based on the figure in Section 3.3 of [RFC 3411].  
       
         snmp://example.com//1.3.6.1.2.1.1.3.0 
         snmp://example.com//1.3.6.1.2.1.1.3+ 
         snmp://example.com//1.3.6.1.2.1.1.3.* 
       
      These three examples all designate the sysUpTime.0 object instance 
      in the SNMPv2-MIB or RFC1213-MIB for the default SNMP context ("") 
      at example.com as sysUpTime.0 is: 
         a) designated directly by OID 1.3.6.1.2.1.1.3.0, 
         b) the lexically next MIB object instance after the OID 
            1.3.6.1.2.1.1.3, and 
         c) the only MIB object instance whose OID has 1.3.6.1.2.1.1.3 
            as a lexical prefix. 
      These three examples are provided for illustrative purposes only, 
      as multiple syntactically distinct URIs SHOULD NOT be used to 
      designate the same MIB object instance in order to avoid 
      unexpected results in URI-based systems that use string comparison 
      to test URIs for equality. 
       
       
    
    
   Black                    Expires - April 2005                [Page 10] 




                            URI Scheme for SNMP             October 2004 
    
    
         snmp://example.com/bridge1/1.3.6.1.2.1.2.2.1.8.* 
       
      This example designates the ifOperStatus column of the IF-MIB in 
      the bridge1 SNMP context at example.com. 
       
         snmp://example.com//(1.3.6.1.2.1.2.2.1.7,1.3.6.1.2.1.2.2.1.8).* 
       
      This example designates all (ifAdminStatus, ifOperStatus) pairs in 
      the IF-MIB in the default SNMP context at example.com. 
       
   5. Security Considerations 
       
      An intended use of this URI scheme is designation of the location 
      of management access to communication devices.  Such location 
      information may be considered sensitive in some environments, 
      making it important to control access to this information and 
      possibly even to encrypt when sending it over the network.  All 
      uses of this URI scheme should provide security mechanisms 
      appropriate to the environments in which such uses are likely to 
      be deployed. 
       
      There are management objects defined in SNMP MIBs whose MAX-ACCESS 
      is read-write and/or read-create.  Such objects may be considered 
      sensitive or vulnerable in some network environments.  The support 
      for SNMP SET operations in a non-secure environment without proper 
      protection can have a negative effect on network operations.  The 
      individual MIB module specifications, and especially their 
      security considerations, should be consulted for further 
      information. 
       
      Some readable objects in some MIB modules (i.e., objects with a 
      MAX-ACCESS other than not-accessible) may be considered sensitive 
      or vulnerable in some network environments.  It is thus important 
      to control even GET access to these objects and possibly to even 
      encrypt the values of these objects when sending them over the 
      network via SNMP.  The individual MIB module specifications, and 
      especially their security considerations, should be consulted for 
      further information.  This consideration also applies to objects 
      for which read operations have side effects. 
       
      SNMP versions prior to SNMPv3 did not include adequate security. 
      Even if the network itself is secure (for example via use of 
      IPsec), there is no control over who on the secure network is 
      allowed to access and GET/SET (read/change/create/delete) the 
      objects in MIB modules. It is RECOMMENDED that implementers 
      consider the security features as provided by the SNMPv3 framework 
      (see [RFC 3410], section 8 for an overview), including full 
      support for SNMPv3 cryptographic mechanisms (for authentication 

    
    
   Black                    Expires - April 2005                [Page 11] 




                            URI Scheme for SNMP             October 2004 
    
    
      and privacy).  This is of additional importance for MIB elements 
      considered sensitive or vulnerable because GETs have side effects. 
       
      Further, deployment of SNMP versions prior to SNMPv3 is NOT 
      RECOMMENDED.  Instead, it is RECOMMENDED to deploy SNMPv3 and to 
      enable cryptographic security.  It is then a customer/operator 
      responsibility to ensure that the SNMP entity giving access to a 
      MIB module instance is properly configured to give access to the 
      objects only to those principals (users) that have legitimate 
      rights to indeed GET or SET (read/change/create/delete) them. 
       
   6. IANA Considerations 
       
      The IANA is asked to register the URL registration template found 
      in Appendix A in accordance with [RFC 2717]. 
       
   7. Change History (to be deleted prior to RFC publication) 
       
      -03: Update to reference rfc2396bis draft instead of RFC 2396. 
         Context and engine syntax changed to comply with rfc2396bis 
         authority component restrictions.  Minor text editing. 
      -04: Remove "0x" engine prefix.  Add discussion of relative 
         URI impacts of embedded //.  Add OID groups to support 
         MIB object instances that need to be accessed together. 
         Always discard SNMP "no data" response exceptions.  More edits. 
      -05: Spell out acronyms in title.  Correct wording to refer to 
         SNMP exceptions.  More editing. 
      -06: Change syntax component names to match SNMP terminology 
         (e.g., contextName, contextEngineID).  Back out -04 change to 
         discard SNMP "no data" exceptions.  Loosen requirements on 
         group iteration. Drop "engine=" to simplify syntax. 
         Rewrite ABNF for clarity and correctness.  More editing. 
      -07: Yet more editing.  Move data access details into a 
         separate subsection, and make it clear that functional 
         equivalence to their results is all that is required.  Use 
         example.com consistently in all examples. 
      -08: Remove discussion of SNMP security models from Section 3.1. 
         Add warning to Section 3.4 about avoiding disclosure of 
         a community name when it's a secret.  Change "relative URI" 
         to "relative reference" to match final version of rfc2396bis. 
       
   8. Normative References 
       
      [rfc2396bis] Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax. 
                  T. Berners-Lee, R. Fielding, L. Masinter. 
                  Internet-Draft draft-fielding-uri-rfc2396bis-07.txt . 
                  Work in Progress.  September 2004. 
       
       
    
    
   Black                    Expires - April 2005                [Page 12] 




                            URI Scheme for SNMP             October 2004 
    
    
      [RFC 2119] Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
                  Levels. S. Bradner. RFC 2119, BCP 14. March 1997. 
       
      [RFC 2234] Augmented BNF for Syntax Specifications: ABNF. 
                  D. Crocker, Ed., P. Overell. RFC 2234. November 1997. 
       
      [RFC 3061] A URN Namespace of Object Identifiers.  M. Mealling. 
                  February 2001. 
       
      [RFC 3411] An Architecture for Describing Simple Network 
                  Management Protocol (SNMP) Management Frameworks. 
                   D. Harrington, R. Presuhn, B. Wijnen.  December 2002. 
       
      [RFC 3414] User-based Security Model (USM) for version 3 of the 
                  Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMPv3). 
                  U. Blumenthal, B. Wijnen. RFC 3414. December 2002. 
       
      [RFC 3416] Version 2 of the Protocol Operations for the Simple 
                  Network Management Protocol (SNMP). R. Presuhn, Ed. 
                  RFC 3416. December 2002. 
       
      [RFC 3417] Transport Mappings for the Simple Network Management 
                  Protocol (SNMP). R. Presuhn, Ed. RFC 3417. 
                  December 2002. 
       
      [RFC 3584] Coexistence between Version 1, Version 2, and Version 3 
                  of the Internet-standard Network Management Framework. 
                  R. Frye, D. Levi, S. Routhier, B. Wijnen. RFC 3584. 
                  August 2003. 
       
   9. Informative References 
       
      [RFC 1738] Uniform Resource Locators (URL). T. Berners-Lee, 
                  L. Masinter, M. McCahill. RFC 1738. December 1994. 
       
      [RFC 1900] Renumbering Needs Work. B. Carpenter, Y. Rekhter. 
                  RFC 1900. February 1996. 
       
      [RFC 2717] Registration Procedures for URL Scheme Names. R. Petke, 
                  I. King. RFC 2717. November 1999. 
       
      [RFC 3291] Textual Conventions for Internet Network Addresses. 
                  M. Daniele, B. Haberman, S. Routhier, 
                  J. Schoenwaelder.  RFC 3291.  May 2002. 
       
      [RFC 3410] Introduction and Applicability Statements for Internet- 
                  Standard Management Framework. J. Case, R. Mundy, 
                  D. Partain, B. Stewart. RFC 3410. December 2002. 
       
    
    
   Black                    Expires - April 2005                [Page 13] 




                            URI Scheme for SNMP             October 2004 
    
    
      [RFC 3430] Simple Network Management Protocol Over Transmission 
                  Control Protocol Transport Mapping. J. Schoenwaelder. 
                  December 2002. 
       
      [RFC 3617] Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) Scheme and  
                  Applicability Statement for the Trivial File Transfer 
                  Protocol (TFTP). E. Lear. October 2003. 
       
   10. Acknowledgments 
       
      Portions of this document were adapted from Eliot Lear's TFTP URI 
      scheme specification [RFC 3617].  The security considerations text 
      was adapted from the widely used security considerations 
      "boilerplate" for MIB modules.  Comments from Ted Hardie, Michael 
      Mealing, Larry Masinter, Frank Strauss, Bert Wijnen, the 
      mreview@ops.ietf.org mailing list and the uri@w3c.org mailing list 
      on earlier versions of this draft have resulted in significant 
      improvements and are gratefully acknowledged. 
       
   11. Copyright Notice and Disclaimers 
    
      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is 
      subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 
      78, and except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their 
      rights. 
       
      This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
      an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
      REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND 
      THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, 
      EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT 
      THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR 
      ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A 
      PARTICULAR PURPOSE." 
       
      The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
      Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
      to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology 
      described in this document or the extent to which any license 
      under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it 
      represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any 
      such rights.  Information on the procedures with respect to rights 
      in RFC documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
       
      Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
      assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
      attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
      of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 

    
    
   Black                    Expires - April 2005                [Page 14] 




                            URI Scheme for SNMP             October 2004 
    
    
      specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
      at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
       
      The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention 
      any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other 
      proprietary rights that may cover technology that may be required 
      to implement this standard.  Please address the information to the 
      IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org." 
       
   12. Author's Addresses 
       
      David L. Black 
      EMC Corporation 
      176 South Street 
      Hopkinton, MA 01748 
      Phone: +1 (508) 293-7953 
      Email: black_david@emc.com 
       
      Keith McCloghrie 
      Cisco Systems, Inc. 
      170 West Tasman Drive 
      San Jose, CA USA 95134 
      Phone: +1 (408) 526-5260 
      Email: kzm@cisco.com 
       
      Juergen Schoenwaelder 
      International University Bremen 
      P.O. Box 750 561 
      28725 Bremen 
      Germany 
      Phone: +49 421 200 3587 
      Email: j.schoenwaelder@iu-bremen.de 
    
   Appendix A. Registration Template 
       
      URL scheme name: snmp 
      URL scheme syntax: Section 2 
      Character encoding considerations: Section 2 
      Intended usage: Section 1 
      Applications and/or protocols which use this scheme: SNMP, all 
         versions, see [RFC 3410] and [RFC 3584].  Also SNMP over TCP, 
         see [RFC 3430]. 
      Interoperability considerations: Section 3.4 
      Security considerations: Section 5 
      Relevant publications: See [RFC 3410] for list.  Also [RFC 3430] 
         and [RFC 3584]. 
      Contact: David L. Black, Section 12 
      Author/Change Controller: IESG 

    
    
   Black                    Expires - April 2005                [Page 15] 





