


Network Working Group                                       I. Johansson
Internet-Draft                                             M. Westerlund
Intended status: Standards Track                             Ericsson AB
Expires: October 26, 2008                                   Apr 24, 2008


     Support for non-compound RTCP, opportunities and consequences
                  draft-ietf-avt-rtcp-non-compound-04

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 26, 2008.

Abstract

   This memo discusses benefits and issues that arise when allowing RTCP
   packets to be transmitted as non-compound packets, i.e not follow the
   rules of RFC 3550.  Based on that analysis this memo proposes changes
   to the rules to allow feedback messages to be sent as non-compound
   RTCP packets when using the RTP AVPF profile (RFC 4585) under certain
   conditions.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in



Johansson & Westerlund  Expires October 26, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Non-compound RTCP in RTP profile            Apr 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  RTCP Compound Packets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Benefits with non-compound packets . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  Low birate links . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  Higher bitrates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.3.  Both high and low bitrate links  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Use cases for non-compound RTCP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.1.  Control plane signaling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.2.  Codec control signaling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.3.  Feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.4.  Status reports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Issues with non-compound RTCP packets  . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.1.  Middle boxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.2.  Packet Validation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       5.2.1.  Old RTCP Receivers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       5.2.2.  Weakened Packet Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       5.2.3.  Bandwidth considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       5.2.4.  Computation of avg_rtcp_size . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.3.  Encryption/authentication  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.4.  RTP and RTCP multiplex on the same port  . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.5.  Header compression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  Rules and guidelines for non-compound packets in AVPF  . . . . 10
     6.1.  Definition of non-compound RTCP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.2.  Algorithm considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       6.2.1.  Verification of delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       6.2.2.  Single vs multiple RTCP in a non-compound RTCP . . . . 12
       6.2.3.  Enforcing compound RTCP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       6.2.4.  Immediate mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     6.3.  SDP Signalling Attribute . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     10.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     10.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 16












Johansson & Westerlund  Expires October 26, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Non-compound RTCP in RTP profile            Apr 2008


1.  Introduction

   In RTP [RFC3550] it is currently mandatory to always use RTCP
   compound packets containing at least Sender Reports or Receiver
   reports, and a SDES packet containing at least the CNAME item.  There
   are good reasons for this as discussed below (see Section 2).
   However this do result in that the minimal RTCP packets are quite
   large.  The RTP profile AVPF [RFC4585] specifies new RTCP packet
   types for feedback messages.  Some of these feedback messages would
   benefit from being transmitted with minimal delay and AVPF do provide
   some mechanism to enable this.  However for environments with low-
   bitrate links this still consumes quite large amount of resources and
   introduce extra delay in the time it takes to completely send the
   compound packet in the network.  There are also other benefits as
   discussed in Section 3.

   The use of non-compound packets is not without issues.  This is
   discussed in Section 5.  These issues needs to be considered and are
   part of the motivation for this document.

   In addition this document proposes how AVPF could be updated to allow
   the transmission of non-compound packets in a way that would not
   substantially affect the mechanisms that compound packets provide.
   The connection to AVPF is motivated by the fact that non-compound
   RTCP is mainly intended for event driven feedback purposes and that
   the AVPF early and immediate modes make this possible.


2.  RTCP Compound Packets

   Section 6.1 in [RFC3550] specifies that an RTCP packet must be sent
   in a compound packet consisting of at least two individual packets,
   first an Sender Report (SR) or Receiver Report (RR), followed by
   additional packets including a mandatory SDES packet containing a
   CNAME Item for the transmitting source identifier (SSRC).  Lets
   examine what these RTCP packet types are used for.

   1.  The sender and receiver reports (see Section 6.4 of [RFC3550])
       provides the RTP session participant with the Sender Source
       Identifier (SSRC) of all RTCP senders.  Having all participants
       send these packets periodically allows everyone to determine the
       current number of participants.  This information is used in the
       transmission scheduling algorithm.  Thus this is particularly
       important for new participants so that they quickly can establish
       a good estimate of the group size.  Failure to do this would
       result in RTCP senders consuming to much bandwidth.





Johansson & Westerlund  Expires October 26, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Non-compound RTCP in RTP profile            Apr 2008


   2.  The sender and receiver reports contain some basic statistics
       usable for monitoring of the transport and thus enable
       adaptation.  These reports become more useful if sent regularly
       as the receiver of a report can perform analysis to find trends
       between the individual reports.  When used for media transmission
       adaptation the information become more useful the more frequently
       it is received, at least until one report per round-trip time
       (RTT) is achieved.  Therefore there are most cases no reason to
       not include the sender or receiver report in all RTCP packets.

   3.  The CNAME SDES item (See Section 6.5.1 of [RFC3550]) exists to
       allow receivers to determine which media flows that should be
       synchronized with each other between different RTP sessions
       carrying different media types.  Thus it is important to quickly
       receive this for each media sender in the session when joining an
       RTP session.

   4.  Sender Reports (SR) is used in combination with the above SDES
       CNAME mechanism to synchronize multiple RTP streams, such as
       audio and video.  After having determined which media streams
       should be synchronized using the CNAME field, the receiver uses
       the Sender Report's NTP and RTP timestamp fields to establish
       synchronization.

   Reviewing the above it is obvious that both SR/RR and the CNAME are
   very important for new session participants to be able to utilize any
   received media and to avoid flooding the network with RTCP reports.
   In addition, if not sent regularly the dynamic nature of the
   information provided would make it less and less useful.


3.  Benefits with non-compound packets

   As mentioned in the introduction, most advantages of using non-
   compound packets exists in cases when the available RTCP bitrate is
   limited.  This because non-compound packets will be substantially
   smaller than compound packets.  A compound packet is forced to
   contain both an RR or an SR and the CNAME SDES item.  The RR
   containing a report block for a single source is 32 bytes, an SR is
   52 bytes.  Both may be larger if they contain report blocks for
   multiple sources.  The SDES packet containing a CNAME item will be 10
   bytes plus the CNAME string length.  Here it is reasonable that the
   CNAME string is at least 10 bytes to get a decent collision
   resistance.  And if the recommended form of user@host is used, then
   most strings will be longer than 20 characters.  Thus a non-compound
   packet can become at least 70-80 bytes smaller than the compound
   packet.




Johansson & Westerlund  Expires October 26, 2008                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Non-compound RTCP in RTP profile            Apr 2008


   The following benefits exist for the non-compound packets,

3.1.  Low birate links

   For low birate links the benefits are as follows.

   o  For links where the packet loss rate grows with the packet size,
      smaller packets are be less likely to be dropped.  An example of
      such links are radio links.  In the cellular world there exist
      links that are optimized to handle RTP packets sized for carrying
      compressed speec.  This increases the capacity and coverage for
      voice services in a given wireless network.  Minimum sized
      compound RTCP packets are commonly 2-3 times the size of a RTP
      packet carrying compressed speech.  If the speech packet over such
      a bearer has a packet loss probability of p, then the RTCP packet
      will experience a loss probability of 1-(1-p)^x where x is the
      number of fragments the compound packet will be split on the link
      layer, i.e. commonly into 2 or 3 fragments.

   o  Shorter serialization time, i.e the time it takes the link to
      transmit the packet.  For slower links this time can be
      substantial.  For example transmitting 120 bytes over an link
      interface capable of 30 kbps takes 32 milliseconds (ms) assuming
      uniform transmission rate.

   In cases when non-compound packets carry important and time sensitive
   feedback, both shorter serialization time and the lower loss
   probability are important to enable the best possible functionality.
   Having a packet loss rate that is much higher for the feedback
   packets compared to media packets hurts when trying to perform media
   adaptation, to for example handle the changed performance present at
   the cell border in cellular system.

3.2.  Higher bitrates

   For high bitrate applications there is usually no problem of
   supplying RTCP with sufficient bitrates.  When using AVPF one can use
   the "trr-int" parameter to restrict the regular reporting interval to
   approximately once per RTT or less often.  As in most cases there is
   little reason to provide with regular reports of higher density than
   this.  Any additional bandwidth can then be used for feedback
   messages.  The benefit of non-compound packets in this case is
   limited, but exists.  One typical example is video using generic NACK
   in cases where the RTT is low.  Using non-compound packets would
   reduce the total amount of bits used for RTCP.  This is primarily
   applicable if the number of non-compound packets is large.  This
   would also result in lower processing delay and less complexity for
   the feedback packets as they do not need to query the RTCP database



Johansson & Westerlund  Expires October 26, 2008                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Non-compound RTCP in RTP profile            Apr 2008


   to construct the right messages.

   As message size generally is a smaller issue for higher birates, it
   is also possible to transmit multiple RTCP in each lower layer
   datagram in these cases.  The motivation behind non-compound RTCP is
   in this case is not size, rather it is to avoid the extra overhead
   caused by inclusion of the SR/RR and SDES CNAME items in each
   transmitted RTCP.

3.3.  Both high and low bitrate links

   Independently of the link type there are additional benefits with
   sending feedback in small non-compound RTCP.

   o  Applications that use RTCP AVPF in early or immediate mode to send
      frequent event driven feedback.  Under these circumstances non-
      compound RTCP reduces the risk that the RTCP bandwidth becomes too
      high during periods of heavy adaptation feedback signaling.

   o  In cases when regular feedback is needed, such as the profile
      under development for TCP friendly rate control (TFRC) for RTP
      [I-D.ietf-avt-tfrc-profile], the size of compound RTCP can result
      in very high bandwidth requirements if the round trip time is
      short.  For this particular application non-compound RTCP gives a
      very substantial improvement.


4.  Use cases for non-compound RTCP

   Below are listed a few use cases for non-compound RTCP.  The current
   use of non-compound RTCP is very application specific.  A general
   definition of the use of non-compound RTCP for e.g control plane or
   codec control signaling would probably need to be specified within
   the IETF.

4.1.  Control plane signaling

   Open Mobile Alliance (OMA) Push-to-talk over Cellular (PoC) [OMA-PoC]
   makes use of non-compound packets when transmitting certain events.
   The OMA POC service is primarily used over cellular links capable of
   IP transport, such as the GSM GPRS.

4.2.  Codec control signaling

   Examples of codec control usage for non-compound RTCP are found in
   [3GPP-MTSI].

   Another example that can be used with non-compound RTCP is e.g TMMBR



Johansson & Westerlund  Expires October 26, 2008                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Non-compound RTCP in RTP profile            Apr 2008


   messages as specified in [RFC5104] which signal a request for a
   change in codec bitrate.  The benefit of non-compound RTCP for these
   messages is that in bad channel conditions, a non-compound RTCP can
   be considerably more likely to be received than larger compound RTCP
   messages.  This is critical as these messages are likely to occur
   when channel conditions are poor.

4.3.  Feedback

   An example of a feedback scenario that would benefit from non-
   compound RTCP is Video streams with generic NACK.  In cases where the
   RTT is shorter than the receiver buffer depth, generic NACK can be
   used to request retransmission of missing packets, thus improving
   playout quality considerably.  If the generic NACK packets are
   transmitted as non-compound packets, the bandwidth requirement for
   RTCP will be minimal, enabling more frequent feedback.  Like in the
   Codec control case it is important that these packets can be
   transmitted with as little delay as possible.

   Another interesting use for non-compound RTCP is in cases when
   regular feedback is needed, such as the profile under development for
   TCP friendly rate control (TFRC) for RTP [I-D.ietf-avt-tfrc-profile].
   The size of compound RTCP can result in very high bandwidth
   requirements for the feedback when the round trip time is short.  For
   this particular application non-compound RTCP may give a very
   substantial improvement.

4.4.  Status reports

   One proposed idea is to transmit small measurement or status reports
   in non-compound RTCP, and to be able to split the sub-packets of a
   minimum compound RTCP and transmit them separately.  The status
   reports can be used either by the endpoints or by other network
   monitoring boxes in the network.

   The benefit is that with some radio access technologies small packets
   are more robust to poor radio conditions than large packets.
   Additionally, with small (report) packets there is a smaller risk
   that the report packets will affect the channel that they report
   upon.

   Another benefit is that it is, with non-compound RTCP, possible to
   allow e.g anonymous status reportorting to be transmitted
   unencrypted.  Something that may be beneficial for e.g network
   monitoring purposes.






Johansson & Westerlund  Expires October 26, 2008                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      Non-compound RTCP in RTP profile            Apr 2008


5.  Issues with non-compound RTCP packets

   This section describes the known issues with non-compound RTCP
   packets and also a brief analysis.

5.1.  Middle boxes

   Middle boxes in the network may discard RTCP packets that do not
   follow the rules outlined in section 6.1 of RFC3550.  Newer report
   types may be interptered as unknown by the middle box.  For instance
   if the payload type number is 207 instead of 200 or 201 it may be
   treated as unknown.  The effect of this might for instance be that
   compound RTCP packets would get through while the non-compound
   feedback packets would be lost.

   Verification of the delivery of non-compound RTCP is discussed in
   Section 6.2.1.

5.2.  Packet Validation

   A non-compound packet will be discarded by the packet validation code
   in Appendix A of [RFC3550].  This has several impacts as described in
   the following sub sections.

5.2.1.  Old RTCP Receivers

   Any RTCP receiver without updated packet validation code will discard
   the non-compound packets.  Thus these receivers will not see the
   feedback contained in the these non-compound packets.  The effect of
   this depends on the type of feedback message and the role of the
   receiver.  For example this may cause complete function loss in the
   case of attempting to use a non-compound NACK message (see Section
   6.2.1 of [RFC4585]) to non updated media sender in a session using
   the retransmission scheme defined by [RFC4588].

   This type of discarding would also effect the feedback suppression
   defined in AVPF.  The result would be a partitioning of the receivers
   within the session between old ones only seeing the compound RTCP
   feedback messages and the newer ones seeing both.  Where the old ones
   may send feedback messages for events already reported on in non-
   compound packets.

5.2.2.  Weakened Packet Validation

   The packet validation code needs to be rewritten to accept non-
   compound packets.  This in particular affects section 9.1 in
   [RFC3550] in the sense that the header verification must take into
   account that the payload type numbers for the (first) RTCP packet may



Johansson & Westerlund  Expires October 26, 2008                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      Non-compound RTCP in RTP profile            Apr 2008


   differ from 200 or 201 (SR or RR).

   One potential effect of this change is much weaker validation that
   received packets actually are RTCP packets, and not packets of some
   other type being wrongly delivered.  Thus some consideration should
   be done to ensure the best possible validation is available.  For
   example restricting non-compound packets to contain only some
   specific RTCP packet types, that is preferably signalled on a session
   basis.

5.2.3.  Bandwidth considerations

   The discarding of non-compound RTCP packets would effect the RTCP
   transmission calculation in the following way: the avg_rtcp_size
   value would become larger than for RTP receivers that exclude the
   non-compound in this calculation (assuming that non-compound packets
   are smaller than compound ones).  Therefore these senders would
   under-utilize the available bitrate and send with a longer interval
   than updated receivers.  For most sessions this should not be an
   issue.  However for sessions with a large portion of non-compound
   packets may result in that the updated receivers time out non-updated
   senders prematurely.  A solution to this is presented in Section 6.2.

5.2.4.  Computation of avg_rtcp_size

   Long intervals between compound RTCP packets and many non-compound
   RTCP packets in between may lead to a computation of a value for
   avg_rtcp_size that varies greatly over time.  This is discussed more
   in Section 6.2.

5.3.  Encryption/authentication

   SRTP presents a problem for non-compound RTCP.  Section 3.4 in
   [RFC3711] states "SRTCP MUST be given packets according to that
   requirement in the sense that the first part MUST be a sender report
   or a receiver report".

   However the same text also states that the encryption prefix that is
   present in the receiver and sender reports should not be used by
   SRTP.  The conclusion is therefore that it is possible to use non-
   compound RTCP with SRTP.

5.4.  RTP and RTCP multiplex on the same port

   In applications which multiplex RTP and RTCP on the same port, as
   defined in [I-D.ietf-avt-rtp-and-rtcp-mux], care must be taken to
   ensure that the de-multiplexing is done properly even though RTCP
   packets are non-compound.



Johansson & Westerlund  Expires October 26, 2008                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      Non-compound RTCP in RTP profile            Apr 2008


5.5.  Header compression

   Two issues are related to header compression:

   o  Payload type number identification: The RoHC header compression
      algorithm algorithm [RFC3095] needs to create different
      compression contexts for RTP and RTCP for optimum performance.  If
      RTP and RTCP are multiplexed on the same port the classification
      is based on payload type numbers.  The classification algorithm
      must here acklowledge the fact that the payload type number for
      (the first) RTCP may differ from 200 or 201.

   o  Compression of RTCP packets: No IETF defined header compression
      method compress RTCP packets, however if such methods are
      developed in the future, these methods must take non-compound RTCP
      in account.


6.  Rules and guidelines for non-compound packets in AVPF

   Based on the above analysis it seems feasible to allow transmission
   of non-compound RTCP under some restrictions.

   First of all it is important that compound packets are transmitted at
   regular intervals to ensure that the feedback reporting works.  The
   tracking of session size and number of participants is also important
   as this ensures that the RTCP bandwidth remain bounded independent of
   the number of session participants.

   As the compound packets are also used to establish the
   synchronization, any newly joining participant in a session would
   need to receive a compound packet from the media sender.

   In summary the regular usage of compound packets must be maintained
   throughout the complete session.  Thus non-compound packets should be
   restricted to be used as extra RTCP (e.g feedback) sent in cases when
   a regular compound packet would not have been sent.

   The usage of non-compound RTCP packet SHALL only be done in RTP
   sessions operating in AVPF [RFC4585] Early RTCP or Immediate feedback
   mode.  Non-compound packets SHALL NOT be sent until at least one
   compound packet has been sent.  In Immediate feedback mode all
   feedback messages MAY be sent as non-compound packets.  In early RTCP
   mode a feedback message scheduled for transmission as an Early RTCP
   packet, i.e not a Regular RTCP packet, MAY be sent as a non-compound
   packet.  All packets that are scheduled for transmission as Regular
   RTCP packets SHALL be sent as (full) compound RTCP packets as
   indicated by AVPF [RFC4585].



Johansson & Westerlund  Expires October 26, 2008               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      Non-compound RTCP in RTP profile            Apr 2008


6.1.  Definition of non-compound RTCP

   A non-compound RTCP is a packet that deviates from the rules
   regarding (minimal) compound RTCP given in RFC3550/4585 in the aspect
   that they don't contain both the mandatory elements SR/RR and SDES-
   CNAME.  The definition does not make any distinction based on size.
   This means that it is possible to transmit multiple RTCP in one lower
   layer datagram.

6.2.  Algorithm considerations

6.2.1.  Verification of delivery

   If an application is to use non-compound packets it is important to
   verify that they actually reach the session participants.  As
   outlined above in Section 5.1 and Section 5.2 packets may be
   discarded along the path or in the end-point.

   The end-points can be resolved by introducing signaling that informs
   if all session participants are capable of non-compound packets or
   not.

   The middle box issue is more difficult and here one will be required
   to use heuristics to determine if the non-compound packets are
   delivered or not.  However in many cases the feedback messages sent
   using non-compound packets will result in either explicit or implicit
   indications that they have been received.  Example of such are the
   RTP retransmission [RFC4588] that result from a NACK message
   [RFC4585], the Temporary Maximum Media Bitrate Notification message
   resulting from a Temporary Maximum Media Bitrate Request [RFC5104],
   or the presence of a Decoder Refresh Point [RFC5104] in the video
   media stream resulting from the Full Intra Request sent.

   An algorithm to detect consistent failure of delivery of non-compound
   packets must be used by any application using non-compound.  The
   details of this algorithm is application dependent and therefore
   outside the scope of this document.

   A method to detect if non-compound RTCP are discarded is to send a
   non-compound SR packet, then check that the timestamp is echoed back
   in the corresponding RR packet.  This verification method is not
   compelety safe however as it SR is still one of the expected packet
   types.

   If the verification fails it is strongly RECOMMENDED that only
   compound RTCP according to the rules outlined in RFC3550 is
   transmitted.




Johansson & Westerlund  Expires October 26, 2008               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft      Non-compound RTCP in RTP profile            Apr 2008


6.2.2.  Single vs multiple RTCP in a non-compound RTCP

   The result of the definition in Section 6.1 may be that the resulting
   size of non-compound RTCP can become larger than a normal compound
   RTCP.  For applications that use access types that are sensitive to
   packet size (see Section 3.1) it is strongly RECOMMENDED that the use
   of non-compound RTCP is limited to the transmission of single RTCP
   packets in each lower layer datagram.

   The methods to detemine the need for this is outside the scope of
   this draft.

6.2.3.  Enforcing compound RTCP

   As discussed earlier it is important that the transmission of
   compound RTCP packets occurs at regular intervals.  However, this
   will occur as long as the RTCP senders follow the AVPF scheduling
   algorithm defined in Section 3.5 in [RFC4585].  This as all regular
   RTCP packets must be full compound RTCP packets.  Note that also in
   immediate mode is there a requirement on sending regular RTCP
   packets.

6.2.4.  Immediate mode

   Section 3.3 in RFC4585 gives the option to use AVPF Immediate mode as
   long as the groupsize is below a certain limit.  As feedback using
   non-compound RTCP may become smaller it opens up for a more liberal
   use of immediate mode.

6.3.  SDP Signalling Attribute

   We request to define the a "a=rtcp-nc" [RFC4566] attribute to
   indicate if the session participant is capable of supporting non-
   compound packets.  It is a required that a participant that proposes
   the use of non-compound RTCP itself supports the reception of non-
   compound RTCP.

   An offering client that wish to use non-compound RTCP MUST include
   the attribute "a=rtcp-nc" in the SDP offer.  If "a=rtcp-nc" is
   present in the offer SDP, the answerer that supports non-compound
   RTCP and wishes to use it SHALL include the "a=rtcp-nc" attribute in
   the answer.


7.  IANA Considerations

   Following the guidelines in [RFC4566], the IANA is requested to
   register one new SDP attribute:



Johansson & Westerlund  Expires October 26, 2008               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft      Non-compound RTCP in RTP profile            Apr 2008


   o  Contact name, email address and telephone number: Authors of
      RFCXXXX

   o  Attribute-name: rtcp-nc

   o  Long-form attribute name: Non-compound RTCP

   o  Type of attribute: media-level

   o  Subject to charset: no

   This attribute defines the support for non-compound RTCP, i.e the
   possibility to transmit RTCP that does not comform to the rules for
   compund RTCP defined in RFC3550.  It is a property attribute, which
   does not take a value.

   Note to RFC Editor: please replace "RFC XXXX" above with the RFC
   number of this memo, and remove this note.


8.  Security Considerations

   The security considerations of RTP [RFC3550] and AVPF [RFC4585] will
   apply also to non-compound packets.  The reduction in validation
   strength for received packets on the RTCP port may result in a higher
   degree of acceptance of spurious data as real RTCP packets.  This
   vulnerability can mostly be addressed by usage of any security
   mechanism that provide authentication, one example such mechanism is
   SRTP [RFC3711].


9.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank all the people who gave feedback on
   this document.

   This document also contain some text copied from [RFC3550],
   [RFC4585]and [RFC3711].  We take the opportunity to thank the authors
   of said documents.


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC3550]  Schulzrinne, H., Casner, S., Frederick, R., and V.
              Jacobson, "RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time
              Applications", STD 64, RFC 3550, July 2003.



Johansson & Westerlund  Expires October 26, 2008               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft      Non-compound RTCP in RTP profile            Apr 2008


   [RFC4585]  Ott, J., Wenger, S., Sato, N., Burmeister, C., and J. Rey,
              "Extended RTP Profile for Real-time Transport Control
              Protocol (RTCP)-Based Feedback (RTP/AVPF)", RFC 4585,
              July 2006.

10.2.  Informative References

   [3GPP-MTSI]
              3GPP, "Specification : 3GPP TS 26.114 (v7.4.0), http://
              www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/26_series/26.114/
              26114-740.zip", March 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-avt-rtp-and-rtcp-mux]
              Perkins, C. and M. Westerlund, "Multiplexing RTP Data and
              Control Packets on a Single Port",
              draft-ietf-avt-rtp-and-rtcp-mux-07 (work in progress),
              August 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-avt-tfrc-profile]
              Gharai, L., "RTP with TCP Friendly Rate Control",
              draft-ietf-avt-tfrc-profile-10 (work in progress),
              July 2007.

   [OMA-PoC]  Open Mobile Alliance, "Specification : Push to talk Over
              Cellular User Plane, http://www.openmobilealliance.org/
              release_program/docs/PoC/V1_0_1-20061128-A/
              OMA-TS-PoC-UserPlane-V1_0_1-20061128-A.pdf",
              November 2006.

   [RFC3095]  Bormann, C., Burmeister, C., Degermark, M., Fukushima, H.,
              Hannu, H., Jonsson, L-E., Hakenberg, R., Koren, T., Le,
              K., Liu, Z., Martensson, A., Miyazaki, A., Svanbro, K.,
              Wiebke, T., Yoshimura, T., and H. Zheng, "RObust Header
              Compression (ROHC): Framework and four profiles: RTP, UDP,
              ESP, and uncompressed", RFC 3095, July 2001.

   [RFC3711]  Baugher, M., McGrew, D., Naslund, M., Carrara, E., and K.
              Norrman, "The Secure Real-time Transport Protocol (SRTP)",
              RFC 3711, March 2004.

   [RFC4566]  Handley, M., Jacobson, V., and C. Perkins, "SDP: Session
              Description Protocol", RFC 4566, July 2006.

   [RFC4588]  Rey, J., Leon, D., Miyazaki, A., Varsa, V., and R.
              Hakenberg, "RTP Retransmission Payload Format", RFC 4588,
              July 2006.

   [RFC5104]  Wenger, S., Chandra, U., Westerlund, M., and B. Burman,



Johansson & Westerlund  Expires October 26, 2008               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft      Non-compound RTCP in RTP profile            Apr 2008


              "Codec Control Messages in the RTP Audio-Visual Profile
              with Feedback (AVPF)", RFC 5104, February 2008.


Authors' Addresses

   Ingemar Johansson
   Ericsson AB
   Laboratoriegrand 11
   SE-971 28 Lulea
   SWEDEN

   Phone: +46 73 0783289
   Email: ingemar.s.johansson@ericsson.com


   Magnus Westerlund
   Ericsson AB
   Torshamnsgatan 21-23
   SE-164 83 Stockholm
   SWEDEN

   Phone: +46 8 7190000
   Email: magnus.westerlund (AT) ericsson.com



























Johansson & Westerlund  Expires October 26, 2008               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft      Non-compound RTCP in RTP profile            Apr 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Johansson & Westerlund  Expires October 26, 2008               [Page 16]


