MEGACO Working Group                            Matt Holdrege (Liaison)
Internet Draft                             Multiservice Switching Forum
June 1999                                           Media Control Group

       Multiservice Switching Forum requirements input to MEGACO
                <draft-ietf-megaco-msf-followup-00.txt>

Status of this Memo


        This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance
        with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its
   areas, and its working groups. Note that other groups may also
   distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
   "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check
   the "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts
   Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net
   (Northern Europe), ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au
   (Pacific Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu
   (US West Coast).

Copyright Notice

Copyright  (C) The Internet Society (1999).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract:
    This document serves as input into the IETF MEGACO requirements
    process. It includes requirements as input by MSF members and
    refined by the MSF Media Control group and requests clarifications
    of requirements currently being considered at IETF. This document
    has been prepared in response to a document prepared by Nancy
    Greene, one of the IETF Megaco Requirements editors. This is a
    followup to a response from MEGACO.

Disclaimer:
    This is a representation of the preliminary requirements generated
    by the Multiservice Switching Forum/Media Control Working Group.
    This document has been approved by the Working Group for liaison
    distribution to the IETF. However, this document in no way binds any
    of the member organizations to the ideas presented. It should also
    be noted that this work is incomplete and a draft. It is being
    submitted now to meet the MEGACO WG timelines. The MSF will revisit
    this work in the future and may add, change or delete its
    requirements.



Holdrege                                                        [Page 1]





I-D               MSF requirements followup to MEGACO          June 1999


Introduction:
    MSF submitted a document entitled "Multiservice Switching Forum
    requirements input to MEGACO" to the IETF MEGACO group as Internet
    draft draft-ietf-megaco-msf-reqs-01.txt for consideration. Most of
    the requirements proposed in draft-ietf-megaco-msf-reqs-01.txt have
    been incorporated in the latest MEGACO requirements draft draft-
    ietf-megaco-reqs-03. Nancy Greene, one of the editors of draft-
    ietf-megaco-reqs-03 provided a document detailing how the
    requirements in draft-ietf-megaco-msf-reqs-01.txt are addressed in
    draft-ietf-megaco-reqs-03.

    This document requests the addition of requirements into the next
    IETF MEGACO requirements draft that the MSF Media Control WG does
    not feel were not adequately addressed in draft-ietf-megaco-reqs-03.
    This document also requests clarification on some requirements that
    are currently in draft-ietf-megaco-reqs-03.

Requirements:

    Requirement 1:
    The original MSF document draft-ietf-megaco-msf-reqs-01.txt stated:
    Report: The protocol shall allow the request and notification of
    mid-call trigger events.

    The current version of draft-ietf-megaco-reqs-03 states:  5.4 c.
    Allow reporting of detected events on the MG to the MGC. The
    protocol should provide the means to minimize the messaging required
    report commonly-occurring event sequences.

    We would like the MEGACO requirements document to include the
    following requirement:  Report: The protocol shall allow the MGC to
    request the arming of a mid-call trigger even after the call has
    been set up.

Requirement 2:
    The original MSF requirement in draft-ietf-megaco-msf-reqs-01.txt
    read:  Function: The Protocol shall allow the recovery or
    redistribution of traffic without call/packet loss.

    The IETF response indicated:  Not added - no call/packet loss is too
    strict a requirement.

    We would like to modify the original requirement to read:  Function:
    The Protocol shall allow the recovery or redistribution of traffic
    without call loss.

    We hope that the restated requirement can be included in the IETF
    MEGACO requirements document.

Requirement 3:
    The requirements draft draft-ietf-megaco-reqs-03.txt states:  8. d.
    Support scalability from very small to very large MGs: The protocol
    must support MGs with capacities ranging from one to a few tens of
    thousands of terminations.



Holdrege                                                        [Page 2]





I-D               MSF requirements followup to MEGACO          June 1999


    We would like to modify the requirement to read:  8. d. Support
    scalability from very small to very large MGs: The protocol must
    support MGs with capacities ranging from one to millions of
    terminations.

Clarifications:
    We would like to require the following clarifications:

    Clarification 1:  The IETF draft draft-ietf-megaco-reqs-03.txt
    states:

    5.7. c. Provide the mechanism for the MGC to specify that the MG
    report accounting information automatically at end of call, in mid-
    call upon request, at specific time intervals as specified by the
    MGC and at unit usage thresholds as specified by the MGC.

    5.7. e. Allow the MGC to have some control over which statistics are
    reported, to enable it to manage the amount of information
    transferred.

    We would like the requirements to clarify the difference between
    accounting information and statistics. The current requirements have
    ambiguity regarding these two terms.

    The MSF view of the terms:  Statistics - aggregate information,
    usage measurements and counters Accounting - per call information,
    call detail record information (e.g. AMA). This information may be
    subjected to more rigorous auditing than statistical information as
    well as regulatory review.

Clarification 2:
    The IETF draft draft-ietf-megaco-reqs-03.txt states:

    d.  Specifically support collection of:

    * start and stop time, by media flow,

    * volume of content carried (e.g. number of packets/cells transmit-
      ted, number received with and without error, interarrival jitter),
      by media flow,

    * QOS statistics, by media flow.

    We would like to understand the reasoning behind collecting the
    specific type of statistics indicated in draft-ietf-megaco-reqs-
    03.txt compared to other information (e.g. type of resources like
    echo cancellers, codecs etc. used.)


    Author's Address 
    Matt Holdrege 
    Ascend Communications 
    1701 Harbor Bay Parkway 
    Alameda, CA 94502 
    matt@ascend.com






Holdrege                                                        [Page 3]


