

Network Working Group                                          S. Barber
Internet Draft                                  The UUCP Mapping Project
                                                               June 2000


               The Conclusion of the UUCP Mapping Project
               draft-barber-uucp-project-conclusion-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is NOT offered in accordance
   with Section 10 of RFC2026, and the author does not provide the IETF
   with any rights other than to publish as an Internet-Draft

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Motivation for This Memo

   The UUCP Mapping Project started in the early 1980s as a means to
   facilitate the exchange of electronic mail among sites using the UUCP
   store-and-forward transport mechanism. This software, originally
   part of the UNIX operating system became available on a variety of
   operating systems and platforms, from large mainframe to small home
   PC's. This was done by creating a single database of systems
   connected to each other via UUCP and then using path building
   software (such as pathalias) to determine the optimal path from one
   system to another. Email addresses using this system incorporated the
   use of the path as part of the address.

   With the evolution of the Internet into mainstream use, the use of
   UUCP for the exchange of electronic mail has been significantly
   reduced. Today, UUCP is primarily used to link systems that are not
   on the Internet to a nearby system that is connected. By use of mail



Barber                                                  [Page 1]





INTERNET DRAFT                                                 June 2000


   exchange resource records in the domain name system, these off-net
   systems can use the now-standard Internet email address format.

Concluding the Project

   Due to the fact that the maps are no longer widely used, the
   volunteers that make up the project have decided it is time to close
   down. The shutdown of the project will take three steps.

   The first step will be the freezing of the system database. This
   takes place at 0000 GMT on August 1, 2000. After that date, no
   further changes to the system database will be accepted.

   The second step will be the last postings of the system database to
   the newsgroup comp.mail.maps.  A penultimate posting will be made
   during the month of August. This will contain the final version of
   the map database prior to the conclusion of the project. During
   September, the final posting will be done. This posting will remove
   all listings from the map database except for selected gateways so
   that those sites that have no obvious alternative connectivity for
   email will continue to work until the end of the 2000.

   The final step will be the removal of the newsgroup comp.mail.maps as
   a valid newsgroup. This should be done during the month of November,
   2000.

IETF Documents that Reference the Project or the Maps

   RFC 915 describes a mail path service and specifically references
   pathalias and indirectly the maps maintained by the project.
   Following the conclusion of the project, the data returned by these
   servers will no longer be updated based on data maintained by the
   project.

   RFC 976 references the UUCP Project. The centralized registration
   operation referenced in this memo will be concluded on the time
   schedule outlined in this memo.

   RFC 1168 describes the database aspect of the project and makes
   specific reference to pathalias, EUNET and JUNET.

   RFC 1480 make notes that Internet US Domain registration is no
   affiliated with the registration of UUCP Map entries. It also
   contains an example of a UUCP Map entry as an illustration of an
   inappropriate registration for the US Domain.

   RFC 1588 makes reference to the UUCP Maps as something that could be
   returned by NETFIND.



Barber                                                  [Page 2]





INTERNET DRAFT                                                 June 2000


   RFC 1876 makes reference to the UUCP Maps, though it suggests that
   the DNS could be used to contain the location information available
   in the maps.

Acknowledgements

   A number of individuals have been instrumental in making the UUCP
   Project successful. Principle among them are Steve Bellovin and Peter
   Honeyman, the creators of pathalias which is the most popular
   software available for building paths from the system database.

   Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey, provided facilities for
   the project for many years. Mel Pleasant was the manager of the
   project before I succeeded him.

   There have been many volunteers who have contributed time (and money,
   in some cases) to the project. Here is the list I have been able to
   create. I apologize to anyone who may have been left off. It was most
   certainly an accident.

   Tohru Asami
   Jesse Asher
   Piet Beertema
   Bill Blue
   John Bossert
   Kent Brodie
   Malcolm Carlock
   Lee Damon
   Richard E. Depew
   Erik E. Fair
   Ken Herron
   Haesoon Cho
   Dave Davey
   Robert Elz
   Paul Graham
   Ed Hew
   Hokey
   Mark R. Horton
   Nike Horton
   C. Bryan Ivey
   Jeff Janock
   Bob Leffler
   K. Richard Magill
   Mikel Manitius
   Doug McCallum
   Jim Murray
   Mike O'Connor
   Todd Ogasawara
   John Owens



Barber                                                  [Page 3]





INTERNET DRAFT                                                 June 2000


   Bob Page
   Sanjay H. Pathak
   John Quarterman
   Rob Robertson
   Tim Rosmus
   Partono Rudiarto
   David Schmidt
   Larry Snyder
   Aris Stathakis
   Kris R. Stephens
   Gil Tene
   Tim Thompson
   Jeff Wabik
   Peter Wan
   Mike Wexler
   Eric Ziegast
   David Paul Zimmerman

Security Considerations

   Security considerations are not discussed in this memo.

Author's  Address:

   Stan Barber
   The UUCP Mapping Project
   P.O. Box 300481
   Houston, Texas 77230-0481
   sob@uucp.org






















Barber                                                  [Page 4]
























