 
Network Working Group                                        K.Nagahashi
Internet-Draft                                        The Univ. of Tokyo
Expires: April 24, 2006                                        T.Yoshida
                                                      NTT Communications
						                 K.Kondo
						           Intec Netcore
                                                           October 24, 2005

    IRIS - A Routing Registry (rreg) Type for the Internet Registry
                          Information Service
                     draft-kengo-crisp-iris-rreg-02

Status of this Memo
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents
   that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he
   or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she becomes aware will be disclosed, in
   accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 16, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This document describes an IRIS registry schema for Internet Routing
   information.  The schema extends the necessary query and result 
   operations of IRIS to provide the


kengo, et al.           Expires June 16, 2005                  [Page 1]
Internet-Draft                 iris-rreg                   December 2004

   functional information service needs for syntaxes and results used by
   Internet Protocol address registries.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1 Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Document Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4 
   4.  Feedback from Operators. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . .  5



Kengo, et al.           Expires August 14, 2005                  [Page 2]
Internet-Draft                 iris-rreg                   December 2004

1.  Introduction

   This document describes an IRIS namespace for Internet routing
   registries using an XML Schema [9] derived from and using the IRIS
   [2] schema.  This schema and registry type are provided to
   demonstrate the extensibility of the IRIS framework beyond the use of
   domains, a criteria defined in CRISP [4].

   The schema given is this document is specified using the Extensible
   Markup Language (XML) 1.0 as described in XML [6], XML Schema
   notation as described in XML_SD [8] and XML_SS [9], and XML
   Namespaces as described in XML_NS [7].


1.1 Motivation
  Our intention to apply  CRISP framework into Routing
  Registry is due to the current messy architecture 
  of routing registries.
  They  are scattered around the world but  neither hierarchical
  strcutre nor recursive look-up are 
  performed. This derives an inaccurate routing information
  in Routing Registry. 
  We have strong motivation to improve accuracy of the routing
  registries by introducing CRISP framework into routing registries.

  2 steps must be taken to improve the situation , (1) defines
  XML Schema for Routing Registry and (2)deploy CRISP enabled
  Routing Registry. 
  
  This document only focuses on the definition of XML schema for
  routing registries, and the deployment issues will be described
  in another document.




Kengo, et al.           Expires April 24, 2006                  [Page 3]
Internet-Draft                 iris-rreg                   October 2005

2.  Document Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119.


3. Requirements and Consideration
3.1 Requirements
   Like other iris schema e.g. areg, dreg, routing registry should
   be defined XML schema which  comprises query and responce.

   The query and responce in routing registry is similer with 
   areg since main objective of routing registry is to manage
   prefix, autonomous system and contact information.

   Followings are architectual requirements for implementing rreg,
   which is obviously different with other regs.

   1)RREG is intended to adapt into IRR(Internet Routing Registry),
     IRR offers various kinds of routing information such as
     prefix related information say who maintain its prefix and 
     origin-as, or Autonomous System information, say, what's
     policy AS represents like who imports, and export? 
     This syntax itself is defined by RPSL (Routing Policy
     Specification Language) and requires not only to
     interpret the language but also to support data transfer
     way in current IRR architecture.

     A current  data transfer way in IRR is mirroring.
     mirroring offers both advantages and disadvantages;
     the most important advantage is to guarantee "local copy"
     of all IRR databases. Unlike address or domain registry,
     routing registry requires "guarantee for data access"
     strictly. Suppose one ISP launches IRR database and 
     mirroring every 30 min, the ISP generates configuration
     from IRR database, if all network from IRR database will be
     down, no actual configurations are made. This story demands
     for highly redundancy where even if network is isolated,
     data access is still guaranteed.

   2)root resolution
     Since a routing registry are distributed without 
     strong relation, root resolution is a hard issue to solve. 
     One of straight forward solution is to decide the root 
      e.g. "rreg.nro.net" uniquely but it still requires to 
     discuss about it.
 
   3)query and registration
     A word "IRR" includes both query and registration,
     however, scope of rreg is only for query mechanism, no 
     registration mechanism is comprised. A registration
     protocol is standalized as EPP[11] and this will be described at 3.2.2.


Kengo, et al.           Expires April 24, 2006                  [Page 4]
Internet-Draft                 iris-rreg                   October 2005


3.2 Architectual Consideration 
3.2.1 mirroring           
   mirroring is an extreme implementatation of high redundancy.
   If all IRR databases are mirroring each other, every IRR database
   can guarantee local data access. On the other hand, mirroring
   lacks scalability; if a number of IRR database is increased,
   mirrorring overhead is likely increased. In that context, 
   scalability and redundancy are trade-off parameters to
   design routing registry architecture. 2 architectures can be
   assumemed for providing redundant rreg;

   1)to provide mirroring functionality into rreg
   2)to employ redundancy mechanism in CRISP framework

   As for 1), a simple idea is to define mirroring protocol
   and put the protocol into rreg specification. The protocol
   itself is not complicated; almost required function is to
   provide data synchronisation with updating  serial number.
   
   In about 2), IRIS framework provides S-NAPTR[12] cohabitation,
   this framework is not complete solution for "guarantee
   for data access" but this is another candidate for
   providing redundancy. 
   

3.2.2 query and registration relation with EPP
  As shown in requirement, data registration is another property
  of IRR functions. However, rreg does not provide data registration
  only provides query mechanism. 2 approaches can be assumed for 

  1)introducing registration function into rreg spec
  2)out of scope with rreg spec

  Since one of current issues in IRR is non-real time mirroring,
  where due to non-real time update, all data does not propagate
  correctly. This issue is not derived from registration but
  from query mechanism. Our intention is to improve query mecanism
  with employing CRISP framework. Thus data registration is
  out of scope with rreg spec. 



Kengo, et al.           Expires April 24, 2006                  [Page 5]
Internet-Draft                 iris-rreg                   October 2005


4.Feedbacks from Operators
  TBD 

   
5.  References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", RFC 2119, BCP 14, March 1997.

   [2]  Newton, A., "Internet Registry Information Service",
        draft-ietf-crisp-iris-core-07 (work in progress), July 2004.

   [3]  Newton, A., "Internet Registry Information Service (IRIS) over
        the Blocks Extensible Exchange Protocol (BEEP)",
        draft-ietf-crisp-iris-beep-07 (work in progress), July 2004.

   [4]  Newton, A., "Cross Registry Internet Service Protocol (CRISP)
        Requirements", RFC 3707, February 2004.

   [5]   Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
         specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [6]   World Wide Web Consortium, "Extensible Markup Language (XML)
         1.0", W3C XML, February 1998,
         <http://www.w3.org/TR/1998/REC-xml-19980210>.

   [7]   World Wide Web Consortium, "Namespaces in XML", W3C XML
         Namespaces, January 1999,
         <http://www.w3.org/TR/1999/REC-xml-names-19990114>.

   [8]   World Wide Web Consortium, "XML Schema Part 2: Datatypes", W3C
         XML Schema, October 2000,
         <http://www.w3.org/TR/2001/REC-xmlschema-2-20010502/>.

   [9]   World Wide Web Consortium, "XML Schema Part 1: Structures", W3C
         XML Schema, October 2000,
         <http://www.w3.org/TR/2001/REC-xmlschema-1-20010502/>.

   [10]  Reynolds, J. and J. Postel, "ASSIGNED NUMBERS", RFC 1700, STD
         2, October 1994.

   [11]  S. Hollenbeck,Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP)
         Mar 2004,RFC3730

   [12]  L. Daigle, A. Newton, Domain-Based Application Service Location 
         Using SRV RRs and the Dynamic Delegation Discovery Service (DDDS)
	 Jan 2005,  RFC3958



Kengo, et al.           Expires April 24, 2006                  [Page 6]
Internet-Draft                 iris-rreg                   October 2005

Authors' Addresses

   Kengo Nagahashi
   The University of Tokyo
   403 3rd. Eng. Bldng.
   7-6-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku   
   Japan
   Phone: +81 3 5841 7465
   EMail: kengo@nagahashi.org

   Tomoya Yoshida
   NTT Communications


   Kuniaki Kondo
   Intec Netcore


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.

Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.


 

