

SIPPING                                                         S. Olson
Internet-Draft                                                 Microsoft
Expires: August 30, 2002                                      March 2002


          Requirements for Content Indirection in SIP Messages
                draft-olson-sipping-content-indirect-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 30, 2002.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   Certain applications of the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) require
   the exchange of information between endpoints that is potentially too
   large to reasonably send directly in a SIP message.  This Internet-
   Draft defines requirements for a mechanism to indirectly specify such
   information so that a more appropriate non-SIP channel may be used
   for the transfer.









Olson                    Expires August 30, 2002                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     Content Indirection in SIP Messages        March 2002


1. Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].














































Olson                    Expires August 30, 2002                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     Content Indirection in SIP Messages        March 2002


2. Introduction

   The purpose of the Session Initiation Protocol [2] (SIP) is to
   create, modify, or terminate sessions with one or more participants.
   SIP is not intended as a general purpose transfer protocol in the way
   HTTP or FTP is.  One limitation of SIP in this regard is in the use
   of SIP over the UDP transport.  On such a transport, the size of the
   SIP message is effectively bounded by the MTU to avoid fragmentation.
   A reasonable nominal value for such an MTU would be 1500 bytes.
   Taking into account the potential size of routing information, a safe
   upper bound to use for SIP messages on the UDP transport would be
   1200 bytes.  Clearly this is not sufficient for carrying any
   arbitrary payload, though it is perfectly adequate for most session
   signalling.

   There may be scenarios however where session related data needs to be
   conveyed and the given data exceeds the recommended size for a SIP
   message.  There may also be scenarios where the session related data
   that needs to be conveyed does not directly reside on the endpoint or
   User Agent.  In such scenarios, it is desirable to have a mechanism
   whereby the SIP message can contain an indirect reference to the
   desired content.  The receiving party would then use this indirect
   reference to retrieve the content via a non-SIP transfer channel such
   as HTTP, FTP, or LDAP.



























Olson                    Expires August 30, 2002                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     Content Indirection in SIP Messages        March 2002


3. Example Use Cases

   There are several potential immediate users of such a content
   indirection mechanism.  These are examples only and are not intended
   to limit the scope or applicability of the mechanism.

3.1 Presence Publication

   The information carried in a presence document could potentially
   exceed the recommended size for a SIP (NOTIFY) request.  In such a
   situation, it would be desirable to send the NOTIFY request with an
   indirect pointer to the presence document which could then be
   retrieved by, for example, HTTP.

3.2 Document Sharing

   During an instant messaging session, a useful service is document
   sharing wherein one party sends an IM (MESSAGE request) with an
   indirect pointer to a document which is meant to be rendered by the
   remote party.  Carrying such a document directly in the MESSAGE
   request is not appropriate for most documents.  Furthermore, the
   document to be shared may reside on a completely independent server
   from the originating party.




























Olson                    Expires August 30, 2002                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     Content Indirection in SIP Messages        March 2002


4. Requirements

   REQ-1:  It MUST be possible to specify the location of content via
         one or more URIs [3].

   REQ-2:  It MUST be possible to specify the purpose and disposition of
         each URL independently.  At a minimum, the following
         dispositions SHOULD be supported:

         *     render: the content should be rendered

         *     publish: the content contains service data that the
               client wishes to push to the server

         *     retrieve: the content represents data that is to be
               shared between the client and server

         *     execute: the content represents executable data such as a
               script that is intended to be executed as part of the
               processing of this request

   REQ-3:  It MUST be possible to label each URL to identify if and when
         the content referred to by that URL has changed.  Applications
         of this mechanism may send the same URL more than once.  The
         intention of this requirement is to allow the receiving party
         to determine if the content referenced by the URL has changed
         without having to actually retrieve that content.  Example ways
         the URL could be labelled include a sequence number, timestamp,
         version number, etc.

   REQ-4:  It MUST be possible to specify the timespan for which a given
         URL is valid.  Applications of this mechanism MUST specify a
         lifetime for the URL.  This may or may not be the same as the
         lifetime for the content itself.

   REQ-5:  It MUST be possible for the UAC and the UAS to indicate
         support of this content indirection mechanism.  A fallback
         mechanism SHOULD be specified in the event that one of the
         parties is unable to support content indirection.

   REQ-6:  The mechanism MUST ensure that the element which uses the URI
         will be able to access a content type it understands.  This is
         to avoid losing the ability to negotiate content types when
         using the content indirection mechanism.

   REQ-7:  It SHOULD be possible to ensure the integrity of the URLs
         when they are received by the remote party.




Olson                    Expires August 30, 2002                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     Content Indirection in SIP Messages        March 2002


   REQ-8:  It MUST be possible for an automaton to process the content
         indirection without human intervention.

   REQ-9:  It MUST allow for indirect transference of content in any SIP
         message which would otherwise carry that content as a body.

   REQ-10:  It MAY allow for indirect transference of content in any SIP
         message which would otherwise carry that content as part of the
         SIP headers.  In other words, a SIP message with a large number
         of headers could transfer the content of those headers
         indirectly through this mechanism.

   REQ-11:  The content indirection mechanism MUST be usable as part of
         MIME multipart body. [4]





































Olson                    Expires August 30, 2002                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     Content Indirection in SIP Messages        March 2002


5. Open Issues

   o  Should there be backwards compatibility with text/uri-list?
















































Olson                    Expires August 30, 2002                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     Content Indirection in SIP Messages        March 2002


References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, Camarillo, Johnston, Peterson,
        Sparks, Handley and Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation
        Protocol", Internet Draft draft-ietf-sip-rfc2543bis-09, February
        2002.

   [3]  Berners-Lee, Fielding and Masinter, "Uniform Resource
        Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax", RFC 2396, August 1996.

   [4]  Freed and Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions
        (MIME) Part Two: Media Types", RFC 2046, November 1996.


Author's Address

   Sean Olson
   Microsoft
   One Microsoft Way
   Redmond, WA  98052
   US

   Phone: +1-425-707-2846
   EMail: seanol@microsoft.com
   URI:   http://www.microsoft.com/windows2000/technologies/communications/rtc























Olson                    Expires August 30, 2002                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     Content Indirection in SIP Messages        March 2002


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Olson                    Expires August 30, 2002                [Page 9]

