





INTERNET-DRAFT                                             Thomas Narten
Intended Status: Informational                                       IBM
<draft-narten-ietf-remote-participation-00.txt>             July 6, 2009

            Improving Remote Participation in IETF WG Meetings

              <draft-narten-ietf-remote-participation-00.txt>


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 2, 2010.


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.








draft-narten-ietf-remote-participation-00.txt                   [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                              July 6, 2009


Abstract

   This document discusses some steps for improving the ability of
   people to remotely participate in IETF meetings. This document makes
   some recommendations of "best practice", that if adopted, could
   improve the ability for people to participate in IETF meetings
   without needing to physically attend meetings. Improving the ability
   of participants to contribute and participate remotely would improve
   the overall effectiveness of the IETF and improve the quality of the
   work it produces.

Contents

   Status of this Memo..........................................    1

   1.  Introduction.............................................    2

   2.  Types of Remote Participation............................    3

   3.  Participation Scenarios..................................    5
      3.1.  Making the Most of Existing Capabilities............    6
      3.2.  Meeting Preparation.................................    7
      3.3.  Participation via Remote Text.......................    7
      3.4.  Meeting Etiquette...................................    8
      3.5.  Meeting Playback....................................    8

   4.  Summary and Conclusion...................................    9

   5.  Security Considerations..................................    9

   6.  IANA Considerations......................................    9

   7.  Acknowledgments..........................................   10

   8.  Normative References.....................................   10

   9.  Informative References...................................   10

   10.  Author's Address........................................   10


1.  Introduction

   It is not always possible for IETF participants to physically attend
   IETF meetings. Moreover, limiting participation to those with the
   resources to attend meetings can limit the effectiveness of the IETF
   and reduce the overall quality of its documents.




draft-narten-ietf-remote-participation-00.txt                   [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                              July 6, 2009


   The IETF has long made significant effort in making it possible to
   participate in work remotely. Most work is done on mailing lists,
   documents, presentations, audio recordings, etc. are archived and
   generally available. However, more work needs to be done.

   This document lays out a framework of for describing the requirements
   needed for various forms of remote participation.


2.  Types of Remote Participation

   There are a number of different scenarios for how someone might wish
   to participate remotely. For the purposes of this document, we focus
   only on remote participation related to "face-to-face meetings,"
   where a number of participants are expected to meet at the same place
   and time for some type of interactive discussion. These types of
   meetings are typified by the week-long IETF meetings and interim WG
   meetings.

   There is substantial range in the types of IETF meetings and the
   requirements for participating in such meetings. Individual WGs may
   have meetings with only a dozen or fewer participants; in contrast,
   IETF plenary sessions can have a thousand attendees. The conduct and
   style of meetings varies considerably as well. Some meetings are
   highly interactive, where there is much back-and-forth discussion
   between multiple participants. Other meetings are more structured,
   where there may be a (mostly) one-way presentation (with charts),
   followed by a question and answer session with participants lining up
   at a microphone. Other styles are also possible as is a mix of styles
   during different parts of a meeting.

   The following describes some common scenarios for remote
   participation. Using scenarios allows us to identify the key
   requirements for specific types of meetings, so that individual
   solutions to individual scenarios become possible, rather than
   attempting to find a "one size fits all" solution that would apply to
   every type of meeting.

   When considering IETF meetings, it is useful to categorize meetings
   along two separate axes. The size of the meeting is defined by the
   number of participants. Clearly, approaches for participating
   remotely in a small meeting (e.g., a dozen participants) varies
   significantly from approaches appropriate for a meeting with hundreds
   of participants. Adding remote participants to large meetings further
   complicates interaction possibilities.

   Separately, the style of a meeting influences the requirements for
   remote participation. Many meetings consist of a "broadcast" portion,



draft-narten-ietf-remote-participation-00.txt                   [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                              July 6, 2009


   where a single speaker presents a set of charts. Such presentations
   are typically followed by a more open question and answer session or
   even a general discussion. In such discussions, any participant may
   potentially wish to speak. However, dialog is generally structured,
   with a persons lining up at a (possibly virtual) microphone to speak
   or ask questions.

   Finally, one shouldn't forget the potential value of "lurking" in a
   meeting, where one (effectively) hears and sees all presentations and
   discussions, but does not speak up during the meeting itself. Such
   lurking can happen in real time, or after the fact via meeting
   archive materials.

   The current general IETF practice for WG meetings includes:

    1. Having presentations available electronically prior to the start
      of the presentation presentation.

    2. Recording and archiving audio of WG meetings.

    3. Producing official minutes (which may be summaries) [RFC2418].

    4. Maintaining a jabber room. The jabber room serves multiple
      purposes. First, someone (if there is a volunteer) attempts to
      transcribe (in real time) summaries of the conversations that are
      taking place at the meeting. Second, questions from remote
      participants entered into the jabber room can be relayed into the
      meeting by someone at the meeting. Third, the jabber session
      serves as a side channel for asking questions or otherwise
      discussing the topic of hand. Finally, the jabber log can serve as
      an additional log of some of the discussion that took place during
      the meeting.

    5. Streaming a real-time audio feed of live sessions across the
      Internet.


   The above describes the existing practice of current IETF meetings.
   Recently, there has been experimentation with additional technologies
   such as WebEx, or bridging in a remote presenter either via VoIP, a
   voice line, or even via cell phone. Results have been mixed. While
   there have been successes, there have also been failures.

   Some recent examples:

    - IPSecME held an interim meeting on May 5, 2009 involving about 20
      participants, all participating remotely. The meeting was
      considered a success by its participants. The tool TeamSpeak was



draft-narten-ietf-remote-participation-00.txt                   [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                              July 6, 2009


      used [IPSECME].

    - VMEET [VMEET] is an effort created after IETF 74 in San Francisco
      to look at improving the IETF remote participation capabilities.
      VMEET has tested a number of technologies to better understand
      whether they could be used for IETF meeting. Technologies include
      WebEx [VMEET-W] and Elluminate [VMEET-E].

    [ additional pointers needed... see
      http://www.ietf.org/meetings/interim.html]

   Small meetings of roughly 20 or fewer participants, where all
   participants are remote (i.e., everyone is "equal") can be made to
   work well. Likewise, large "broadcast" style meetings, where a single
   (or small number) of individuals give presentations, with only
   limited ability to ask questions, can be made to work.  Many of us
   have experience with both such types of meetings outside of the IETF.

   The trickier scenarios are those involving a larger number of
   participants, and a less structured interaction style, or one where
   potentially anyone can speak at anytime.


3.  Participation Scenarios

   There have been discussions in VMEET (and elsewhere) about what kind
   of tools and facilities are needed for effective remote
   participation. Some have focused on an "ideal" environment in a
   "worst-case" scenario, i.e, an IETF plenary with a thousand
   participants and many wishing to speak.

   Some have also argued that whiteboard collaboration tools are
   desirable, even though most WG meetings make use of such
   collaboration tools today only occasionally.

   The IETF already has some experience with small interim WG meetings
   handled via traditional conference bridges. In the following, we
   focus on more traditional IETF meetings where most participants
   physically get together in the same room. We attempt to describe
   various participation scenarios in approximate increasing order of
   complexity.

   1) The simplest form of remote participation is "lurking", where one
      listens in on a meeting, follows presentations and discussions,
      but does not actually provide any input. Indeed, one can
      effectively lurk by replaying a meeting recording (with associated
      materials) at a later time.  One can also listen to a live audio
      stream, leaving open the the option of interjecting into the



draft-narten-ietf-remote-participation-00.txt                   [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                              July 6, 2009


      discussion should the need arise.

   2) One step up from lurking is participating by asking questions or
      otherwise providing input via jabber. This works best when the
      questions are short (i.e., can easily be typed) and some delay can
      be tolerated between when a question is asked and when it is
      answered. It works less well as a question turns into a dialog or
      discussion. One limitation with meeting discussions via jabber is
      the delay between the poster and the responder is usually
      significantly longer than in an voice conversation (what a remote
      participant hears may be delayed by several seconds). Thus, use of
      jabber for the usual WG meeting discussion, while helpful, is not
      a substitute for direct participation in many cases.

   3) Another step in increasing capabilities involves having a
      presenter present from a remote location. This can be done with a
      traditional audio bridge, so long as it is hooked into the meeting
      room's PA system, something that is not done at current IETF
      meetings. In the remote presenter scenario, only a limited number
      of remote participants need speaking capabilities, and the timing
      of their participation usually follows a known schedule.

   4) A next step involves having a remote participant ask a voice
      question in real time. This requires either a conference bridge,
      possibly in conjunction with some sort of VoIP tool. When an audio
      bridge is used, the cost of participation increases (there is
      generally a per-line meeting charge), and there may be a limit to
      the number of "speaker lines" that can be supported effectively.
      Conference bridges based on VoIP may also have scaling limits in
      terms with disruptions stemming from significant delays (i.e, >
      150ms) in "turning the line around" when switching from one
      speaker to another.

   Overall, as the number of remote participants increases, it becomes
   increasingly necessary to have tools to facilitate discussion. For
   example, beyond roughly 20 speakers, managing the speaking order can
   easily become unwieldy and unworkable.


3.1.  Making the Most of Existing Capabilities

   In the following, we describe some common meeting scenarios that take
   place within the IETF today and attempt to make recommendations for
   best practices on how to maximize the effectiveness of meetings and
   remote participation.






draft-narten-ietf-remote-participation-00.txt                   [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                              July 6, 2009


3.2.  Meeting Preparation

   Like with all meetings, a productive meeting usually involves
   adequate advance preparation, including preparation by participants
   (i.e., reading the drafts). That includes having a formal agenda,
   providing advance access to background documents, etc. Unlike a face-
   to-face meeting, however, any charts used by presenters must also be
   made available in advance. It is extremely frustrating to try and
   follow a presentation for which one cannot see the charts.

   Additional checks should also me made to ensure that remote
   participants are able to participate adequately. Steps include:

   1. Testing that all microphones are working and that remote
      participants can hear those speaking clearly. (This also helps
      ensure that audio archives are usable.)

   2. If possible, verify that the audio stream is being recorded.

         Recommendation: Require that all presentations be available in
         advance, with enforcement by the WG chairs. In addition,
         develop simple checks to verify that remote participants can
         hear prior to starting.


3.3.  Participation via Remote Text

   Through Jabber, it has been possible for some time now for remote
   participants to post questions into the jabber room and have them
   read aloud during meetings. This supports simple interactions, but
   does not work well with discourse involving a lot of back-and-forth.
   Difficulties with the use of jabber for remote participation,
   include:

   - it is not always clear when a question for the meeting is asked
      (since there are often multiple conversations going on within a
      jabber room), or who's job (if anyone's) it is to relay the
      question.

   - Remote participates (connected only via jabber) are not able to
      participate in "sense of the room" hums

   Recommendations:

   1. Develop clear instructions/protocols for how a remote participant
      can formally "get in the queue" and provide input. Educate remote
      participants as to the process, and ensure that mechanisms are in
      place (even it if is just someone monitoring the chat room) to



draft-narten-ietf-remote-participation-00.txt                   [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                              July 6, 2009


      ensure that formal questions are processed during the meeting in a
      timely fashion.

   2. Explore ways for including remote participants in hums. It should
      be noted that ARIN's remote participation facilities include a
      separate jabber room that is only for asking formal questions and
      for hums; a separate jabber room is available for more general
      session-related use [ARIN].


3.4.  Meeting Etiquette

   It is always important that meeting participants follow good
   etiquette, but it is especially important when remote participants
   are present as they do not have the numerous other social cues
   available to someone physically present at a meeting. Steps include:

   1) Speakers should always use a microphone when speaking and always
      state there names prior to speaking.

   2) Speakers should speak slowly, starting with when they give there
      names. (This author has observed that many people speak their
      names so quickly that only those who already know the speaker can
      understand the name!)

   3) Presenters should always explicitly say when they are moving to
      another slide. To aid remote participants, presenters should
      specifically say to which chart they are moving to, either by
      giving the chart number or by mentioning the heading at the top of
      the slide.

   Recommendation: Take steps to ensure that speaker etiquette becomes
   part of the normal IETF culture. This may take the help of WG chairs
   to enforce.


3.5.  Meeting Playback

   The value of being able to review and revisit meetings (and the
   discussions that took place in them) cannot be underestimated.  Given
   the global nature of IETF participants, it is not generally possible
   to schedule meetings that satisfy everyone's timezone needs. Thus,
   some participants may find it better to review a meeting after the
   fact at a more convenient time, following up on the mailing list with
   any specific questions or concerns. This is doable in the IETF, so
   long as the longstanding rule and practice continues to be that all
   decisions made in a meeting must subsequently be confirmed on the
   mailing list.  In addition, late comments, those made after a meeting



draft-narten-ietf-remote-participation-00.txt                   [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                              July 6, 2009


   has ended, can still be extremely valuable, provided they are made in
   a timely fashion. Thus, it is important that all meeting materials
   (including recordings) be made available quickly, preferably within
   hours of the meeting. This refers in particular to any audio
   recording, since other materials will need to have been available
   prior to the meeting.

   Although the IETF maintains audio archives of its sessions, their
   management could be improved. They are overly hard to find, and it
   can take significant effort to locate specific portions related to a
   particular meeting or topic.  Recordings are presently archived in a
   flat directory, named by the time and location of the meeting; and
   appear to be unedited raw recordings.  There is no automatic way of
   going from a particular WG meeting to the specific audio segment for
   that meeting [AUDIO].

   Recommendation: Make the archiving of audio recordings a formal
   requirement of IETF meeting management.  Develop a better indexing
   system for audio archives of IETF meetings. Recordings should be
   readily findable as part of the proceedings, the "tools" agenda at
   tools.ietf.org, etc. This may be achievable (at least partly) via a
   WIKI and volunteers to edit the audio files. Establish a timeline for
   posting audio recordings after meetings.


4.  Summary and Conclusion

   This document has introduced some of the issues related to remote
   participation in the IETF. We have focused on current facilities and
   make some recommendations that can easily be done today, without
   major changes in existing work practices. Expanding remote facilities
   to more complicated environments (e.g., a large WG meeting with many
   active, remote participants) needs further study.


5.  Security Considerations

   This document has no known security implications.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no requests to IANA.








draft-narten-ietf-remote-participation-00.txt                   [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                              July 6, 2009


7.  Acknowledgments

   TBD

8.  Normative References



9.  Informative References

   [ARIN] ARIN's remote participation web page.
        https://www.arin.net/participate/meetings/ARIN-XXIII/remote.html

   [AUDIO] Audio archives of IETF WG meetings.
        ftp://videolab.uoregon.edu/pub/videolab/media/

   [RFC2418] "IETF Working Group Guidelines and Procedures," S. Bradner,
        September 1998.

   [IPSECME] IPSecME Interim Meeting, May, 2009.
        http://trac.tools.ietf.org/wg/ipsecme/trac/wiki/Interim20090505,
        http://trac.tools.ietf.org/wg/ipsecme/trac/wiki/ConferenceCalls

   [VMEET] VMEET mailing list:
        https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/vmeet.

   [VMEET-E] Archive of VMEET session that evaluated the Elluminate
        tool, May, 2009. http://www.samrg.org/vmeet/elluminate/

   [VMEET-W] Archive of VMEET session that evaluated the WebEx tool,
        April, 2009. http://www.ietf.org/mail-
        archive/web/vmeet/current/msg00154.html.



10.  Author's Address

   Thomas Narten
   IBM Corporation
   3039 Cornwallis Ave.
   PO Box 12195 - BRQA/502
   Research Triangle Park, NC 27709-2195

   Phone: 919-254-7798
   EMail: narten@us.ibm.com






draft-narten-ietf-remote-participation-00.txt                  [Page 10]

