

   CCAMP Working Group                            Eric Mannie (Ebone) 
   Internet Draft                     Dimitri Papadimitriou (Alcatel) 
   Expiration Date: December 2001               
                                                           June 2001 
    
    
      GMPLS Signaling Extension to Control the Conversion between 
        Contiguous and Virtual Concatenation for SONET and SDH. 
    
    
          draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-concatenation-conversion-00.txt 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  Internet-Drafts are 
   working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), 
   its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may 
   also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress." 
    
   To view the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the 
   "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in an Internet-Drafts Shadow 
   Directory, see http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
 
Abstract 
    
   This document is a companion to the GMPLS extensions for SONET and 
   SDH control [GMPLS-SONET-SDH]. It defines a way to control and 
   negotiate the use of converters between contiguous and virtual 
   concatenation in SONET and SDH networks. A new flag in the 
   Requested Contiguous Concatenation (RCC) field is proposed for 
   that purpose. 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
   When SONET/SDH LSPs are established and removed dynamically using 
   GMPLS signaling, some fragmentation of the SONET/SDH multiplex at 
   each interface can happen. For instance, it is possible to have some 
   free timeslots (holes) between larger set of allocated timeslots. 
   These holes cannot be used to route larger contiguously concatenated 
   signals.  
    
   This problem is expected to happen in a network where many non-
   concatenated and contiguously concatenated signals of different 

 
E. Mannie et. al.                                                    1 

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-concatenation-conversion-00.txt    June, 2001 

   sizes are dynamically established and removed. This issue is similar 
   to the partitioning that could happen on a hard disk. 
    
   After some time, the fragmentation could be so high that it could be 
   required to re-arrange locally the usage of the timeslots between 
   two nodes. This process means that a local bridge and roll of 
   circuits must be done. 
    
   To avoid such a problem, the ideal solution is to use only virtual 
   concatenation allowing inherently re-using the holes. However, much 
   SONET/SDH equipment∆s don∆t support virtual concatenation at all. 
   For instance, this is the case of most SONET/SDH interfaces on IP 
   routers. These interfaces being almost exclusively contiguously 
   concatenated interfaces (even not channelized). 
    
   To solve that issue, conversion between contiguously concatenated 
   signals and virtually concatenated signals can be used (and vice 
   versa). ITU-T G.783 2001 (section 12.5.2) specifies how to convert a 
   contiguously concatenated VC-4-Xc to a virtually concatenated VC-4-
   Xv (and vice versa) through the use of the S4 interworking function. 
    
   A contiguously concatenated signal can be converted to a virtually 
   concatenated signal at the ingress of a cloud. The inverse 
   conversion can take place at the egress of the cloud. Ideally, such 
   converters should be available as close as possible to the nodes 
   that are only capable of contiguous concatenation. However, in a 
   heterogeneous network one cannot expect that such converters will be 
   available everywhere where they will be needed. 
    
   The conversion capability should be advertised in routing protocols 
   to allow finding a path with the right ingress and egress 
   converters. It will become complex if the ingress converter belongs 
   to one routing domain while the egress converter belongs to another 
   routing domain. 
    
   At the opposite end of the spectrum one could consider that such 
   conversion capability can be available on a hop-by-hop basis at some 
   hops. In that case, the routing protocols and routing algorithms 
   don∆t need to take any new information into consideration. A path is 
   computed independently of the knowledge of converters and the 
   bandwidth optimization is done when available, on a hop-by-hop 
   basis. 
    
   In all cases the extension defined in this document allows to 
   negotiate the use of conversion between neighbors. The rules defined 
   hereafter must be applied when using this extension. 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL 
   NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" 
   in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119]. 
 
 
 
 
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001                    2 

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-concatenation-conversion-00.txt    June, 2001 

2. Control of conversion between contiguous and virtual concatenation  
    
   This section defines the following optional extension flag for the 
   Requested Contiguous Concatenation (RCC) field of section 2.1 of 
   [GMPLS-SONET-SDH]: 
    
     Flag 3 (bit 3): Adaptable contiguous concatenation. 
    
   This flag allows an upstream node to signal to a downstream node 
   that it supports the adaptable contiguous concatenation type. This 
   type of concatenation is defined hereafter as a way to negotiate 
   dynamically the use of contiguous to virtual concatenation 
   converters, and vice versa. It tends to maximize the use of 
   virtual concatenation in a network. 
    
   This extension is only applicable to VC-4-Xc signals as defined in 
   ITU-T G.783. It is not in the scope of this signaling 
   specification to define how the conversion is done in the data 
   plane. 
    
   This document will be extended with the adequate SONET references 
   in the next release. 
    
   The first LSR in the path supporting the conversion on its output 
   interface uses this extension to signal it, i.e. it sets the flag. 
   The flag is forwarded downstream with the adequate signaling message 
   until it reaches the destination. The first LSR may be the source 
   LSR itself, if it supports virtual concatenation and if it wants to 
   negotiate its use with the destination. 
 
   The destination answers positively with the adequate list of labels 
   if it supports it. The same is done in the upstream direction at 
   each hop, until it reaches the LSR providing the conversion function 
   (converter). Upstream of the converter, a unique label is used until 
   it reaches the source. 
    
   The signal is thus transported contiguously concatenated until it 
   reaches the first converter on the path and then it becomes 
   virtually concatenated until it reaches the destination. 
    
   Eventually, the positive answer reaches the source itself. In that 
   case, the signal is indeed virtually concatenated end-to-end. In 
   that case, this extension allows to request a contiguously 
   concatenated signal, and to negotiate the use of virtual 
   concatenation end-to-end. If supported, the virtual concatenation 
   will be used instead of the contiguous concatenation. 
    
   If not supported by the destination, a single label is sent upstream 
   by the destination. The same operation is done upstream at each hop, 
   until it reaches the first node, in the downstream to upstream 
   direction, able to convert from virtual to contiguous. 
    
   If such a node is found, a positive answer is sent upstream until it 
   reaches the node that has set up the flag. This node can be a 
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001                    3 

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-concatenation-conversion-00.txt    June, 2001 

   contiguous to virtual converter. In this case, the signal will be 
   transported contiguously concatenated from the source to the ingress 
   converter, then as virtually concatenated from the ingress converter 
   to the egress converter, and then finally as contiguously 
   concatenated from the egress converter to the destination. 
    
   Eventually, the negative answer reaches the source itself. In that 
   case, the signal is indeed contiguously concatenated end-to-end. 
    
   Indeed there are five possible cases and all were described here 
   before: 
    
      1. Contiguous concatenation end-to-end. 
      2. Contiguous followed by virtual concatenation. 
      3. Virtual followed by contiguous concatenation. 
      4. Contiguous, then virtual then contiguous concatenation. 
      5. Virtual concatenation end-to-end. 
    
   This simple scheme triggers finding and using the closest converter 
   to the source and the closest invert converter to the destination. 
   The routing algorithm can or cannot compute a route taking 
   converters into consideration. Moreover, there is no need to 
   indicate explicitly in the signaling which node must convert in 
   which way. 
 
   Note that simply using the virtual concatenation indication allows 
   neither to change the concatenation type on the fly, nor negotiating 
   the concatenation type end-to-end. Adaptable contiguous 
   concatenation is a way to advertise that contiguous concatenation is 
   supported (most frequent case) but that virtual concatenation could 
   be done instead (less frequent case). 
    
   The adaptable contiguous concatenation flag MUST be used together 
   with standard and/or arbitrary contiguous concatenation flags. These 
   last two flags allow knowing the type of contiguous concatenation to 
   apply in each contiguously concatenated part of the network. Note 
   that they don∆t need to be the same in case 4, each contiguous 
   segment can be effectively in a different type. 
    
   This extension is compatible and can be combined with the virtual 
   concatenation and multiplier features defined in [GMPLS-SONET-
   SDH]. If the result of the concatenation negotiation is a virtual 
   concatenation in some part of the network, then the number, order 
   and nature of the corresponding SONET/SDH timeslots pointed by the 
   labels unambiguously indicates the result of the negotiation. 
    
    
3. Acknowledgments 
    
   Valuable comments and input were received from Alexandre Geyssens, 
   Xavier Neerdaels and Philippe Noel. 
    
    
    
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001                    4 

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-concatenation-conversion-00.txt    June, 2001 

4. Security Considerations 
    
   This draft introduces no new security considerations to [GMPLS-
   SONET-SDH]. 
    
    
5. References 
    
   [GMPLS-LDP] Ashwood-Smith, P. et al, "Generalized MPLS Signaling - 
               CR-LDP Extensions", Internet Draft, 
               draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-cr-ldp-02.txt, 
               April, 2001. 
    
   [GMPLS-SIG] Ashwood-Smith, P. et al, "Generalized MPLS - 
               Signaling Functional Description", Internet Draft, 
               draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-signaling-02.txt, 
               February 2001. 
    
   [GMPLS-RSVP] Ashwood-Smith, P. et al, "Generalized MPLS 
                Signaling - RSVP-TE Extensions", Internet Draft, 
                draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-rsvp-te-02.txt, 
                April, 2001. 
    
   [GMPLS-ARCH] E. Mannie Editor, "GMPLS Architecture", Internet 
                Draft, draft-many-gmpls-architecture-00.txt, March, 
                2001. 
    
   [GMPLS-SONET-SDH] E. Mannie Editor, "GMPLS Extensions for SONET  
                and SDH Control", Internet Draft, 
                draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-sonet-sdh-01.txt, June, 
                2001. 
    
   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
             Requirement Levels," RFC 2119. 
    
    
   [RFC2210] Wroclawski, J., "The Use of RSVP with IETF Integrated 
             Services," RFC 2210, September 1997. 
 
 
6. Authors' Addresses 
    
      Eric Mannie 
      EBONE 
      Terhulpsesteenweg 6A 
      1560 Hoeilaart - Belgium 
      Phone:  +32 2 658 56 52 
      Mobile: +32 496 58 56 52 
      Fax:    +32 2 658 51 18 
      Email:  eric.mannie@ebone.com 
    
    
    
    
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001                    5 

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-concatenation-conversion-00.txt    June, 2001 

      Dimitri Papadimitriou 
      Senior R&D Engineer - Optical Networking 
      Alcatel IPO-NSG 
      Francis Wellesplein 1, 
      B-2018 Antwerpen, Belgium 
      Phone: +32 3 240-8491 
      Email: Dimitri.Papadimitriou@alcatel.be 















































 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001                    6 
