


Network Working Group                                         J. Klensin
Internet-Draft                                              June 2, 2004
Expires: December 1, 2004


            Terminology for Describing Internet Connectivity
                 draft-klensin-ip-service-terms-02.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed,
   and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 1, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   As the Internet has evolved, many types of arrangements have been
   advertised and sold as "Internet connectivity".  Because these may
   differ significantly in the capabilities they offer, the range of
   options, and the lack of any standard terminology, has caused
   considerable consumer confusion.  This document provides a list of
   terms and definitions that may be helpful to providers, consumers,
   and, potentially, regulators in clarifying the type and character of
   services being offered.





Klensin                 Expires December 1, 2004                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              IP Service Terms                   June 2004


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1   The Problem and the Requirement  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2   Adoption and a Non-pejorative Terminology  . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  General Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Additional Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1   Disclaimer -- Note in Draft  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2   Additional Useful Terms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . .  8






































Klensin                 Expires December 1, 2004                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              IP Service Terms                   June 2004


1.  Introduction

1.1  The Problem and the Requirement

   Different ISPs and other providers offer a wide variety of products
   that are identified as "Internet" or "Internet access".  These
   products offer different types of functionality and, as a result,
   some may be appropriate for certain users and uses and not others.
   For example, a service that offers only access to the Web, but that
   does not support any other type of Internet services, may be entirely
   appropriate for someone who is exclusively interested in browsing and
   in web-based email services, but not for someone who requires access
   to download files or make more intense use of email.  And it is
   likely to be even less appropriate for someone who requires the
   ability to operate servers for other users, who needs virtual private
   network (VPN) capabilities or other secured access to a remote
   office, or who needs to synchronize mail for offline use.

   Of course, the document describes only the functions provided or
   permitted by the service provider.  It does not, and cannot, specify
   the functions that pass through and are supported by various
   user-provided equipment.

   This document is a first attempt at establishing some definitions for
   these various services.  It is hoped that the definitions will evolve
   into ones that can be standardized and adopted widely enough to be
   useful to users and consumers.

1.2  Adoption and a Non-pejorative Terminology

   The definitions proposed here are clearly of little value if service
   providers and vendors are not willing to adopt them.  Consequently,
   the terms proposed are intended to not be pejorative, despite the
   belief of some members of the IETF community that some of these
   connectively models are simply "broken" or "not really an Internet
   service".

2.  General Terminology

   The terms listed in this section are the primary "IP Service Terms"
   and it is hoped that service providers will adopt them in describing
   offerings to potential users or customers.

   Terms are listed below more or less in order of ascending (to "full
   Internet") capability.  In each case, the terminology refers to the
   intent of the provider (ISP) as expressed in either technical
   measures or terms and conditions of service.  It may be possible to
   do some additional things with particular implementations of these



Klensin                 Expires December 1, 2004                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              IP Service Terms                   June 2004


   characteristic connectivity types, but those flexibilities are
   generally not the intent of the provider and are unlikely to be
   supported if the workarounds stop working.

   Web connectivity.  This service provides connectivity to the web
      only.  Other services are generally not supported.  In particular,
      there may be no access to POP3 or IMAP email, encrypted tunnels or
      other VPN mechanisms, etc.  The addresses used are generally
      dynamic, and may not be public.  The provider may impose a
      filtering web proxy on the connections; that proxy may change and
      redirect URLs to other sites than the one originally specified by
      the user or embedded link.

   Client connectivity only, without a public address.  This service
      provides access to the Internet without support for server or most
      peer to peer functions.  The IP address assigned to the customer
      will almost always be dynamic and will not represent public
      address space.  Filtering web proxies are common with this type of
      service, but the provider should indicate whether or not one is
      present.

   Client only, public address.  This service provides access to the
      Internet without support for server or most peer to peer
      functions.  The IP address assigned to the customer will often be
      dynamic but is in public address space.  Most VPN and similar
      connections will work with this service, although the provider may
      prohibit the use of server functions by either legal (contractual)
      restrictions or by filtering of incoming connection attempts.
      Filtering web proxies are uncommon with this type of service, and
      the provider should indicate if one is present.  Similarly, while
      filters that block, e.g., use of remote mail servers to submit or
      retrieve mail, are uncommon with this type of service, they do
      occur and their presence should be identified to the user (see
      also Section 3).

   Full Internet Connectivity.  This service provides the user full
      Internet connectivity, with one or more static public addresses
      (or dynamic ones that are long-lived enough to make operating
      servers practical without highly dynamic DNS entries) assigned to
      the user.  Filtering web proxies and other restrictions on inbound
      or outbound ports and traffic are usually considered incompatible
      with this type of service and servers on a connected customer LAN
      are typically considered normal.

3.  Additional Terminology






Klensin                 Expires December 1, 2004                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              IP Service Terms                   June 2004


3.1  Disclaimer -- Note in Draft

   [[This subsection is to be dropped or moved (presumably in modified
   form) to an appendix before final publication.]]

   This document is a first cut.  For these definitions to be useful,
   considerable input from the IETF community, suggestions for
   additional terms, and better definitions will be required.  The
   document assumes that a single set of terms will be adequate and that
   a more complex arrangement --e.g., a matrix or array that contrasts a
   service type with address availability, presence or absence of NATs,
   etc.-- is not needed.  If something more complex _is_ needed, someone
   should propose it, although this author is very skeptical about the
   possibility of getting acceptance for a complex, multidimensional
   scheme.

   The suggestion to move the list that now appears below into a
   separate "Additional Terminology" section is due to Brian Carpenter.
   It seems to be a good solution, but comments are needed as to whether
   this gets us into the "matrix" complexity that I have been trying to
   avoid.

   Comments on the initial draft of this document suggest that the
   observations above bear repeating and some expansion.  It is easy to
   come up with cases which the terms suggested do not provide adequate
   differentiation.  Some ISPs try to block VPNs in conjunction with
   their "client only" services, others do not.  In some parts of the
   world, interception and reinterpretation of DNS queries is common, in
   others it is quite rare.  Those factors, and others, suggest that the
   simple list below could easily be expanded into a matrix or
   multidimensional array of features.  That type of list might be
   useful for people writing commercial procurement specifications, but
   it would not be useful for the "what is being advertised and what are
   you likely to get" goal of this document.  For this specification,
   anything more complex than a simple list is almost certain to be
   unusable.

   Specifically, the following distinctions have been suggested, but
   have so far been resisted by the author as adding excessive
   complication.  They are listed both for further consideration and to
   illustrate how easily things can become complicated.  Input from the
   community is, of course, desired.

   If we preserve this new model, the language of the bullet items may
   need improvement: unlike the terms above, "the service should..." may
   not be the right introductory phrase.  Suggestions solicited.





Klensin                 Expires December 1, 2004                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              IP Service Terms                   June 2004


3.2  Additional Useful Terms

   These additional terms, while not as basic to understanding a service
   offering as the ones identified above, as listed as additional
   information that a service provider might choose to provide to
   complement those general definitions.  Or a potential customer might
   use those that are relevant as an in constructing a list of specific
   questions to ask.

   Version support.  The service should declare that it includes IPv4
      support only, both IPv4 and IPv6 support, or IPv6 support only.
   Authentication support.  The service should declare which technical
      mechanism(s) it uses to establish and possibly authenticate
      connections - such as unauthenticated DHCP, PPP, RADIUS, HTTP
      interception...
   VPNs and Tunnels.  Is IPSec blocked or permitted?  Are other
      tunneling techniques at the IP layer or below, such as L2TP,
      permitted?  Is there any attempt to block applications-layer
      tunnel mechanisms such as SSH?
   DNS support.  Are users required to utilize DNS servers provided by
      the service provider, or are DNS queries permitted to reach
      arbitrary servers?
   IP-related services.  Are ICMP messages to and from end user sites
      generally blocked or permitted?  Are specific functions such as
      ping and traceroute blocked and, if so, at what point in the
      network?
   Roaming support.  The service should declare whether or not it
      supports IP roaming.  [[Note in draft: this term probably needs to
      be defined sufficiently to make it useful.  Could whomever
      suggested listing it help here?]] And, for "broadband"
      connections, whether some dialup arrangement is supported for
      either backup or customer travel and whether that arrangement has
      full access to mailboxes, etc.
   Applications services provided.  The service should identify whether
      it provides email services and/or web hosting, and on what basis.
      An email services listing should identify whether POP3, IMAP, or
      web access are provided and in what combinations and what types of
      authentication and privacy services are supported or required for
      each.  Is FTP PASV supported or blocked?
   Applications blocking.  The service should declare whether it blocks
      use of SMTP or mail submission to other than its own servers and
      if its servers restrict the user to use of its domain names on
      outbound email.  Similarly, any actions of the service to block or
      restrict outbound use of other applications services should be
      identified.






Klensin                 Expires December 1, 2004                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              IP Service Terms                   June 2004


   Filtering.  The service should declare whether it provides filtering
      or protection against worms or denial of service attacks against
      its customers, virus and UCE filtering for its mail services (if
      any), non-discretionary or "parental control" filtering of
      content, and so on.
   Wiretapping and interception.  The service should indicate whether
      traffic passing through it is subject to lawful intercept with or
      without notice?  Is traffic data stored for possible use by law
      enforcement with or without notice?

4.  Security Considerations

   This document is about terminology, not protocols, and does not raise
   any particular security issues.  However, if the type of terminology
   that is proposed is widely adopted, it may become easier to identify
   security-related expectations of particular hosts, LANs, and types of
   connections.

5.  Acknowledgements

   This document was inspired by an email conversation with Vernon
   Schryver, Paul Vixie, and Nathaniel Bornstein.  While there have been
   proposals to produce definitions like the ones above for many years,
   that conversation convinced the author that it was finally time to
   get a strawman on the table to see if the IETF could actually carry
   it forward.  Harald Alvestrand, Brian Carpenter, George Michaelson,
   Vernon Schryver, and others made several suggestions on the initial
   draft that resulted in clarifications to the second one and Brian
   Carpenter and Pakka Savola made very useful suggestions that were
   incorporated into the third one.


Author's Address

   John C Klensin
   1770 Massachusetts Ave, #322
   Cambridge, MA  02140
   USA

   Phone: +1 617 491 5735
   EMail: john-ietf@jck.com










Klensin                 Expires December 1, 2004                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              IP Service Terms                   June 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Klensin                 Expires December 1, 2004                [Page 8]


