


Network Working Group                                     Christian Vogt
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Expires: September 5, 2009                                 March 4, 2009


               On the Harmfulness of Address Translation
           draft-vogt-address-translation-harmfulness-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 5, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   Address translation is widely considered harmful because its existing
   variants conflict with well-established design principles of the
   Internet engineering community.  Still, address translation has
   become common practice despite technical problems because it



Vogt                    Expires September 5, 2009               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft  On the Harmfulness of Address Translation     March 2009


   constitutes an easy-to-deploy solution to a set of common operational
   needs.  Since some of these needs will continue to exist in IP
   version 6, there is concern within the Internet engineering community
   about the potential proliferation of harmful technology from IP
   version 4 to IP version 6.  This paper investigates these concerns.
   It analyzes feasible address translator designs, explains why the
   problems of address translation, as used today, are to a significant
   extent specific to IP version 4, and shows how the problems can be
   mitigated in IP version 6.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3




































Vogt                    Expires September 5, 2009               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft  On the Harmfulness of Address Translation     March 2009


1.  Introduction

   Address translation is widely considered harmful because its existing
   variants conflict with well-established design principles of the
   Internet engineering community.  Still, address translation has
   become common practice despite technical problems because it
   constitutes an easy-to-deploy solution to a set of common operational
   needs.  Since some of these needs will continue to exist in IP
   version 6, there is concern within the Internet engineering community
   about the potential proliferation of harmful technology from IP
   version 4 to IP version 6.  This paper investigates these concerns.
   It analyzes feasible address translator designs, explains why the
   problems of address translation, as used today, are to a significant
   extent specific to IP version 4, and shows how the problems can be
   mitigated in IP version 6.


Author's Address

   Christian Vogt
   Ericsson Research
   200 Holger Way
   San Jose, CA  95134
   United States

   Email: christian.vogt@ericsson.com

























Vogt                    Expires September 5, 2009               [Page 3]

