   Internet Draft                                                          
   Category: Informational                                                 
   Document: <draft-ietf-psamp-framework-06.txt>                                
   Expires: January 2005                             Nick Duffield(Editor) 
                                                      AT&T Labs í Research 
                                                                           
                                                                 July 2004 
    
    
                A Framework for Packet Selection and Reporting 
    
    
   Status of this Memo 
    
      This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
      all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.  
       
      Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
      Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
      other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
      Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
      six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
      documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
      as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
      progress."  
       
      The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
      http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
       
      The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
      http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
       
   Abstract 
       
      This document specifies a framework for the PSAMP (Packet Sampling) 
      protocol. The functions of this protocol are to select packets from 
      a stream according to a set of standardized reports, form ra stream 
      of reports on the selected packets, and to export that stream to a 
      collector. This framework details the components of this 
      architecture, then describes some generic requirements, motivated 
      the dual aims of ubiquitous deployment and utility of the reports 
      for applications. Detailed requirements for selection, reporting 
      and export are described, along with configuration of the PSAMP 
      functions. 
       
       
       
      Comments on this document should be addressed to the PSAMP Working 
      Group mailing list: psamp@ops.ietf.org 
       
      To subscribe: psamp-request@ops.ietf.org, in body: subscribe 
      Archive: https://ops.ietf.org/lists/psamp/ 
    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                 [Page 1] 



   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
       
       
       
       
       
   Table of Contents 
    
      1.   PSAMP Documents Overview.....................................3 
      2.   Introduction.................................................4 
      3.   Elements, Terminology and Architecture.......................4 
      3.1  High-level description of the PSAMP Architecture.............5 
      3.2  Observation Points, Packet Streams and Packet Content........5 
      3.3  Selection Process............................................6 
      3.4  Reporting Process............................................7 
      3.5  Measurement Process..........................................8 
      3.6  Exporting Process............................................8 
      3.7  PSAMP Device.................................................9 
      3.8  Collector....................................................9 
      3.9  Possible configurations......................................9 
      3.10 PSAMP and IPFIX Interaction..................................9 
      4.   Generic Requirements for PSAMP..............................10 
      4.1  Generic Selection Process Requirements......................10 
      4.2  Generic Reporting Process Requirements......................11 
      4.3  Generic Export Process Requirements.........................11 
      4.4  Generic Configuration Requirements..........................12 
      5.   Packet Selection Operations.................................12 
      5.1  Two Types of Selection Operation............................12 
      5.2  PSAMP Packet Selection Operations...........................13 
      5.3  Input Sequence Numbers for Primitive Selection Processes....15 
      5.4  Composite Selectors.........................................15 
      5.5  Constraints on the Sampling Frequency.......................16 
      6.   Reporting Process...........................................16 
      6.1  Mandatory Contents of Packet Reports........................16 
      6.2  Extended Packet Reports.....................................16 
      6.3  Extended Packet Reports in the Presence of IPFIX............17 
      6.4  Report Interpretation.......................................17 
      6.5  Report Timeliness...........................................18 
      7.   Parallel Measurement Processes..............................19 
      8.   Export Process..............................................20 
      8.1  Use of IPFIX................................................20 
      8.2  Congestion-aware Unreliable Transport.......................20 
      8.3  Limiting Delay for Export Packets...........................20 
      8.4  Configurable Export Rate Limit..............................20 
      8.5  Collector Destination.......................................21 
      8.6  Local Export................................................21 
      9.   Configuration and Management................................21 
      10.  Feasibility and Complexity..................................22 
      10.1 Feasibility.................................................22 
      10.1.1 Filtering..................................................22 
      10.1.2 Sampling...................................................22 
      10.1.3 Hashing....................................................22 
      10.1.4 Reporting..................................................23 
    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                 [Page 2] 
    


   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
      10.1.5 Export.....................................................23 
      10.2 Potential Hardware Complexity...............................23 
      11.  Applications................................................24 
      11.1 Baseline Measurement and Drill Down.........................24 
      11.2 Passive Performance Measurement.............................25 
      11.3 Troubleshooting.............................................25 
      12.  Security Considerations.....................................26 
      13.  Normative References........................................27 
      14.  Informative References......................................27 
      15.  Authors' Addresses..........................................28 
      16.  Intellectual Property Statement.............................30 
      17.  Full Copyright Statement....................................30 
    
                                                                
       
      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved. 
      This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
      all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026. 
       
      Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
      Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
      other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- 
      Drafts. 
       
      Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
      months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
      documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
      as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
      progress." 
       
      The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
      http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
       
      The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
      http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
          
      The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
      "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
      this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119. 
    
       
   1. PSAMP Documents Overview 
       
       
      The PSAMP protocol specifies how network elements are to sample or 
      otherwise select a subset of packets passing through them, and how 
      reports on the selected packets are to be exported. The following 
      documents will describe the PSAMP protocol. 
       
      PSAMP-FRAMEWORK: ŸA Framework for Packet Selection and Reporting÷. 
      This document. This framework document is for informational 
      purposes; the normative references for PSAMP are the four documents 
    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                 [Page 3] 
    


   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
      listed below [PSAMP-TECH], [PSAMP-MIB], [PSAMP-PROTO], [PSAMP-
      INFO]. Definitions of terminology and the use of the terms Ÿmust÷, 
      Ÿshould÷ and Ÿmay÷ in this document are informational only. 
       
      [PSAMP-TECH]: ŸSampling and Filtering Techniques for IP Packet 
      Selection÷, describes the set of packet selection techniques 
      supported by PSAMP. 
       
      [PSAMP-MIB]: ŸDefinitions of Managed Objects for Packet Sampling÷ 
      describes the PSAMP Management Information Base  
       
      [PSAMP-PROTO]: ŸPacket Sampling (PSAMP) Protocol Specifications÷ 
      specifies the export of packet information from a PSAMP Exporting 
      Process to a PSAMP Colleting Process 
          
      [PSAMP-INFO]: ŸInformation Model for Packet Sampling Exports÷ 
      defines an information and data model for PSAMP. 
           
       
   2. Introduction 
       
      This document describes the PSAMP framework for network elements to 
      select subsets of packets by statistical and other methods, and to 
      export a stream of reports on the selected packets to a collector.  
       
      The motivation to codify the PSAMP standard comes from the need for 
      measurement-based support for network management and control across 
      multivendor domains. This requires domain wide consistency in the 
      types of selection schemes available, the manner in which the 
      resulting measurements are presented, and consequently, consistency 
      of the interpretation that can be put on them. 
       
      The motivation for specific packet selection operations comes from 
      the applications that they enable. Development of the PSAMP 
      standard is open to influence by the requirements of standards in 
      related IETF Working Groups, for example, IP Performance Metrics 
      (IPPM) [RFC-2330] and Internet Traffic Engineering (TEWG).  
       
      The name PSAMP is a contraction of the phrase Packet Sampling. The 
      word Ÿsampling÷ captures the idea that only a subset of all packets 
      passing a network element will be selected for reporting. But PSAMP 
      selection operations include random selection, deterministic 
      selection (filtering), and deterministic approximations to random 
      selection (hash-based selection). 
       
       
       
       
   3. Elements, Terminology and Architecture 
       


    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                 [Page 4] 
    



   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
   3.1 High-level description of the PSAMP Architecture 
       
      Here is an informal high level description of the PSAMP protocol 
      operating in a PSAMP device (all terms will be defined presently). 
      A stream of packets is observed at an observation point. A 
      selection process inspects each packet to determine whether it 
      should be selected. A reporting process constructs a report on each 
      selected packet, using the packet content, and possibly other 
      information such as the packet treatment or arrival timestamps. 
      exporting process sends the reports to a collector, together with 
      any subsidiary information needed for their interpretation.  
    
    
      The following figure indicates the sequence of the three process, 
      selection, reporting, and exporting, within the PSAMP device. The 
      composition of the selection process followed by the reporting 
      process is known as the measurement process. 
       
                 +---------+    +---------+    +---------+ 
       Packet    |Selection|    |Reporting|    |Exporting| 
       Stream--->|Process  |--->|Process  |--->|Process  |--->Collector   
                 +---------+    +---------+    +---------+  
                     Measurement Process                         
    
      The following sections give the detailed definitions of each of all 
      the objects just named. 
       
       
   3.2 Observation Points, Packet Streams and Packet Content 
       
      This section contains the definition of terms relevant to obtaining 
      the packet input to the selection process.  
       
      * Observation Point  
       
        An observation point is a location in the network where packets 
        can be observed. Examples include: 
         
             (i) a line to which a probe is attached; 
             (ii) a shared medium, such as an Ethernet-based LAN; 
             (iii) a single port of a router, or set of interfaces 
             (physical or logical) of a router; 
             (iv) an embedded measurement subsystem within an interface. 
              
        Note that one observation point may be a superset of several 
        other observation points.  For example one observation point can 
        be an entire line card.  This would be the superset of the 
        individual observation points at the line card's interfaces. 
       
       
      * Observed Packet Stream. 
         
    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                 [Page 5] 
    


   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
        The observed packet stream is the set of all packets observed at 
        the observation point. 
       
      * Packet Stream 
    
           A packet stream denotes a subset of the observed packet 
           stream. 
            
         
      * Packet Content 
       
           The packet content denotes he union of the packet header 
           (which includes link layer, network layer and other 
           encapsulation headers) and the packet payload. 
       
       
      Note that packets selected from a stream, e.g. by sampling, do not 
      necessarily possess a property by which they can be distinguished 
      from packets that have not been selected. For this reason the term 
      Ÿstream÷ is favored over Ÿflow÷, which is defined as set of packets 
      with common properties [IPFIX-REQUIRE]. 
       
   3.3 Selection Process 
       
      This section defines a selection process and related objects. 
       
      * Selection Process 
         
        A selection process takes a packet stream as its input and 
        selects a subset of that stream as its output. 
         
      * Selection State:  
       
           A selection process may maintain state information for use by 
           the selection process and/or the reporting process. At a given 
           time, the selection state may depend on packets observed at 
           and before that time, and other variables. Examples include: 
             
                  (i) sequence numbers of packets at the input of 
                  selectors; 
                   
                  (ii) a timestamp of observation of the packet at the 
                  observation point; 
                   
                  (iii) iterators for pseudorandom number generators; 
                
                  (iv) hash values calculated during selection; 
             
                  (v) indicators of whether the packet was selected by a 
                  given selector; 
                   


    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                 [Page 6] 
    


   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
           Selection processes may change portions of the selection state 
           as a result of processing a packet. Selection state for a 
           packet is to reflect the state after processing the packet. 
            
      * Selector:  
       
           A selector defines the action of a selection process on a 
           single packet of its input. A selected packet becomes an 
           element of the output packet stream of the selection process. 
            
           The selector can make use of the following information in 
           determining whether a packet is selected: 
            
           (i) the packetËs content; 
       
           (ii) information derived from the packet's treatment at the 
      observation point; 
       
           (iii) any selection state that may be maintained by the 
           selection process. 
            
      * Composite Selection Process:               
         
           A composite selection process is an ordered composition of 
           selection processes, in which the output stream issuing from 
           one component forms the input stream for the succeeding 
           component.  
            
      * Composite Selector:  
         
           A selector is composite if it defines a composite selection 
           process. 
       
    
      * Primitive Selection Process:  
       
           A selection process is primitive if it is not a composite a 
           selection process. 
            
      * Primitive Selector:  
       
           A selector is primitive if it defines a primitive selection 
           process. 
            
   3.4 Reporting Process 
       
      * Reporting Process:  
       
           A reporting process creates a report stream on packets 
           selected by a selection process, in preparation for export. 
           The input to the reporting process comprises that information 
           available to the selection process per selected packet, 
    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                 [Page 7] 
    


   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
           specifically: 
            
             (i) the selected packetËs content; 
              
             (ii) information derived from the selected packet's 
             treatment at the observation point; 
              
             (iii) any selection state maintained by the inputting 
             selection process, reflecting any modifications to the 
             selection state made during selection of the packet. 
              
              
      * Packet Reports:  
            
           Packet reports comprise a configurable subset of a packetËs 
           input to the reporting process, including the packetËs 
           content, information relating to its treatment, and its 
           associated selection state. 
    
      * Report Interpretation:  
            
           Report interpretation comprises subsidiary information 
           relating to one or more packets, that is used for 
           interpretation of their packet reports. Examples include 
           configuration parameters of the selection process and of the 
           reporting process. 
    
      * Report Stream: 
            
           The report stream is the output of a reporting process, 
           comprising two distinguished types of information: packet 
           reports, and report interpretation. 
              
   3.5 Measurement Process 
    
      * A Measurement Process is the composition of a selection process 
        that takes the observed packet stream as its input, followed by a 
        reporting process. 
       
   3.6 Exporting Process 
       
      * Exporting Process:  
         
        An exporting process sends the output of one or more measurement 
        processes to one or more collectors.  
    
      * Export Packets:  
         
        one or more packet reports, and perhaps report interpretation,               
        are bundled by the export process into a export packet for export 
        to a collector. 
         
    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                 [Page 8] 
    


   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
   3.7 PSAMP Device 
       
      A PSAMP Device is a device hosting at least a PSAMP observation 
      point, a measurement process and an exporting process. Typically, 
      corresponding observation point(s), measurement process(es) and 
      exporting process(es) are co-located at this device, for example at 
      a router. 
       
       
   3.8 Collector 
       
      A collector receives a report stream exported by one or more export 
      processes. In some cases, the host of the measurement and/or export 
      processes may also serve as the collector. 
    
     
   3.9 Possible configurations 
        
      Various possibilities for the high level architecture of these 
      elements are as follows. 
       
          MP = Measurement Process, EP = Export Process 
       
         +---------------------+                 +------------------+ 
         |Observation Point(s) |                 | Collector(1)     | 
         |MP(s)--->EP----------+---------------->|                  |     
         |MP(s)--->EP----------+-------+-------->|                  | 
         +---------------------+       |         +------------------+ 
                                       |     
         +---------------------+       |         +------------------+ 
         |Observation Point(s) |       +-------->| Collector(2)     | 
         |MP(s)--->EP----------+---------------->|                  | 
         +---------------------+                 +------------------+ 
                                          
         +---------------------+          
         |Observation Point(s) |          
         |MP(s)--->EP---+      |          
         |              |      |          
         |Collector(3)<-+      | 
         +---------------------+   
       
   3.10    PSAMP and IPFIX Interaction 
       
      The PSAMP measurement process can be viewed as analogous to the 
      IPFIX metering process. The PSAMP measurement process takes an 
      observed packet stream as its input, and produces packet reports as  
      its output. The IPFIX metering process produces flow records as its 
      output. The distinct name Ÿmeasurement process÷ has been retained  
      in order to avoid potential confusion in settings where IPFIX and 
      PSAMP coexist, and in order to avoid the implicit requirement that  
      the PSAMP version satisfy the requirements of an IPFIX metering  
      process (at least while these are under development). The 
    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                 [Page 9] 
    


   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
      relationship between PSAMP and IPFIX is described fully in [PSAMP-
      INFO].  
    
       
       
    
   4. Generic Requirements for PSAMP 
       
      This section describes the generic requirements for the PSAMP 
      protocol. A number of these are realized as specific requirements 
      in later sections. 
    
    
   4.1 Generic Selection Process Requirements. 
       
      * Ubiquity: The selectors must be simple enough to be implemented 
        ubiquitously at maximal line rate. 
       
      * Applicability: the set of selectors must be rich enough to 
        support a range of existing and emerging measurement based 
        applications and protocols. This requires a workable trade-off 
        between the range of traffic engineering applications and 
        operational tasks it enables, and the complexity of the set of 
        capabilities. 
       
      * Extensibility: the protocol must be able to accommodate 
        additional packet selectors not currently defined. 
       
      * Flexibility: the protocol must support selection of packets using 
        various network protocols or encapsulation layers, including 
        Internet Protocol Version 4 (IPv4) [IPv4], Internet Protocol 
        Version 6 (IPv6) [RFC-2460], and Multiprotocol Label Switching 
        (MPLS) [RFC-3031].  
    
      * Robust Selection: packet selection must be robust against 
        attempts to craft an observed packet stream from which packets 
        are selected disproportionately (e.g. to evade selection, or 
        overload measurement systems). 
    
      * Parallel Measurement Processes: the protocol must support 
        simultaneous operation of multiple independent measurement 
        processes at the same host. 
       
      * Non-Contingency: the selection decision for each packet must not 
        depend on future packets.   
       
      * Encrypted Packets: selection operations based on interpretation 
        of packet fields must be configurable to ignore (i.e. not select) 
        encrypted packets, when they are detected.  
    
      Selectors are outlined in Section 5, and described in more detail 
      in the companion document [PSAMP-TECH].  
    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                [Page 10] 
    


   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
       
   4.2 Generic Reporting Process Requirements 
       
      * Self-defining: the report stream must be complete in the sense 
        that no additional information need be retrived from the 
        observation point in order to interpret and analyze the reports.   
       
      * Indication of Information Loss: the reports stream must include 
        sufficient information to indicate or allow the detection of loss 
        occurring within the selection, reporting or exporting processes, 
        or in transport. This may be achieved by the use of sequence 
        numbers. 
       
      * Accuracy: the report stream must include information that enables 
        the accuracy of measurements to be determined. 
       
      * Faithfulness: all reported quantities that relate to the packet 
        treatment must reflect the router state and configuration 
        encountered by the packet at the time it is received by the 
        measurement process. 
       
      * Privacy: selection of the content of packet reports will be 
        cognizant of privacy and anonymity issues while being responsive 
        to the needs of measurement applications, and in accordance with 
        [RFC-2804].  Full packet capture of arbitrary packet streams is 
        explicitly out of scope. 
    
      A specific reporting process meeting these requirements, and the 
      requirement for ubiquity, is described in Section 6. 
       
   4.3 Generic Export Process Requirements 
       
      * Timeliness: configuration must allow for limiting of buffering 
        delays for the formation and transmission for export reports. See 
        Section 6.5for further details. 
       
      * Congestion Avoidance: export of a report stream across a network 
        must be congestion avoiding in compliance with [RFC-2914]. 
       
      * Secure Export: 
              
        (i) confidentiality: the option to encrypt exported data must be 
        provided. 
     
        (ii) integrity: alterations in transit to exported data must be 
        detectable at the collector 
              
        (iii) authenticity: authenticity of exported data must be 
        verifiable by the collector in order to detect forged data. 
       
      The motivation here is the same as for security in IPFIX export; 
      see Sections 6.3 and 10 of [IPFIX-REQUIRE].   
    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                [Page 11] 
    


   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
       
   4.4 Generic Configuration Requirements 
       
      * Ease of Configuration: of sampling and export parameters, e.g. 
        for automated remote reconfiguration in response to collected 
        reports. 
       
      * Secure Configuration: the option to configure via protocols that 
        prevent unauthorized reconfiguration or eavesdropping on 
        configuration communications must be available.  Eavesdropping on 
        configuration might allow an attacker to gain knowledge that 
        would be helpful in crafting a packet stream to evade subversion, 
        or overload the measurement infrastructure. 
    
      Configuration is discussed in Section 9. Feasibility and complexity 
      of PSAMP operations is discussed in Section 10. 
       
       
   5. Packet Selection Operations 
       
   5.1 Two Types of Selection Operation 
    
      PSAMP categorizes selection operations into two types: 
       
      * Filtering: a filter is a selection operation that selects a 
        packet deterministically based on the packet content, its 
        treatment, and functions of these occurring in the selection 
        state. Two examples are: 
      *  
           (i) Mask/match filtering.  
              
           (ii) 
             Hash-based selection: a hash function is applied to the 
             packet content, and the packet is selected if the result 
             falls in a specified range. 
       
      * Sampling: a selection operation that is not a filter is called a 
        sampling operation. This reflects the intuitive notion that if 
        the selection of a packet cannot be determined from its content 
        alone, there must be some type of sampling taking place.  
         
        Sampling operations can be divided into two subtypes: 
    
           (i) Content-independent Sampling, which does not use packet 
             content in reaching sampling decisions. Examples include 
             periodic sampling, and uniform pseudorandom sampling driven 
             by a pseudorandom number whose generation is independent of 
             packet content. Note that in content-independent sampling it 
             is not necessary to access the packet content in order to 
             make the selection decision. 
       
           (ii) 
             Content-dependent Sampling, in which the packet content is 
             used in reaching selection decisions Examples include 
    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                [Page 12] 
    









   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
             pseudorandom selection according to a probability that 
             depends on the contents of a packet field; note that this is 
             not a filter. 
    
       
   5.2 PSAMP Packet Selection Operations 
       
      A spectrum of packet selection operations is described in detail in 
      [PSAMP-TECH]. Here we only briefly summarize the meanings for 
      completeness. 
    
      A PSAMP selection process must support at least one of the 
      following selectors. 
          
      * Systematic Time Based Sampling: packet selection is triggered at 
        periodic instants separated by a time called the spacing. All 
        packets that arrive within a certain time of the trigger (called 
        the interval length) are selected. 
       
      * Systematic Count Based Sampling: similar to systematic time based 
        expect that selection is reckoned with respect to packet count 
        rather than time. Packet selection is triggered periodically by 
        packet count, a number of successive packets being selected 
        subsequent to each trigger. 
       
      * Uniform Probabilistic Sampling: packets are selected 
        independently with fixed sampling probability p. 
       
      * Non-uniform Probabilistic Sampling: packets are selected 
        independently with probability p that depends on packet content. 
       
      * Probabilistic n-out-of-N Sampling: form each count-based 
        successive block of N packets, n are selected at random  
       
      * Mask/match Filtering: this entails taking the masking portions of 
        the packet (i.e. taking the bitwise AND with a binary mask) and 
        selecting the packet if the result falls in a range specified in 
        the selection parameters of the filter.  This specification 
        doesn't preclude the future definition of a high level syntax for 
        defining filtering in a concise way (e.g. TCP port taking a 
        particular value) providing that syntax can be compiled into the 
        bitwise expression. 
         
        Mask/match operations should be available for different protocol 
        portions of the packet header: 
    
           (i) the IP header (excluding options in IPv4, stacked headers 
           in IPv6) 
            
           (ii) transport header 
            


    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                [Page 13] 
    









   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
           (iii) encapsulation headers (e.g. the MPLS label stack) if 
           present) 
         
        When the host of a selection process offers mask/match filtering, 
        and, in its usual capacity other than in performing PSAMP 
        functions, identifies or processes information from one or more 
        of the above protocols, then the information should be made 
        available for filtering. For example, when a host routes based on 
        destination IP address, that field should be made available for 
        filtering. Conversely, a host that does not route is not expected 
        to be able to locate an IP address within a packet, or make it 
        available for filtering, although it may do so. 
         
        Since packet encryption alters the meaning of encrypted fields, 
        Mask/Match filtering must be configurable to ignore encrypted 
        packets, when detected. 
       
      * Hash-based Selection: Hash-based selection will employ one or 
        more hash functions to be standardized.  The hash domain is 
        specified by a bitmaps on the IP packet header and the IP 
        payload.  
         
        When the hash function is sufficiently good, hash-based selection 
        can be used to approximate uniform random sampling over the hash 
        domain. The target sampling frequency is then the ratio of the 
        size of the selection range to the hash range. Applications of 
        hash-based selection include Trajectory Sampling [DuGr01] and 
        Consistent Flow Sampling. See[PSAMP-TECH] for further details. 
            
      * Router State Filtering: the selection process may support 
        filtering based on the following conditions, which may be 
        combined with the AND, OR or NOT operators:  
    
           (i) Ingress interface at which packet arrives equals a 
           specified value 
           (ii) Egress interface to which packet is routed to equals a 
           specified value 
           (iii) Packet violated Access Control List (ACL) on the router 
           (iv) Failed Reverse Path Forwarding (RPF) 
           (v) Failed Resource Reservation (RSVP) 
           (vi) No route found for the packet 
           (vii) Origin Autonomous System (AS) equals a specified value 
           or lies within a given  range 
           (viii) Destination AS equals a specified value or lies within 
           a given range 
    
       Router architectural considerations may preclude some information 
       concerning the packet treatment, e.g. routing state, being 
       available at line rate for selection of packets. However, if 
       selection not based on routing state has reduced down from line 
       rate, subselection based on routing state may be feasible. 
       
    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                [Page 14] 
    









   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
      This section detailed specific requirements for the selection 
      process, motivated by the generic requirement of Section 3.3. 
    
   5.3 Input Sequence Numbers for Primitive Selection Processes. 
         
      Each instance of a primitive selection process must maintain a 
      count of packets presented at its input. The counter value is to be 
      included as a sequence number for selected packets. The sequence 
      numbers are considered as part of the packet's selection state. 
       
      Use of input sequence numbers enables applications to determine the 
      attained frequency at which packets are selected, and hence 
      correctly normalize network usage estimates regardless of loss of 
      information, regardless of whether this loss occurs because of 
      discard of packet reports in the measurement or reporting process 
      (e.g. due to resource contention in the host of these processes), 
      or loss of export packets in transmission or collection. See [RFC-
      3176] for further details. 
       
      As an example, consider a set of n consecutive packet reports r1, 
      r2, €, rn, selected by a sampling operation and received at a 
      collector. Let s1, s2, €, sn be the input sequence numbers reported 
      by the packets. The attained selection frequency, taking into 
      account both packet sampling at the observation point and selection 
      arising from loss in transmission, is R = (n-1)/(sn-s1). (Note R 
      would be 1 if all packet were selected and there were no 
      transmission loss). 
       
      The attained selection frequency can be used to estimate the number 
      bytes present in a portion of the observed packet stream. Let b1, 
      b2, €, bn be the bytes reported in each of the packets that reached 
      the collector, and set B = b1+b2+,€,+bn. Then the total bytes 
      present in packets in the observed packet stream whose input 
      sequence numbers lie between s1 and sn is estimated by B/R, i.e, 
      scaling up the measured bytes through division by the attained 
      selection frequency. 
       
      With composite selectors, and input sequence number will be 
      reported for each selector in the composition. 
       
       
   5.4 Composite Selectors 
       
      The ability to compose selectors in a selection process should be 
      provided. The following combinations appear to be most useful for 
      applications: 
             
      * filtering followed by sampling 
         
      * sampling followed by filtering 
       


    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                [Page 15] 
    









   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
      Composite selectors are useful for drill down applications. The 
      first component of a composite selector can be used to reduce the 
      load on the second component. In this setting, the advantage to be 
      gained from a given ordering can depend on the composition of the 
      packet stream. 
       
   5.5 Constraints on the Sampling Frequency 
    
      Sampling at full line rate, i.e. with probability 1, is not 
      excluded in principle, although resource constraints may not 
      support it in practice. 
       
       
   6. Reporting Process 
       
      This section detailed specific requirements for the reporting 
      process, motivated by the generic requirement of Section 3.4 
       
   6.1 Mandatory Contents of Packet Reports 
       
      The reporting process must include the following in each packet 
      report: 
       
           (i) the input sequence number(s) of any sampling operation 
             that acted on the packet in the instance of a measurement 
             process of which the reporting process is a component. 
       
      The reporting process must support inclusion of the following in 
      each packet, as a configurable option: 
       
           (ii) a basic report on the packet, i.e., some number of 
           contiguous bytes from the start of the packet, including the 
           packet header (which includes link layer, network layer and 
           other encapsulation headers) and some subsequent bytes of the 
           packet payload. 
            
      Some devices hosting reporting processes may not have the resource 
      capacity or functionality to provide more detailed packet reports 
      that those in (i) and (ii) above. Using this minimum required 
      reporting functionality, the reporting process places the burden of 
      interpretation on the collector, or on applications that it 
      supplies. Some devices may have the capability to provide extended 
      packet reports, described in the next section.  
       
       
       
   6.2 Extended Packet Reports 
    
      The reporting process may support inclusion in packet reports of 
      the following information, inclusion any or all being configurable 
      as an option. 
       
    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                [Page 16] 
    









   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
           (iii) fields relating to the following protocols used in the 
           packet:: IPv4, IPV6, transport protocols, MPLS. 
             
           (iv) packet treatment, including: 
       
            - identifiers for any input and output interfaces of the 
           observation point that were traversed by the packet 
             
            - source and destination AS 
       
           (v) selection state associated with the packet, including: 
       
           - the timestamp of observation of the packet at the 
           observation point. The timestamp should be reported to 
           microsecond resolution.  
       
           - hashes, where calculated. 
       
       It is envisaged that selection of fields for extended packet 
       reporting may be used to reduce reporting bandwidth, in which case 
       the option to report information in (ii) may not be exercised. 
       
    
   6.3 Extended Packet Reports in the Presence of IPFIX 
       
      If an IPFIX metering process is supported at the observation point, 
      then in order to be PSAMP compliant, extended packet reports must 
      be able to include all fields required in the IPFIX information 
      model [IPFIX-REQUIRE], with modifications appropriate to reporting 
      on single packets rather than flows. 
    
   6.4  Report Interpretation 
    
      Information for use in report interpretation must include  
       
           (i) configuration parameters of the selectors of the packets 
           reported on.  
            
           (ii) format of the packet report; 
            
           (iii) indication of the inherent accuracy of the reported 
           quantities, e.g., of the packet timestamp.  
            
           (iv) identifiers for observation point, measurement process, 
           and export process.  
    
      The accuracy measure in (iii) is of fundamental importance for 
      estimating the likely error attached to estimates formed from the 
      packet reports by applications. 
       
      Identifiers in (iv) are necessary, e.g., in order to match packet 
      reports to the selection process that selected them. For example, 
    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                [Page 17] 
    









   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
      when packet reports due to a sampling operation suffer loss (either 
      during export, or in transit) it may be desirable to reconfigure 
      downwards the sampling rate on the selection process that selected 
      them.  
       
      The requirements for robustness and transparency are motivations 
      for including report interpretation in the report stream. Inclusion 
      makes the report stream self-defining.  The PSAMP framework 
      excludes reliance on an alternative model in which interpretation 
      is recovered out of band. This latter approach is not robust with 
      respect to undocumented changes in selector configuration, and may 
      give rise to future architectural problems for network management 
      systems to coherently manage both configuration and data 
      collection. 
       
      It is not envisaged that all report interpretation be included in 
      every packet report. Many of the quantities listed above are 
      expected to be relatively static; they could be communicated 
      periodically, and upon change. 
       
      To conserve network bandwidth and resources at the collector, the 
      export packets may be compressed before export.  Compression is 
      expected to be quite effective since the sampled packets may share 
      many fields in common, e.g. if a filter focuses on packets with 
      certain values in particular header fields. Using compression, 
      however, could impact the timeliness of packet reports. Any 
      consequent delay must not violate the timeliness requirement for 
      availability of packet reports at the collector. 
       
   6.5 Report Timeliness 
    
      Low measurement latency allows the traffic monitoring system to be 
      more responsive to real-time network events, for example, in 
      quickly identifying sources of congestion. Timeliness is generally 
      a good thing for devices performing the sampling since it minimizes 
      the amount of memory needed to buffer samples. 
       
      Keeping the packet dispatching delay small has other benefits 
      besides limiting buffer requirements. For many applications a 
      resolution of 1 second is sufficient. Applications in this category 
      would include: identifying sources associated with congestion; 
      tracing denial of service attacks through the network and 
      constructing traffic matrices. Furthermore, keeping dispatch delay 
      within the resolution required by applications eliminates the need 
      for timestamping by synchronized clocks at observation points, or 
      for the observation points and collector to maintain bi-directional 
      communication in order to track clock offsets. The collector can 
      simply process packet reports in the order that they are received, 
      using its own clock as a "global" time base. This avoids the 
      complexity of buffering and reordering samples. See [DuGeGr02] for 
      an example. 
       
    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                [Page 18] 
    









   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
      The delay between observation of a packet and transmission of a 
      export packet containing a report on that packet has several 
      components. It is difficult to standardize a given numerical delay 
      requirement, since in practice the delay may be sensitive to 
      processor load at the observation point. Therefore, PSAMP aims to 
      control that portion of the delay within the observation point that 
      is due to buffering in the formation and transmission of export 
      packets.  
    
      In order to limit delay in the formation of export packets, the 
      export process must provide the ability to close out and enqueue 
      for transmission any export packet in formation as soon as it 
      includes one packet report. This could be achieved, for example, by 
      the following means: 
       
          -      the number of packet reports per export packet is not 
                  to exceed a maximum value, which can be configured to 
                  take the value 1. 
                   
          -      the ability to exclude report interpretation from any 
                  export packet that contains a packet report; 
       
      In order to limit the delay in the transmission of export packets, 
      a configurable upper bound to the delay of an export packet prior 
      to transmission must be provided. If the bound is exceeded the 
      export packet is dropped. This functionality can be provided by the 
      timed reliability service of the SCTP Partial Reliability Extension 
      [RFC-3758]. 
    
   7. Parallel Measurement Processes 
       
      Because of the increasing number of distinct measurement 
      applications, with varying requirements, it is desirable to set up 
      parallel measurement processes on given observed packet stream. A 
      device capable of hosting a measurement process should be able to 
      support more than one independently configurable measurement 
      process simultaneously. Each such measurement process should have 
      the option of being equipped with its own export process; otherwise 
      the parallel measurement processes may share the same export 
      process.  
       
      Each of the parallel measurement processes should be independent. 
      However, resource constraints may prevent complete reporting on a 
      packet selected by multiple selection processes. In this case, 
      reporting for the packet must be complete for at least one 
      measurement process; other measurement processes need only record 
      that they selected the packet, e.g., by incrementing a counter. The 
      priority amongst measurement processes under resource contention 
      should be configurable. 
       
      It is not proposed to standardize the number of parallel 
      measurement processes. 
    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                [Page 19] 
    








   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
       
   8. Export Process 
       
      This section detailed specific requirements for the exporting 
      process, motivated by the generic requirements of Section 3.6 
       
   8.1 Use of IPFIX 
       
      PSAMP will use the IP Flow Information eXport (IPFIX) protocol for 
      export of the report stream. The IPFIX protocol is well suited for 
      this purpose, because  the IPFIX architecture matches the PSAMP 
      architecture very well and the means provided by the IPFIX protocol 
      are sufficient. The remainder of this section describes  
       
   8.2 Congestion-aware Unreliable Transport 
    
      The export of the report stream does not require reliable export.  
      Section 5.3 shows that the use of input sequence number in packet 
      selectors means that the ability to estimate traffic rates is not 
      impaired by export loss. Export packet loss becomes another form of 
      sampling, albeit a less desirable, and less controlled, form of 
      sampling. 
       
      On the contrary, retransmission of lost export packets consumes 
      additional network resources. The requirement to store 
      unacknowledged data is an impediment to having ubiquitous support 
      for PSAMP. 
       
      In order to jointly satisfy the timeliness and congestion avoidance 
      requirements of Section 4.3, a congestion aware unreliable 
      transport protocol must be used. IPFIX is compatible with this 
      requirement, since it mandates support of the The Stream Control 
      Transmission Protocol (SCTP) [SCTP] and the SCTP Partial 
      Reliability Extension [RFC-3758]. 
       
   8.3 Limiting Delay for Export Packets 
          
      The export process may queue the report stream in order to export 
      multiple packet reports in a single export packet. Any consequent 
      delay must still allow for timely availability of packet reports at 
      the collector as described in Section 6.5. The timed reliability 
      service of the SCTP Partial Reliability Extension [RFC-3758] allows 
      from the dropping of packets from the export buffer once their age 
      in the buffer exceeds a configurable bound. 
       
       
   8.4 Configurable Export Rate Limit 
       
      The export process must have an export rate limit, configurable per 
      export process. This is useful for two reasons: 
       


    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                [Page 20] 
    


   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
           (i) Even without network congestion, the rate of packet 
           selection may exceed the capacity of the collector to process 
           reports, particularly when many export processes feed a common 
           collector. Use of an export rate limit allows control of the 
           global input rate to the collector. 
       
           (ii) IPFIX provides for export using the User Datagram 
           Protocol (UDP) as transport in some circumstance, although its 
           use it deprecated. An export rate limit allows the capping of 
           the export rate to match both path link speeds and the 
           capacity of the collector.  
       
      [Check: does IPFIX provide a configurable export rate limit?] 
       
   8.5 Collector Destination 
    
      When exporting to a remote collector, the collector is identified 
      by IP address, transport protocol, and transport port number. 
       
   8.6 Local Export 
       
      The report stream may be directly exported to on-board measurement 
      based applications, for example those that form composite 
      statistics from more than one packet. Local export may be presented 
      through an interface direct to the higher level applications, i.e., 
      through an API, rather than employing the transport used for off-
      board export. Specification of such an API is outside the scope of 
      the PSAMP framework. 
       
      A possible example of local export could be that packets selected 
      by the PSAMP measurement process serve as the input for the IPFIX 
      protocol, which then forms flow records out of the stream of 
      selected packets.  
    
       
            
       
   9. Configuration and Management 
       
      A key requirement for PSAMP is the easy reconfiguration of the 
      parameters of the measurement process: those for selection, packet 
      reports and export. Examples are  
       
           (i) support of measurement-based applications that want to 
           drill-down on traffic detail in real-time;  
            
           (ii) collector-based rate reconfiguration. 
       
      To facilitate reconfiguration and retrieval of parameters, they are 
      to reside in a Management Information Base (MIB). Mandatory 
      configuration, capabilities and monitoring objects will cover all 
      mandatory PSAMP functionality. 
    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                [Page 21] 
    


   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
       
      Secondary objects will cover the recommended and optional PSAMP 
      functionality, and must be provided when such functionality is 
      offered by a host. Such PSAMP functionality includes configuration 
      of offered selectors, composite selectors, multiple measurement 
      processes, and report format including the choice of fields to be 
      reported. For further details concerning the PSAMP MIB, see [PSAMP-
      MIB]. 
       
      PSAMP requires a uniform mechanism with which to access and 
      configure the MIB. SNMP access must be provided by the host of the 
      MIB. 
       
       
   10. 
      Feasibility and Complexity 
       
      In order for PSAMP to be supported across the entire spectrum of 
      networking equipment, it must be simple and inexpensive to 
      implement.  One can envision easy-to-implement instances of the 
      mechanisms described within this draft. Thus, for that subset of 
      instances, it should be straightforward for virtually all system 
      vendors to include them within their products. Indeed, sampling and 
      filtering operations are already realized in available equipment. 
       
      Here we give some specific arguments to demonstrate feasibility and 
      comment on the complexity of hardware implementations. We stress 
      here that the point of these arguments is not to favor or recommend 
      any particular implementation, or to suggest a path for 
      standardization, but rather to demonstrate that the set of possible 
      implementations is not empty. 
       
   10.1     Feasibility 
          
   10.1.1  Filtering 
       
      Filtering consists of a small number of mask (bit-wise logical), 
      comparison and range (greater than) operations.  Implementation of 
      at least a small number of such operations is straightforward. For 
      example, filters for security access control lists (ACLs) are 
      widely implemented. This could be as simple as an exact match on 
      certain fields, or involve more complex comparisons and ranges. 
       
   10.1.2  Sampling 
       
      Sampling based on either counters (counter set, decrement, test for 
      equal to zero) or range matching on the hash of a packet (greater 
      than) is possible given a small number of selectors, although there 
      may be some differences in ease of implementation for hardware vs. 
      software platforms. 
       
   10.1.3  Hashing  
          
    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                [Page 22] 
    
   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
      Hashing functions vary greatly in complexity.  Execution of a small 
      number of sufficient simple hash functions is implementable at line 
      rate. Concerning the input to the hash function, hop-invariant IP 
      header fields (IP address, IP identification) and TCP/UDP header 
      fields (port numbers, TCP sequence number) drawn from the first 40 
      bytes of the packet have been found to possess a considerable 
      variability; see [DuGr01]. 
       
   10.1.4  Reporting 
       
      The simplest packet report would duplicate the first n bytes of the 
      packet. However, such an uncompressed format may tax the bandwidth 
      available to the reporting process for high sampling rates; 
      reporting selected fields would save on this bandwidth. Thus there 
      is a trade-off between simplicity and bandwidth limitations. 
       
   10.1.5  Export 
       
      Ease of exporting export packets depends on the system 
      architecture. Most systems should be able to support export by 
      insertion of export packets, even through the software path. 
        
   10.2    Potential Hardware Complexity 
       
      We now comment on the complexity of possible hardware 
      implementations. Achieving low constants for performance while 
      minimizing hardware resources is, of course, a challenge, 
      especially at very high clock frequencies. Most of these 
      operations, however, are very basic and their implementations very 
      well understood; in fact, the average ASIC designer simply uses 
      canned library instances of these operations rather than design 
      them from scratch. In addition, networking equipment generally does 
      not need to run at the fastest clock rates, further reducing the 
      effort required to get reasonably efficient implementations. 
       
      Simple bit-wise logical operations are easy to implement in 
      hardware.  Such operations (NAND/NOR/XNOR/NOT) directly translate 
      to four-transistor gates.  Each bit of a multiple-bit logical 
      operation is completely independent and thus can be performed in 
      parallel incurring no additional performance cost above a single 
      bit operation. 
       
      Comparisons (EQ/NEQ) take O(lg(M)) stages of logic, where M is the 
      number of bits involved in the comparison.  The lg(M) is required 
      to accumulate the result into a single bit. 
       
      Greater than operations, as used to determine whether a hash falls 
      in a selection range, are a determination of the most significant 
      not-equivalent bit in the two operands.  The operand with that 
      most-significant-not-equal bit set to be one is greater than the 
      other.  Thus, a greater than operation is also an O(lg(M)) stages 


    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                [Page 23] 
    


   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
      of logic operation. Optimized implementations of arithmetic 
      operations are also O(lg(M)) due to propagation of the carry bit. 
       
      Setting a counter is simply loading a register with a state. Such 
      an operation is simple and fast O(1).  Incrementing or decrementing 
      a counter is a read, followed by an arithmetic operation followed 
      by a store.  Making the register dual-ported does take additional 
      space, but it is a well-understood technique.  Thus, the 
      increment/decrement is also an O(lg(M)) operation. 
       
      Hashing functions come in a variety of forms.  The computation 
      involved in a standard Cyclic Redundancy Code (CRC) for example are 
      essentially a set of XOR operations, where the intermediate result 
      is stored and XORed with the next chunk of data.  There are only 
      O(1) operations and no log complexity operations.  Thus, a simple 
      hash function, such as CRC or generalizations thereof, can be 
      implemented in hardware very efficiently. 
       
      At the other end of the range of complexity, the MD5 function uses 
      a large number of bit-wise conditional operations and arithmetic 
      operations.  The former are O(1) operations and the latter are 
      O(lg(M)). MD5 specifies 256 32b ADD operations per 16B of input 
      processed.  Consider processing 10Gb/sec at 100MHz (this processing 
      rate appears to be currently available). This requires processing 
      12.5B/cycle, and hence at least 200 adders, a sizeable number. 
      Because of data dependencies within the MD5 algorithm, the adders 
      cannot be simply run in parallel, thus requiring either faster 
      clock rates and/or more advanced architectures. Thus, selection 
      hashing functions as complex as MD5 may be precluded for ubiquitous 
      use at full line rate. This motivates exploring the use of 
      selection hash functions with complexity somewhere between that of 
      MD5 and CRC. However, identification hashing with MD5 on only 
      selected packets is feasible at a sufficiently low sampling 
      frequency. 
          
   11. 
      Applications  
          
      We first describe several representative operational applications 
      that require traffic measurements at various levels of temporal and 
      spatial granularity. Some of the goals here appear similar to those 
      of IPFIX, at least in the broad classes of applications supported. 
      The major benefit for PSAMP is the support of new network 
      management applications, specifically, those enabled by the packet 
      selectors that it supports.  
       
   11.1    Baseline Measurement and Drill Down 
       
      Packet sampling is ideally suited to determine the composition of 
      the traffic across a network. The approach is to enable measurement 
      on a cut-set of the network links such that each packet entering 
      the network is seen at least once, for example, on all ingress 
      links. Unfiltered sampling with a relatively low frequency 
    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                [Page 24] 
    
   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
      establishes baseline measurements of the network traffic. Packet 
      reports include packet attributes of common interest: source and 
      destination address and port numbers, prefix, protocol number, type 
      of service, etc. Traffic matrices are indicated by reporting source 
      and destination AS matrices. Absolute traffic volumes are estimated 
      by renormalizing the sampled traffic volumes through division by 
      either the target sampling frequency, or by the attained sampling 
      frequency (as derived by interface packet counters included in the 
      report stream) 
       
      Suppose an operator or a measurement-based application detects an 
      interesting subset of a packet stream, as identified by a 
      particular packet attribute. Real-time drill-down to that subset is 
      achieved by instantiating a new measurement process on the same 
      packet stream from which the subset was reported. The selection 
      process of the new measurement process filters according to the 
      attribute of interest, and composes with sampling if necessary to 
      manage the frequency of packet selection. 
       
   11.2    Passive Performance Measurement 
         
      Hash-based sampling enables the tracking of the performance 
      experience by customer traffic, customers identified by a list of 
      source or destination prefixes, or by ingress or egress interfaces. 
      Operational uses include the verification of Service Level 
      Agreements (SLAs), and troubleshooting following a customer 
      complaint. 
       
      In this application, trajectory sampling is enabled at all network 
      ingress and egress interfaces. The label hash is used to match up 
      ingress and egress samples. Rates of loss in transit between 
      ingress and egress are estimated from the proportion of 
      trajectories for which no egress report is received. Note loss of 
      customer packets is distinguishable from loss of packet reports 
      through use of report sequence numbers. Assuming synchronization of 
      clocks between different entities, delay of customer traffic across 
      the network may also be measured. 
       
      Extending hash-selection to all interfaces in the network would 
      enable attribution of poor performance to individual network links. 
       
   11.3    Troubleshooting 
       
      PSAMP can also be used to diagnose problems whose occurrence is 
      evident from aggregate statistics, per interface utilization and 
      packet loss statistics.  These statistics are typically moving 
      averages over relatively long time windows, e.g., 5 minutes, and 
      serve as a coarse-grain indication of operational health of the 
      network. The most common method of obtaining such measurements are 
      through the appropriate SNMP MIBs (MIB-II [RFC-1213] and vendor-
      specific MIBs.) 
       
    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                [Page 25] 
    


   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
      Suppose an operator detects a link that is persistently overloaded 
      and experiences significant packet drop rates. There is a wide 
      range of potential causes: routing parameters (e.g., OSPF link 
      weights) that are poorly adapted to the traffic matrix, e.g., 
      because of a shift in that matrix; a denial of service attack or a 
      flash crowd; a routing problem (link flapping). In most cases, 
      aggregate link statistics are not sufficient to distinguish between 
      such causes, and to decide on an appropriate corrective action. For 
      example, if routing over two links is unstable, and the links flap 
      between being overloaded and inactive, this might be averaged out 
      in a 5 minute window, indicating moderate loads on both links. 
       
      Baseline PSAMP measurement of the congested link, as described in 
      Section 11.1, enables measurements that are fine grained in both 
      space and time. The operator has to be able to determine how many 
      bytes/packets are generated for each source/destination address, 
      port number, and prefix, or other attributes, such as protocol 
      number, MPLS forwarding equivalence class (FEC), type of service, 
      etc. This allows the precise determination of the nature of the 
      offending traffic. For example, in the case of a DDoS attack, the 
      operator would see a significant fraction of traffic with an 
      identical destination address. 
       
      In certain circumstances, precise information about the spatial 
      flow of traffic through the network domain is required to detect 
      and diagnose problems and verify correct network behavior. In the 
      case of the overloaded link, it would be very helpful to know the 
      precise set of paths that packets traversing this link follow. This 
      would readily reveal a routing problem such as a loop, or a link 
      with a misconfigured weight. More generally, complex diagnosis 
      scenarios can benefit from measurement of traffic intensities (and 
      other attributes) over a set of paths that is constrained in some 
      way. For example, if a multihomed customer complains about 
      performance problems on one of the access links from a particular 
      source address prefix, the operator should be able to examine in 
      detail the traffic from that source prefix which also traverses the 
      specified access link towards the customer. 
       
      While it is in principle possible to obtain the spatial flow of 
      traffic through auxiliary network state information, e.g., by 
      downloading routing and forwarding tables from routers, this 
      information is often unreliable, outdated, voluminous, and 
      contingent on a network model. For operational purposes, a direct 
      observation of traffic flow is more reliable, as it does not depend 
      on any such auxiliary information. For example, if there was a bug 
      in a router's software, direct observation would allow the 
      diagnosis the effect of this bug, while an indirect method would 
      not. 
       
   12. 
      Security Considerations 
       
         Security considerations are addressed in: 
    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                [Page 26] 
    
   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
        
         - Section 4.1: item Robust Selection 
         - Section 4.3: item Secure Export   
         - Section 4.4: item Secure Configuration 
         
   13. 
      Normative References 
       
           [PSAMP-TECH] T. Zseby, M. Molina, F. Raspall , N. G. Duffield,
                                                                    
              Sampling and Filtering Techniques for IP Packet Selection, 
              RFC XXXX. [Currently Internet Draft, draft-ietf-psamp-
              sample-tech-04.txt, work in progress, February 2004. 
       
           [PSAMP-MIB] T. Dietz, D. Romascanu, B. Claise, Definitions of 
              Managed Objects for Packet Sampling, ,  
              RFC XXXX. [Currently Internet Draft, draft-ietf-psamp-mib-
              02.txt, work in progress, February 2004.] 
            
           [PSAMP-PROTO] B. Claise (Ed.) Packet Sampling (PSAMP) Protocol 
              Specifications, RFC XXXX. [Currently Internet Draft draft-
              ietf-psamp-protocol-01.txt, work in progress, February 
              2004.] 
            
           [PSAMP-INFO] T. Dietz, F. Dressler,G. Carle,B. Claise, 
              Information Model for Packet Sampling Exports, RFC XXXX.  
              [Currently Internet Draft,  draft-ietf-psamp-info-01, 
              February 2004 
       
       
   14. 
      Informative References 
       
           [B88] R.T. Braden, A pseudo-machine for packet monitoring and 
              statistics, in Proc ACM SIGCOMM 1988 
       
           [ClPB93] K.C. Claffy, G.C. Polyzos, H.-W. Braun, Application 
              of Sampling Methodologies to Network Traffic 
              Characterization, Proceedings of ACM SIGCOMM'93, San 
              Francisco, CA, USA, September 13-17, 1993 
        
           [IPFIX-PROTO]   B. Claise,  Mark Fullmer ,Paul Calato , 
              Reinaldo Penno, IPFIX Protocol Specifications , Internet 
              Draft, draft-ietf-ipfix-protocol-3.txt, February 2004. 
            
           [RFC-2460] S. Deering, R. Hinden, Internet Protocol, Version 6 
              (IPv6) Specification, RFC 2460, December 1998. 
            
           [DuGr01] N. G. Duffield and M. Grossglauser, Trajectory 
              Sampling for Direct Traffic Observation, IEEE/ACM Trans. on 
              Networking, 9(3), 280-292, June 2001. 
            
           [DuGeGr02] N.G. Duffield, A. Gerber, M. Grossglauser, 
              Trajectory Engine: A Backend for Trajectory Sampling, IEEE 


    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                [Page 27] 
    









   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
              Network Operations and Management Symposium 2002, Florence, 
              Italy, April 15-19, 2002. 
            
            
           [RFC-2914] S. Floyd, Congestion Control Principles, RFC 2914, 
              September 2000. 
               
               
           [RFC-2804] IAB and IESG, Network Working Group, IETF Policy on 
              Wiretapping, RFC 2804, May 2000 
            
           [RFC-1213] - K. McCloghrie, M. Rose, Management Information 
              Base for Network Management of TCP/IP-based internets:MIB-
              II, RFC 1213, March 1991. 
            
            
           [RFC-3176] P. Phaal, S. Panchen, N. McKee, InMon Corporation's 
              sFlow: A Method for Monitoring Traffic in Switched and 
              Routed Networks, RFC 3176, September 2001 
            
           [RFC-2330] V. Paxson, G. Almes, J. Mahdavi, M. Mathis, 
              Framework for IP Performance Metrics, RFC 2330, May 1998 
            
           [RFC-791] J. Postel, "Internet Protocol", STD 5, RFC 791, 
              September 1981. 
    
           [IPFIX-REQUIRE] J. Quittek, T. Zseby, B. Claise, S. Zander, 
              Requirements for IP Flow Information Export, Internet Draft 
              draft-ietf-ipfix-reqs-12.txt, work in progress, November 
              2003. 
                   
           [RFC-3031]  Rosen, E., Viswanathan, A. and R. Callon, 
              "Multiprotocol Label Switching Architecture", RFC 3031, 
              January 2001. 
            
           [SPSJTKS01] A. C. Snoeren, C. Partridge, L. A. Sanchez, C. E. 
              Jones, F. Tchakountio, S. T. Kent, W. T. Strayer, Hash-
              Based IP Traceback, Proc. ACM SIGCOMM 2001, San Diego, CA, 
              September 2001. 
            
           [RFC-2960] R. Stewart, (ed.) "Stream Control Transmission 
              Protocol", RFC 2960, October 2000. 
            
           [RFC-3758] R. Stewart, M. Ramalho, Q. Xie, M. Tuexen, P. 
              Conrad, "SCTP Partial Reliability Extension", RFC 3758, May 
              2004. 
       
   15. 
      Authors' Addresses 
       
         Derek Chiou 
         Avici Systems 
         101 Billerica Ave 
    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                [Page 28] 
    









   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
         North Billerica, MA 01862 
         Phone: +1 978-964-2017 
         Email: dchiou@avici.com 
       
         Benoit Claise 
         Cisco Systems 
         De Kleetlaan 6a b1 
         1831 Diegem 
         Belgium 
         Phone: +32 2 704 5622 
         Email: bclaise@cisco.com 
       
         Nick Duffield 
         AT&T Labs - Research 
         Room B-139 
         180 Park Ave 
         Florham Park NJ 07932, USA 
         Phone: +1 973-360-8726 
         Email: duffield@research.att.com 
       
         Albert Greenberg 
         AT&T Labs - Research 
         Room A-161 
         180 Park Ave 
         Florham Park NJ 07932, USA 
         Phone: +1 973-360-8730 
         Email: albert@research.att.com 
       
         Matthias Grossglauser 
         School of Computer and Communication Sciences 
         EPFL 
         1015 Lausanne 
         Switzerland 
         Email: matthias.grossglauser@epfl.ch 
       
         Peram Marimuthu 
         Cisco Systems 
         170, W. Tasman Drive 
         San Jose, CA 95134 
         Phone: (408) 527-6314 
         Email: peram@cisco.com 
       
         Jennifer Rexford 
         AT&T Labs - Research 
         Room A-169 
         180 Park Ave 
         Florham Park NJ 07932, USA 
         Phone: +1 973-360-8728 
         Email: jrex@research.att.com 
        
         Ganesh Sadasivan  
         Cisco Systems  
    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                [Page 29] 
    









   Internet Draft      Packet Selection and Reporting          July 2004 
    
    
         170 W. Tasman Drive  
         San Jose, CA 95134  
         Phone: (408) 527-0251  
         Email: gsadasiv@cisco.com 
       
       
   16. 
      Intellectual Property Statement 
       
      AT&T Corporation may own intellectual property applicable to this 
      contribution. The IETF has been notified of AT&T's licensing intent 
      for the specification contained in this document. See 
      http://www.ietf.org/ietf/IPR/ATT-GENERAL.txt for AT&T's IPR 
      statement. 
       
   17. 
      Full Copyright Statement 
       
      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved. 
       
      This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
      others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain 
      it or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, 
      published and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction 
      of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this 
      paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative works. 
      However, this document itself may not be modified in any way, such 
      as by removing the copyright notice or references to the Internet 
      Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed for the 
      purpose of developing Internet standards in which case the 
      procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process 
      must be followed, or as required to translate it into languages 
      other than English. 
       
      The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
      revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
       
       
      This document and the information contained herein is provided on 
      an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
      ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
      IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
      THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
      WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    










    
   Duffield (Ed.)           Expires January 2005                [Page 30] 