



Network Working Group                                         J. Klensin
Internet-Draft                                         February 11, 2016
Updates: 4071 (if approved)
Intended status: Best Current Practice
Expires: August 14, 2016


                        Revised IAOC Membership
                   draft-klensin-iaoc-member-01.txt

Abstract

   The original specification of the membership of the IAOC included the
   IETF and IAB Chairs as voting members.  While probably desirable
   initially, this has turned out to have unfortunate side effects.
   This document discusses those side effects and replaces those
   specific individuals with liaisons from the IAB and IESG.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 14, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of




Klensin                  Expires August 14, 2016                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               IAOC Membership               February 2016


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  The IAB and IETF Chairs and the IAOC  . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Reasons for IAB and IETF Chair Membership in the IAOC and
       IETF Trust  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  BCP 101 Modifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     9.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     9.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Appendix A.  Other Obvious Questions About Choices  . . . . . . .   7
     A.1.  How About the ISOC President/CEO? . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     A.2.  The Trust-IAOC Relationship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     A.3.  Changing the appointment mechanism for IAOC members
           selected from the community by the IAB and IAOC . . . . .   8
   Appendix B.  Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     B.1.  History and Changes from version -00 to -01 . . . . . . .   8
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9

1.  Introduction

   The original specification of the membership of the IAOC in BCP 101
   [1] included the IETF and IAB Chairs as voting members.  While
   probably desirable initially, this has turned out to have unfortunate
   side effects.  This document discusses those side effects and
   replaces those specific individuals with liaisons from the IAB and
   IESG.

   Note in Draft: This working draft contains a considerable amount of
   explanatory material about the various choices, both to make the
   intent more clear and to facilitate community discussion of those and
   other options.  If the draft is approved in principle, those
   materials should probably either be moved to appendices or deleted
   entirely.  Also, in response to several comments made on the IETF
   list, it is worth noting that this document is about IASA and the
   IAOC (and, peripherally, the IETF Trust) and only incidentally about
   how the IAB and IESG organize themselves and determine their
   representation on other bodies.






Klensin                  Expires August 14, 2016                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               IAOC Membership               February 2016


2.  History

   [[CREF1: RFC Editor: please remove this section if the document
   reaches you. ]]

   The original version of this document was posted in July 2009 and got
   absolutely no traction, indeed one or two key members of the IESG
   made it clear informally that they had no interest in it and that
   there was no point even trying to discuss it.  In February 2016, a
   draft [3] was posted by some IAB members that seems to have
   [re]started the discussion.  After repeated requests that a draft be
   posted, this one has been updated to reflect changed context and list
   discussion.  It is posted as a contribution to the discussion.

   The concept of "liaisons" is from the original version of this draft
   and is a third alternative to recent suggestions of "observers" or
   ex-officio IAB and IESG members who are not necessarily the chair.
   While the author prefers a liaison model for reasons discussed below,
   the distinction may be minor and there would be little objection to
   one or the other substitution if the community favored it.

   As noted above, the author has produced this draft in the hope that
   it will provide a useful starting point and alternative for the
   community.  If it is useful enough in that role to justify revision,
   a co-author, or an effort to merge parts of it with the Hardie et al
   draft [3], would be welcomed.

3.  The IAB and IETF Chairs and the IAOC

   While BCP 101 specified that the IAB and IETF Chairs should serve on
   the IAOC (and now as Trustees of the Internet Trust [2]), there does
   not appear to be a strong motivation for having those particular
   Chair roles expanded to include the considerable additional workload
   that comes with the IAOC and Trustee roles.  There were some good
   reasons associated with transition at the time the IASA (and IAOC)
   were established, but the transition to the IASA (and Trust)
   arrangements are now in the distant past and at least the original
   set of reasons no longer apply.  It is clearly important that the
   IAOC and Trustees have direct and ongoing input from the IAB and
   IESG, but that responsibility need not be performed by the two
   Chairs.  There are disadvantages associated with having the Chairs in
   the Trustee and IAOC roles, which include:

   Workload and full-time positions
      To a considerable extent, each additional task we permanently
      assign to the IAB or IETF Chair positions narrows the number of
      people who will have the bandwidth and support needed to take on
      those roles.  It also assumes a wider range of skills.  Those



Klensin                  Expires August 14, 2016                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               IAOC Membership               February 2016


      requirements make the positions harder to fill, reduce the number
      of volunteers, and increase the risk that the IAB or Nomcom,
      respectively, will be placed into the position of selecting
      someone "least bad" among a small range of candidates.  Absent
      really compelling arguments to the contrary (see Section 4), it
      also puts us in a position in which the two Chairs are personally
      essential rather than leaders who are responsible to consensus
      within their bodies and the community.  As others have pointed
      out, that is inconsistent with our claimed "no kings" model.

      A different way to look at almost the same issue is that
      circumstances change.  The IAB should be able to determine its
      priorities, and how the time of the Chair should be allocated, and
      to do so dynamically rather than assuming that the IAOC is always
      a high and inescapable priority.

   Skill set
      Section 4 of BCP 101 [1] provides guidance about the IAB and IESG
      (non-ex-officio) appointments to the IAOC and indicates

         "people with some knowledge of contracts and financial
         procedures, who are familiar with the administrative support
         needs of the IAB, the IESG, or the IETF standards process."

      The "Principles" described in Section 2.2 of RFC 4071 make it
      entirely clear that the IAOC (and the IASA structure in general)
      are intended to provide for and support the administrative needs
      of the IETF and related organizations (including the IAB and, now,
      the IETF Trust).  At least according to that document and the
      other documents that make up BCP 101, the IAOC is not a policy
      body.  The strongest arguments that have been advanced for
      requiring in-person participation by the IAB and IETF Chairs all
      appear to be related to IAOC policy-making of to the IETF Trust
      (see below and Appendix A.2.  If the community does not intend
      such policy-making to occur in the IAOC, it may be better to have
      the IAOC membership selected for a higher degree of skill and
      interest in its actual role.

      Similar issues apply to the IETF Trust role (unless the IAOC and
      Trustee roles are ultimately separated): doing the job well
      requires an ability and willingness to understand the realities of
      Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) law and regulations and to work
      effectively with lawyers and other advisers who are IPR
      specialists.

   The appeals chain
      RFC 4071 also defines an appeals model for IAOC actions that takes
      appeals to the IAB.  Specifically for that IAB role, it would



Klensin                  Expires August 14, 2016                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               IAOC Membership               February 2016


      probably be better to not require that the IAB Chair be personally
      involved in the IAOC as a voting member.

   In addition, it is useful to clarify the role of the IAB and IESG
   representatives by making them non-voting liaisons.  This reduces the
   requirement that IAB and/or IESG members be selected for the specific
   types of expertise needed on the IAOC and Trustees.  If they cannot
   explain IESG and IAB requirements and perspectives to the voting IAOC
   and Trustee members and persuade them as needed or cannot explain
   IAOC and Truetee matters to the IAB (or IESG) as needed, we have far
   more serious problems than whether or not those two people vote.  It
   may be worth noting that reporting on and explaining portions between
   the two bodies is exactly consistent with our expectations for IAB/
   IETF liaisons to completely external bodies.

4.  Reasons for IAB and IETF Chair Membership in the IAOC and IETF Trust

   As discussed above, when the community approved BCP 101, it was
   approving a fundamentally administrative activity.  That was
   motivated, at least in part, by a desire to replace earlier
   arrangements if which administrative activities for the IETF were run
   entirely by an external body.  However, it was equally important to
   be sure that those detailed administrative functions did not fall on
   the IESG or IAB in order that those bodies could continue to do their
   primary jobs.  At the beginning, there were strong arguments for
   including the IAB and IETF Chairs in the IAOC in order to facilitate
   the transition and because they had been, de facto, the primary
   liaisons and contact points for the earlier arrangements.  RFC 4071
   is now well into its tenth year, we have a stable environment that is
   working at least moderately well (modulo some issues about
   responsiveness to the community and conformance with the transparency
   requirements of the RFC with which the presence of the two Chairs as
   voting members does not appear to be helping), and those transitional
   requirements no longer apply.

   The issues with the IETF Trust [2] are a bit different.  It is much
   more a policy body than the IAOC.  The reasons for making the IAOC
   members the Trustees of the IETF Trust were, again, dictated by some
   transition concerns in which the appearance of the Chairs of the IAB
   and IETF being directly involved was important.  But, again, the IETF
   Trust has entered its second decade, is stable, and appears to be
   working relatively well.  If Trust considerations argue against
   making the changes outlined in this document, that may be a stronger
   reason for the community to review the composition of the Trustees
   than to preserve the status quo in the IAOC.  (See further discussion
   on this topic in Appendix A.2.





Klensin                  Expires August 14, 2016                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               IAOC Membership               February 2016


   Nothing in this document should be construed as prohibiting either
   the IETF or IAB Chairs from serving in the liaison roles.  The IAB
   Chair, who is chosen for that role by an IAB selected largely or
   entirely for skills not related to the IAOC or the IETF Trust (and
   who serves at the pleasure of that body), will often not be the
   optimal liaison.  By contrast, the IETF Chair, who is selected by the
   Nomcom for skills that will often be more relevant, may more often be
   the best choice for liaison.  However, it seems more reasonable to
   leave those decisions to the IAB and IESG and the individuals
   involved rather than building them rigidly into a BCP, if only to
   better allow for changing circumstances.

5.  BCP 101 Modifications

   BCP 101 is hereby modified by changing "eight" to "six" in the first
   sentence of Section 4 of RFC 4071, deleting the bullet items from
   that section that read "The IETF Chair (ex officio);" and "The IAB
   Chair (ex officio);", and adding, after the bullet list, "The IAB and
   IESG shall appoint liaisons from their own membership to the IAOC.
   Those liaisons shall function as full members but without vote.

6.  Acknowledgments

   The original (2009) version of this draft emerged from a number of
   community discussions and discussions about variations in the match
   between the skills and interests of various IAB and IETF Chairs over
   the years, noting that the skills and interest needed to effectively
   serve on the IAOC had rarely been identified as primary, or even
   high, on the list of IAB or Nomcom criteria for people selected to
   those leadership posts.

   The current, 2016, version was stimulated by a draft being circulated
   for IAB comment [3] and IETF list discussion of it.  One of the
   authors of that draft challenged those in the community who had
   different views or proposals to produce a draft that specified a
   practical alternative.  This draft is a response to that request; the
   author thanks the IAB member authors of the other draft and many
   contributors to the on-list conversation for the new ideas and
   rationale that appear here, while understanding that some of them may
   not agree with the way in which this draft utilizes their views and
   insights.  Comments from Brian Carpenter, Dave Crocker, Ted Hardie,
   Mike St. Johns, and Andrew Sullivan were particularly helpful in that
   regard.








Klensin                  Expires August 14, 2016                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               IAOC Membership               February 2016


7.  IANA Considerations

   [[CREF2: RFC Editor: Please remove this section before publication.]]

   This memo includes no requests to or actions for IANA.

8.  Security Considerations

   This document makes an adjustment to an IETF and IASA procedural
   document.  It has no Internet security implications beyond those
   described in the relevant base documents.

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [1]        Austein, R., Ed. and B. Wijnen, Ed., "Structure of the
              IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA)", BCP 101,
              RFC 4071, DOI 10.17487/RFC4071, April 2005,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4071>.

   [2]        Carpenter, B., Ed. and L. Lynch, Ed., "BCP 101 Update for
              IPR Trust", BCP 101, RFC 4371, DOI 10.17487/RFC4371,
              January 2006, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4371>.

9.2.  Informative References

   [3]        Hardie, T., Sullivan, A., and R. Housley, "Updating the
              ex-officio member of the IAB in the IAOC", February 2016,
              <draft-hardie-iaoc-iab-update-00>.

Appendix A.  Other Obvious Questions About Choices

A.1.  How About the ISOC President/CEO?

   As specified in RFC 4071, there are three ex-officio voting positions
   on the IAOC.  This document eliminates two of those positions,
   replacing them with non-voting liaisons appointed by the relevant
   body.  The preference remains to have the IETF Chair actually serve
   on the IAOC unless there are reasons to not do so while the
   preference about the IAB Chair is much less strong (and the reasons
   less compelling).  That leads to an obvious question as to why the
   requirement that the ISOC President and CEO serve directly, ex-
   officio, on the IAOC (and the IETF Trust, see below) should be
   retained.  The reason is that RFC 4071 makes it quite clear that IASA
   is an ISOC function, carried out for the IETF community, that the IAD
   is an ISOC employee, that ISOC is expected to be the actual signatory
   to relevant contracts, and so on.  That combination of factors gives



Klensin                  Expires August 14, 2016                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               IAOC Membership               February 2016


   ISOC line responsibility (as well as ultimate budgetary
   responsibility) and having the ISOC President and CEO serve directly
   on the IAOC is important to those relationships and accountability
   for them.

A.2.  The Trust-IAOC Relationship

   When the IETF Trust was established, it was critically important, as
   an initialization and transition matter, that the Trustees and the
   IAOC have the same membership.  At this point, a decade on, the
   importance of having the IAOC serve the administrative oversight
   function (for which it was named) remains clear.  The IETF Trust and
   its Trustees have, by contrast, assumed more of a policy function.
   At this point, the reasons for keeping the two memberships the same
   (including an early, now-expired, constraint about not being able to
   make changes without external approval) have largely disappeared.
   This document does not specify separating the two, but such an action
   would be compatible with it, noting that there is almost certainly a
   much stronger argument for keeping the IETF and IAB Chairs as
   Trustees than there is for keeping them as IAOC members.

A.3.  Changing the appointment mechanism for IAOC members selected from
      the community by the IAB and IAOC

   Several suggestions have been made lately for shifting the IAB and
   IESG appointment responsibilities for community members to serve as
   voting IAOC members to the Nomcom, allowing the Nomcom to appoint all
   such members other than the one appointed by ISOC.  This document
   does not address that possibility, but it would be compatible with
   what is proposed here.  As with the role of the IAB and IETF Chairs
   (see above), there is probably a stronger case to me made for the IAB
   and IESG appointing Trustees than for their appointing IAOC members.

Appendix B.  Change Log

   [[CREF3: RFC Editor: Please remove this section before publication.]]

B.1.  History and Changes from version -00 to -01

   As discussed above, version -01 of this document is a 2016 rewrite of
   the 2009 version -00.  There are few if any changes to the
   substantive proposal but a good deal of discussion has been added to
   reflect more recent considerations.








Klensin                  Expires August 14, 2016                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               IAOC Membership               February 2016


Author's Address

   John C Klensin
   1770 Massachusetts Ave, Ste 322
   Cambridge, MA  02140
   USA

   Phone: +1 617 245 1457
   Email: john+ietf@jck.com










































Klensin                  Expires August 14, 2016                [Page 9]
