






Network Working Group                                          S. Barber
Internet Draft                                  The UUCP Mapping Project
                                                           December 2000


               The Conclusion of the UUCP Mapping Project
              draft-barber-uucp-project-conclusion-05.txt


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Motivation for This Memo

   The UUCP Mapping Project started in the early 1980s as a means to
   facilitate the exchange of electronic mail among sites using the UUCP
   store-and-forward transport mechanism. This UUCP software, originally
   part of the UNIX operating system became available on a variety of
   operating systems and platforms, from large mainframe to small home
   PC's. This was done by creating a single database of systems
   connected to each other via UUCP and then using path building
   software (such as pathalias) to determine the optimal path from one
   system to another. Email addresses using this system incorporated the
   use of the path as part of the address.

   With the evolution of the Internet into mainstream use, the use of
   UUCP for the exchange of electronic mail has been significantly
   reduced. Today, UUCP is primarily used to link systems that are not
   on the Internet to a nearby system that is connected. By use of mail
   exchange resource records in the domain name system, these off-net



Barber                                                  [Page 1]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             December 2000


   systems can use the now-standard Internet email address format.

Concluding the Project

   Due to the fact that the maps are no longer widely used, the
   volunteers that make up the project have decided it is time to close
   down. The shutdown of the project will take three steps.

   The first step was the freezing of the system database. This took
   place during the month of August 2000. No further changes to the
   system database have been accepted.

   The second step was be the last postings of the system database to
   the newsgroup comp.mail.maps. A final posting was made during the
   month of September 2000.

   The final step was the removal of the newsgroup comp.mail.maps as a
   valid newsgroup. This was done during the month of November 2000.

IETF Documents that Reference the Project or the Maps

   RFC 915 describes a mail path service and specifically references
   pathalias and indirectly the maps maintained by the project.
   Following the conclusion of the project, the data returned by these
   servers will no longer be updated based on data maintained by the
   UUCP Project.

   RFC 976 references the UUCP Project. The centralized registration
   operation referenced in this RFC has been concluded.

   RFC 1168 describes the database aspect of the UUCP Project and makes
   specific reference to pathalias, EUNET and JUNET.

   RFC 1480 make note that Internet US Domain registration is not
   affiliated with the registration of UUCP Map entries. It also
   contains an example of a sample UUCP Map entry as an illustration of
   an inappropriate registration for the US Domain.

   RFC 1588 makes reference to the UUCP Maps as something that could be
   returned by NETFIND.

   RFC 1876 makes reference to the UUCP Maps, though it suggests that
   the DNS could be used to contain the location information available
   in the maps.

Acknowledgements

   A number of individuals have been instrumental in making the UUCP



Barber                                                  [Page 2]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             December 2000


   Project successful. Principle among them are Steve Bellovin and Peter
   Honeyman, the creators of pathalias which is the most popular
   software available for building paths from the system database. In
   RFC 976, Mark R. Horton established the ground rules for the format
   of email messages exchanged via UUCP.

   In 1984, the USENIX Association provided the initial funding the
   launch the UUCP Project initially led by Karen Summers-Horton. The
   project originally distributed software and provided domain name
   registration services in addition to the mapping project. Mark R.
   Horton ran the project starting in 1985 until the registration and
   software distribution functions were shutdown in 1988.

   Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey, provided facilities for
   the project for many years. Mel Pleasant was the manager of the
   project before I succeeded him.

   There have been many volunteers who have contributed time (and money,
   in some cases) to the project. Here is the list I have been able to
   create. I apologize to anyone who may have been left off. It was most
   certainly an accident.

   Tohru Asami                           Dave Davey

   Jesse Asher                           Robert Elz

   Piet Beertema                         Paul Graham

   Bill Blue                             Ed Hew

   John Bossert                          Hokey

   Scott Bradner                         Nike Horton

   Kent Brodie                           C. Bryan Ivey

   Malcolm Carlock                       Jeff Janock

   Lee Damon                             Berry Kercheval

   Richard E. Depew                      Rob Kolstad

   Erik E. Fair                          Bob Leffler

   Ken Herron                            K. Richard Magill

   Haesoon Cho                           Mikel Manitius




Barber                                                  [Page 3]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             December 2000


   Doug McCallum                         Mike Wexler

   Mark Moraes                           Rayan Zachariassen

   Steve Morenberg                       Eric Ziegast

   Jim Murray                            David Paul Zimmerman

   Mike O'Connor

   Todd Ogasawara

   John Owens

   Bob Page

   Sanjay H. Pathak

   John Quarterman

   Rob Robertson

   Tim Rosmus

   Partono Rudiarto

   David Schmidt

   Larry Snyder

   Gene Spafford

   Aris Stathakis

   Kris R. Stephens

   Karen Summers-Horton

   Gil Tene

   Tim Thompson

   Jeff Wabik

   Peter Wan

   Lauren Weinstein




Barber                                                  [Page 4]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             December 2000


Security Considerations

   It is possible that email could be lost or misdelivered by those that
   continue to make use of the UUCP Mapping Project map data. One of the
   reasons for the publication of this memo is to highlight the fact
   that the data is no longer useful and alternative mechanisms must be
   employed to improve the possibility that the mail will be delievered
   correctly.

Author's  Address:

   Stan Barber
   The UUCP Mapping Project
   P.O. Box 300481
   Houston, Texas 77230-0481
   sob@uucp.org



































Barber                                                  [Page 5]


