




ROLC Working Group                                Derya H. Cansever
INTERNET DRAFT                                    GTE Laboratories, Inc.
                                                  February 1996
Expiration Date July 1996




              NHRP Protocol Applicability Statement
               <draft-ietf-rolc-nhrp-appl-02.txt>



Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
   and its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet Drafts.

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months.  Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
   other documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to use Internet
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as a "working
   draft" or "work in progress."

   Please check the 1id-abstracts.txt listing contained in the
   internet-drafts Shadow Directories on nic.ddn.mil, nnsc.nsf.net,
   nic.nordu.net, ftp.nisc.sri.com, or munnari.oz.au to learn the
   current status of any Internet Draft.

Abstract

   As required by the Routing Protocol Criteria [RFC 1264], this draft 
   report discusses the applicability of the Next Hop Resolution 
   Protocol (NHRP) in routing of IP datagrams over Non-Broadcast Multiple 
   Access (NBMA) networks, such as ATM, SMDS and X.25. The final form of 
   this draft report is a prerequisite to advancing NHRP on the standards 
   track.

1. Protocol Documents
 
   The NHRP protocol description is defined in [1] in its draft form.
 
   The NHRP protocol analysis is documented in TBD [2].

   The NHRP MIB description is defined in [3] in its draft form.











2. Introduction

   This document summarizes the key features of NHRP and discusses the
   environments for which the protocol is well suited. For the purposes
   of description, NHRP can be considered a generalization of Classical 
   IP and ARP over ATM which is defined in [4] and of the Transmission
   of IP Datagrams over the SMDS Service, defined in [5]. This 
   generalization occurs in 2 distinct directions. 
   
   Firstly, NHRP avoids the need to go through extra hops of routers 
   when the Source and Destination belong to different Logical Internet 
   Subnets (LIS). Of course, [4] and [5] specify that when the source 
   and destination belong to different LISs, the source station must 
   forward data packets to a router that is a member of multiple LISs, 
   even though the source and destination stations may be on the same 
   logical NBMA network. If the source and destination stations belong
   to the same logical NBMA network, NHRP provides the source station 
   with an inter-LIS address resolution mechanism at the end of which 
   both stations can exchange packets without having to use the services 
   of intermediate routers. This feature is also referred to as 
   "short cut" routing. If the destination station is not part of 
   the logical NBMA network, NHRP provides the source with the NBMA 
   address of the egress router towards the destination.

   The second generalization is that NHRP is not specific to a particular 
   NBMA technology. Of course, [4] assumes an ATM network and [5] assumes 
   an SMDS network at their respective subnetwork layers.

   NHRP is specified for resolving the NBMA addresses IP datagrams over 
   large clouds of NBMA networks. In principle, NHRP should also be 
   extensible to network layer protocols other than IP, without major 
   modifications to the specification provided in [1].

3. Key Features

   NHRP is not a routing protocol, but an inter-LIS address resolution
   mechanism that may make use of network layer routing in resolving
   the NBMA address of the destination. This is further discussed in 
   Section 5.

   The most prominent feature of NHRP is that it avoids extra hops
   in an NBMA with multiple LISs. To this goal, NHRP provides the source with 
   the NBMA address of the destination, if the destination is directly 
   attached to the NBMA. If the destination station is not attached to the 
   NBMA, then NHRP provides the source with the NBMA address of an exit 
   router that has connectivity to the destination. In general, there may
   be multiple exit routers that have connectivity to the destination. If 
   NHRP uses the services of a dynamic routing algorithm in fulfilling its 
   function, which is necessary for robust and scalable operation, then the 
   exit router identified by NHRP reflects the selection made by the
   network layer dynamic routing protocol.









   NHRP is defined for avoiding extra hops in the delivery of IP packets 
   with a single destination. As such, it is not intended for direct use 
   in a point-to-multipoint communication setting. However, elements of 
   NHRP may be used in certain multicast scenarios for the purpose of 
   providing short cut routing. Such an effort is discussed in [6].

   NHRP can be used in host-host, host-router and router-host communications. 
   When used in router-router communication, NHRP can produce 
   persistent routing loops. NHRP for router-router communication will
   be addressed in separate document.

   A special case of router-router communication where loops will not
   occur is when the destination host is directly adjacent to the non-NBMA
   interface of the egress router. If it is believed that the adjacency of 
   the destination station to the egress router is a stable topological 
   configuration, then NHRP can safely be used in this router-router 
   communication scenario. If the NHRP Request has the Q bit set, indicating 
   that the requesting party is a router, and if the destination station is 
   directly adjacent to the egress router as a stable topological 
   configuration, then the egress router can issue a corresponding NHRP reply, 
   possibly with the B bit set, indicating that the information is stable. 
   If the destination is not adjacent to the egress router, and if Q bit is set
   in the Request, then a safe mode of operation for the egress router would
   be not to issue an NHRP Reply for this particular request.

   As a result of inter-LIS address resolution capability, NHRP allows
   the communicating parties to exchange packets by fully utilizing the 
   particular features of the NBMA network. One such example is 
   the use of QoS guarantees when the NMBA network is ATM. Here, 
   due to short-cut routing, ATM provided QoS guarantees can be implemented
   without having to deal with the issues of re-assembling and re-segmenting
   IP packets at each network layer hop.
  
   NHRP protocol can be viewed as a client-server interaction. An NHRP 
   Client is the one who issues an NHRP Request. An NHRP Server is the 
   one who issues a reply to an NHRP request, or the one who forwards 
   a received NHRP request to another Server. Of course, an NHRP entity 
   may act both as a Client and a Server. NHRP uses network layer routing 
   in resolving the NBMA address of the destination. The related routing 
   tables can be populated using the services of network layer dynamic 
   routing algorithms, or they may be statically configured. If network 
   layer dynamic routing algorithms are used, NHRP Servers would be 
   implemented in a router, or in some device that participates to a 
   network layer dynamic routing algorithm. If static routing is used, 
   then NHRP Servers do not necessarily have to participate 
   to network layer dynamic routing algorithms. All they are required to do 
   is to reply to NHRP Requests using their IP to NBMA address resolution 
   tables, or to forward them to another Server, using some pre-determined 
   forwarding rules. 
   









   4. Use of NHRP

   In general, issuing an NHRP request would be an application dependent
   action [7]. For applications that do not have particular QoS requirements,
   and that are executed within a short period of time, an NBMA short-cut
   may not be a necessity. In situations where there is a "cost" 
   associated with NBMA short-cuts, such applications may be better served 
   by network layer hop-by-hop routing. Here, "cost" may be understood in 
   a monetary  context, or as additional strain on the equipment that 
   implements short-cuts. Therefore, there is a trade-off between the 
   "cost" of a short-cut path and its utility to the user. Reference [7] 
   proposes that this trade-off should be addressed at the application
   level. In an environment consisting of LANs and routers that are
   interconnected via dedicated links, the basic routing decision
   is whether to forward a packet to a router, or to broadcast it locally. 
   Such a decision on local vs. remote is based on the destination address. 
   When routing IP packets over an MBMA network, where there is potentially
   a direct Source to Destination connectivity with QoS options, the 
   decision on local vs. remote is no longer as fundamentally important 
   as in the case where packets have to traverse routers that are
   interconnected via dedicated links. Then, in an NBMA network with QoS
   options, the basic decision becomes the one of short-cut vs. 
   hop-by-hop network layer routing. In this case, the relevant criterion
   becomes applications' QoS requirements [7]. NHRP is particularly
   applicable for environments where the decision on local vs. remote
   is superseded by the decision on short-cut vs. hop-by-hop network
   layer routing.

   Let us assume that the trade-off is in favor of a short-cut NBMA
   route. Generally, an NHRP request can be issued by a variety of NHRP
   aware entities, including hosts and routers with NBMA interfaces.
   If an IP packet traverses multiple hops before a short-cut path
   has been established, then there is a chance that multiple 
   short-cut paths could be formed. In order to avoid such an 
   undesirable situation, a useful operation rule is to authorize 
   only the following entities to issue an NHRP request and to perform 
   short-cut routing.
    i) The host that originates the IP packet, if the host has an NBMA
       interface.
    ii) The first router along the routing path of the IP packet such that
        the next hop is reachable through the NBMA interface of that
        particular router.
    iii) A policy router within an NBMA network through which the IP
         packet has to traverse.

5. Protocol Scalability

   NHRP uses network layer routing in resolving the NBMA address of the
   destination. As such, the scalability of NHRP is closely tied to the
   scalability of the network layer routing protocol used by NHRP. Dynamic
   network layer routing protocols are proven to scale well. Thus, when 
   used in conjunction with dynamic routing algorithms, NHRP should scale 










   in the same order as the routing algorithm, subject to two issues. The 
   first issue is related to the memory size and the required processing
   power for the address resolution tables at the NHSs. The routing
   algorithm divides the network into moderately sized subnets. Assignment
   of the areas of responsibility for each NHS in a way similar to the
   operation of the routing algorithm will resolve the issue of address
   resolution table size. The second issue is related to the NHRP awareness
   of the routers. If a router on the routed path of an NHRP Request
   does not implement NHRP, it will silently discard the Request. Then,
   short-cuts cannot be implemented and connectivity will be provided on a
   hop-by-hop basis. Thus, when NHRP is implemented in conjunction with
   dynamic network layer routing, virtually all the routers within a logical 
   NBMA network should be NHRP aware. 

   One can also use static routing in conjunction with NHRP. Then, not all
   the routers in the NBMA network need to be NHRP aware. Of course, static
   routing does not scale well. Also, when static routing is used, it may
   not be possible to forward the IP packet to be transmitted along with
   the path of the NHRP Request.

6. Discussion

   NHRP does not replace existing routing protocols. In general, routing 
   protocols are used to determine the proper path from a source host or
   router, or intermediate router, to a particular destination. If the
   routing protocol indicates that the proper path is via an interface 
   to an NBMA network, then NHRP may be used at the NBMA interface to 
   resolve the destination IP address into the corresponding NBMA address.
   Of course, the use of NHRP is subject to the considerations discussed in 
   Section 4.

   Assuming that NHRP is applicable and the destination address has been
   resolved, packets are forwarded using the particular data forwarding 
   and path determination  mechanisms of the underlying NBMA network.
   Here, the sequence of events are such that route determination is 
   performed by IP routing, independent of NHRP. Then, NHRP is used
   to create a short-cut track upon the path determined by the IP 
   routing protocol. An advantage of this approach is that it "shortens" 
   the routed path. A disadvantage is that it may create persistent
   routing loops when used in router-to-router communication [8]. As
   noted in Section 3, Router-to-Router NHRP will be addressed in a 
   separate document.
   













References

   [1] NMBA Next Hop Resolution Protocol (NHRP), Dave Katz,
       David Piscitello, Bruce Cole and James Luciani,
       draft-ietf-rolc-nhrp-07.txt.

   [2] TBD

   [3] NHRP Management Information Base, M. Patrick, draft-ietf-rolc
       -nhrp-mib-01.txt

   [4] Classical IP and ARP over ATM, Mark Laubach, RFC 1577.

   [5] Transmission of IP datagrams over the SMDS service, J. Lawrance 
       and D. Piscitello, RFC 1209.

   [6] Support for Sparse Mode PIM over ATM, Yakov Rekhter and Dino
       Farinacci, draft-rekhter-pim-atm-00.txt

   [7] "Local/Remote" Forwarding Decision in Switched Data Link Subnetworks,
       Yakov Rekhter and Dilp Kandlur, draft-ietf-rolc-apr-04.txt.
  
   [8] IP over ATM: A Framework Document, R.G. Cole, D.H. Shur and
       C. Villamizar, draft-ietf-ipatm-framework-doc-07.ps

 


Acknowledgements

   The author acknowledges valuable contributions and comments from 
   many participants of the ROLC Working Group, in particular from 
   Curtis Villamizar, Yakov Rekhter, Joel Halpern and Andy Malis.

Author's Address

   Derya H. Cansever
   GTE Laboratories Inc.
   40 Sylvan Rd. MS 51
   Waltham MA 02254

   Phone: +1 617 466 4086
   Email: dhc2@gte.com




Expiration Date July 1996




