Network Working Group                                G. Bernstein (ed.) 
Internet Draft                                        Grotto Networking 
                                                        Young Lee (ed.) 
                                                                 Huawei 
Intended status: Informational                            June 30, 2008 
Expires: December 2008 
                                    
 
                                      
    Performance Evaluation of PCE Architectures for Wavelength Switched 
                             Optical Networks 
                draft-bernstein-pce-wson-evaluation-00.txt 


Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that       
   any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is       
   aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she       
   becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of       
   BCP 79. 

   This document may not be modified, and derivative works of it may not 
   be created, except to publish it as an RFC and to translate it into 
   languages other than English. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 30, 2008. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 

 
 
 
Bernstein             Expires December 30, 2008                [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft     PCE WSON Performance Evaluation            June 2008 
    

Abstract 

   In this note a number of PCE architectural and computational options 
   are evaluated against a medium sized wavelength switched optical 
   network. The key performance measures of overall and backward 
   blocking are reported under different dynamic traffic scenarios. The 
   corresponding reduction in connection blocking probabilities and 
   computational advantages enabled by these architectural alternatives 
   strongly warrant their inclusion in continuing PCE WSON work. 

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. Simulated PCE Architectures and Variations.....................4 
      2.1. Routing with Distributed RWA..............................4 
      2.2. Separate Routing from Wavelength Assignment...............5 
      2.3. Combined Routing and Wavelength Assignment................5 
   3. Simulation Runs and Results....................................5 
   4. Interpretation of results and Conclusions......................7 
   5. Security Considerations........................................8 
   6. IANA Considerations............................................8 
   7. Acknowledgments................................................8 
      7.1. Informative References....................................9 
   Author's Addresses...............................................10 
   Intellectual Property Statement..................................10 
   Disclaimer of Validity...........................................11 
    
1. Introduction 

   Path computation in Wavelength Switched Optical Networks (WSON) is 
   typically subject to a wavelength continuity constraint. The nature 
   of this constraint has lead to a number of different practical 
   schemes for path computation in WSONs. The general class of these 
   computational problems is typically referred to as Routing and 
   Wavelength Assignment (RWA) problems. It must be emphasized that the 
   wavelength assignment (WA) mentioned here is an integral part of path 
   computation and not a part of network planning or static 
   configuration problem and hence falls within the scope of the path 
   computation element (PCE) architecture. 

   In the WSON Framework draft [Frame] three basic computational 
   architectures were described: 

   o  Combined RWA --- Both routing and wavelength assignment are 
      performed at a single computational entity. 

 
 
Bernstein & Lee       Expires December 30, 2008                [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft     PCE WSON Performance Evaluation            June 2008 
    

   o  Separate Routing and WA --- Separate entities perform routing and 
      wavelength assignment. The path obtained from the routing 
      computational entity must be furnished to the entity performing 
      wavelength assignment. 

   o  Routing with Distributed WA --- Routing is performed at a 
      computational entity while wavelength assignment is performed in a 
      distributed fashion across nodes along the path.  

   The implications to the control plane of these three approaches are 
   described in [Frame] and [WSON-PCE]. In reference [ECOC-08] initial 
   simulations are reported on the performance of these different 
   approaches along with various computational options. Here we will 
   review those aspects of [ECOC-08] relevant to WSON PCE 
   standardization efforts and discuss further simulations under 
   different traffic load and network sizing parameters. Note that these 
   results are expressed in the form of graphs that do not appear in the 
   text version of this draft. 

   In circuit switching networks such as WSON a key performance measure 
   used to evaluate network performance under dynamic loads is the 
   probability that a connection request will be blocked. For GMPLS 
   based network there can be a portion of the overall blocking, termed 
   "backward blocking" in [ECOC-08] due to resource contention during 
   the signaling phase of lightpath set up, i.e. when two different 
   RSVP-TE instances try to reserve the same wavelength on the same 
   link. In this note we will primarily be concerned with the overall 
   blocking performance of the various PCE computation architectures for 
   WSON. 

   The simulations were carried out on a Pan European network topology 
   with 27 optical nodes and 55 WDM links [Should we reference Alessio's 
   OFC paper?] as shown in Figure 1. Each link carries either 32 or 80 
   wavelengths depending upon the simulation run. The traffic is 
   uniformly distributed among all node pairs, lightpath requests arrive 
   following a Poisson process with an exponentially distributed inter-
   arrival time (with average 1/u seconds) and holding time (with 
   average 1/lambda=60s seconds or 6000s depending on simulation run). 
   The load offered to the network is thus expressed in Erlang as 
   lambda/u and it is varied by controlling the inter-arrival time. In 
   all the figures, each simulation point is plotted with the confidence 
   interval at 90% of confidence level. 

    

    

 
 
Bernstein & Lee       Expires December 30, 2008                [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft     PCE WSON Performance Evaluation            June 2008 
    

     

    

    

    

            Figure 1 is shown here in the PDF. 

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

                                 Figure 1  

2. Simulated PCE Architectures and Variations 

2.1. Routing with Distributed RWA 

   The following variants were studied: 

   1. In the "Fully Distributed" (FD) case the PCE was assumed to reside 
      on the originating node for the light path and only had aggregate 
      wavelength usage (bandwidth) information. In this case a least 
      congested route (LCR) path selection algorithm was used. 

   2. In the "R-" case a centralized PCE was assumed to compute paths 
      (but not wavelength assignment) based on the same LCR algorithm as 
      above. Then distributed wavelength assignment via signaling was 
      utilized.  For the purposes of blocking probability calculation 
      this leads to similar results as the previous case. 



 
 
Bernstein & Lee       Expires December 30, 2008                [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft     PCE WSON Performance Evaluation            June 2008 
    

   3. In the "R+" case a centralized PCE was assumed to compute paths 
      (but not wavelength assignment) based on detailed link wavelength 
      utilization/availability. A variant of the LCR algorithm that 
      understood the wavelength continuity constraint was employed. 

2.2. Separate Routing from Wavelength Assignment 

   In this case it was assumed that routing (but not wavelength 
   assignment) was performed at the ingress node based only on aggregate 
   wavelength utilization (bandwidth). The results of this computation 
   are then passed to a separate PCE server for wavelength assignment 
   (WA). It was assumed that this separate WA PCE had detailed knowledge 
   of link wavelength utilization.  

   An important variation of the above is when the first route 
   computation element (in this case on the ingress node) calculates K 
   alternative paths which are then fed to the WA PCE which will then 
   choose one of the paths and a viable wavelength (where possible). 
   This scenario is denoted by "WA-k" on the various graphs and 
   simulations were performed for k = 2 and k = 3. 

2.3. Combined Routing and Wavelength Assignment 

   In this case in the simulations a central PCE was responsible for 
   both routing and wavelength assignment. This requires the PCE to run 
   a reasonably sophisticated algorithm and have detailed link 
   wavelength utilization information. This is denoted by "R+WA" in the 
   simulation results. 

3. Simulation Runs and Results 

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

 
 
Bernstein & Lee       Expires December 30, 2008                [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft     PCE WSON Performance Evaluation            June 2008 
    

    

    

    

    

                     Figure 2 is shown here in the PDF 

    

    

    

    

    

    

   Figure 2 shows the following inferences: 

   o  R+WA (Combined Routing and Wavelength Assignment) performs the 
      best due to the absence of backward blocking while FD suffers a 
      highest blocking. 

   o  In the heavy network load, R+ is as good as R+WA due to 
      wavelength-continuity aware routing scheme (WC-LCR) employed by R+ 
      scheme in which case there is virtually no backward blocking 
      similar to R+WA. 

   o  R- and FD suffer the worst blocking performance due to the routing 
      scheme employed that is not wavelength continuity aware.  

    

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
Bernstein & Lee       Expires December 30, 2008                [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft     PCE WSON Performance Evaluation            June 2008 
    

 

 

 

 

               Figure 3 is shown her in the PDF. 

 

 

 

 

 

      Figure 3. WA, WA-2, WA-3 and R+WA scenarios with 32 wavelengths 
                           per link, 1/u = 60s. 
                                      
   Figure 3 shows the following inferences: 

   o    For the medium and heavy loads, WA and FD show high blocking 
      probability due to the routing schemes that is based on aggregated 
      bandwidth information.  

   o    WA-k (k=3) significantly improves the WA assignment performance.  

   Simulation results with a longer holding time (100x) maintain the 
   similar inferences obtained for the case of a shorter holding time.  

4. Interpretation of results and Conclusions 

   (a) Importance of accurate wavelength usage information, e.g., FD and 
   R- compared to R+, WA  
   (b) Reduction (elimination) of backward blocking in the R+WA, WA, and 
   WA-K situations  
   (c) The usefulness of WA-k in reducing blocking compared to R+, WA 
   and the simplification compared to R+WA 

   In terms of the PCE architecture options, centralized wavelength 
   assignment shows a clear performance benefit over distributed 
   wavelength assignment.  

 
 
Bernstein & Lee       Expires December 30, 2008                [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft     PCE WSON Performance Evaluation            June 2008 
    

   In regards to routing, separating routing from wavelength assignment 
   could be a viable option to consider. In this case, the number of 
   routes fed to a central WA PCE affects the overall performance.   

5. Security Considerations 

   This draft in showing the advantages of the PCE R+WA and WA-k 
   architectures in WSON networks, makes clear the need for securing the 
   PCE architecture in general but does not add any new security 
   requirements.  It should be noted that WSON light paths and link 
   resources are relatively scarce and expensive resources and hence a 
   potentially higher value target for attacks. 

6. IANA Considerations 

   This draft does not require IANA services. 

7. Acknowledgments 

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.



























 
 
Bernstein & Lee       Expires December 30, 2008                [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft     PCE WSON Performance Evaluation            June 2008 
    

   References 

7.1. Informative References 

   [Frame]   G. Bernstein, Y. Lee, W. Imajuku, "Framework for GMPLS and 
             PCE Control of Wavelength Switched Optical Networks", work 
             in progress: draft-ietf-ccamp-wavelength-switched-00.txt, 
             May 2008. 

   [ECOC-08] A. Giorgetti, F. Paolucci, F. Cugini, L. Valcarenghi, P. 
             Castoldi, G. Bernstein, "Routing and Wavelength Assignment 
             in PCE-based Wavelength Switched Optical Networks (WSONs)", 
             To Appear ECOC 2008. 

     
   [WSON-PCE]  Y. Lee and G. Bernstein, "PCEP Requirements and 
             Extensions for WSON Routing and Wavelength Assignment", 
             work in progress: draft-lee-pce-wson-routing-wavelength-
             02.txt. 




























 
 
Bernstein & Lee       Expires December 30, 2008                [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft     PCE WSON Performance Evaluation            June 2008 
    

Author's Addresses    

   Aessio Giorgetti 
   Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa, Italy 
   Email: a.giorgetti@sssup.it 
    
   F. Paolucci 
   Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa, Italy 
   Email: fr.paolucci@sssup.it 
    
   Filippo Cugini  
   CNIT, Pisa, Italy 
   Email: filippo.cugini@cnit.it 
    
   L. Valcarenghi  
   Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa, Italy 
   Email: valcarenghi@sssup.it 
    
   P. Castoldi   
   Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa, Italy 
   Email: castoldi@sssup.it 
    
   Greg Bernstein (Ed.) 
   Grotto Networking 
   Fremont California, U.S.A. 
       
   Phone: (510) 573-2237 
   Email: gregb@grotto-networking.com 
    
   Young Lee (Ed.)  
   Huawei Technologies  
   1700 Alma Drive, Suite 100  
   Plano, TX 75075, USA  
        
   Phone: (972) 509-5599 (x2240)  
   Email: ylee@huawei.com  
    

Intellectual Property Statement 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 

 
 
Bernstein & Lee       Expires December 30, 2008               [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft     PCE WSON Performance Evaluation            June 2008 
    

   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

Disclaimer of Validity 

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS 
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 

Acknowledgment 

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 

    







 
 
Bernstein & Lee       Expires December 30, 2008               [Page 11] 

