Network working group                                    Dacheng Zhang 
Internet Draft                                           Xiaohu Xu 
Category: Standards Track                            
Created: May 27, 2009                     Huawei Technologies Co.,Ltd 
Expires: November 2009                                                         
 
                                      
                     Host Identifier Revocation in HIP 
                    draft-zhang-hip-hi-revocation-00 
                                      


Status of this Memo 

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at   
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at   
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 27, 2009. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors. All rights reserved.  

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info). 
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your 
   rights and restrictions with respect to this document. 

    

 
 
 
Zhang and Xu.         Expires November 27, 2009               [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft    Host Identifier Revocation in HIP           May 2009 
    

Abstract 

   This document mainly analyzes the key revocation issue with host 
   identities (HI) in the Host Identity Protocol (HIP), which has not 
   attracted enough attention from HIP community yet. As a core 
   component of key management mechanism, key revocation is critical 
   for security systems especially which are expected to execute for a 
   long period. Apart from that, this document also discusses the 
   possible challenges that the designers of HI revocation mechanisms 
   have to face and introduces several possible solutions.  

Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119]. 

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Introduction..................................................2 
   2. Key Management................................................3 
   3. HI Revocation in HIP..........................................4 
      3.1. Implicit HI Revocation in HIP............................4 
      3.2. Explicit HI Revocation without Third Parties.............6 
      3.3. Explicit HI Revocation with Third Parties................6 
   4. Conclusions...................................................7 
   5. IANA Considerations...........................................7 
   6. Acknowledgments...............................................7 
   7. References....................................................8 
   Authors' Addresses...............................................8 
    
1. Introduction 

   Key management aims at guaranteeing the security of cryptographic 
   keys during the period of their application and includes all of the 
   provisions made in a security system design which are related to 
   generation, validation, exchange, storage, safeguard, application, 
   and replacement of cryptographic keys. Appropriate key management is 
   critical to security systems. Generally, a key management mechanism 
   can be broken down into five sub-systems: key generation, key 
   maintenance, key distribution, key assessment, and key revocation.  

   Key generation systems concern the issues related with key 
   generating processes. Key maintenance systems deal with the issues 
   with key storage. Key distribution systems deal with the issues with 

 
 
Zhang and Xu.         Expires November 27, 2009               [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft    Host Identifier Revocation in HIP           May 2009 
    

   regard to distributing cryptographic keys for users. Key assessment 
   systems take in charge of verifying the legality of cryptographic 
   keys according to certain policies. Key revocation systems cover the 
   issues with regard to updating cryptographic keys. In these sub-
   systems, key revocation is most complex and covers most functions of 
   the other four sub-systems. For instance, in a typical key 
   revocation process, antique keys need to be abandoned and securely 
   discarded; new keys need to be generated, assessed and distributed; 
   the users supposed to be affected by the change of keys need to be 
   notified.  

   Generally, there are two types of key revocation approaches: 
   implicit key revocation and explicit key revocation. Indicated by 
   the name, implicit key revocation does not need any additional 
   operations to revoke a cryptographic key. For instance, in PKI, a 
   Certificate Authority (CA) can issue a certificate for a user in 
   order to assert the relationship between the user and its public key. 
   The certificate is associated with a life period. When the period 
   expires, the user's public key is revoked as well. An explicit key 
   revocation mechanism, in contrast, needs an assigned entity such as 
   the owner a key to explicitly deliver notification when the key is 
   revoked for certain reasons. For instance, in X.500 based systems, 
   an issuer can generates a list of certificates, which have been 
   revoked but not expired yet, for users to consult. 

2. Key Management 

   Key management aims at guaranteeing the security of cryptographic 
   keys during the period of their application and includes all of the 
   provisions made in a security system design which are related to 
   generation, validation, exchange, storage, safeguard, application, 
   and replacement of cryptographic keys. Appropriate key management is 
   critical to security systems. Generally, a key management mechanism 
   can be broken down into five sub-systems: key generation, key 
   maintenance, key distribution, key assessment, and key revocation.  

   Key generation systems concern the issues related with key 
   generating processes. Key maintenance systems deal with the issues 
   with key storage. Key distribution systems deal with the issues with 
   regard to distributing cryptographic keys for users. Key assessment 
   systems take in charge of verifying the legality of cryptographic 
   keys according to certain policies. Key revocation systems cover the 
   issues with regard to updating cryptographic keys. In these sub-
   systems, key revocation is most complex and covers most functions of 
   the other four sub-systems. For instance, in a typical key 
   revocation process, antique keys need to be abandoned and securely 

 
 
Zhang and Xu.         Expires November 27, 2009               [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft    Host Identifier Revocation in HIP           May 2009 
    

   discarded; new keys need to be generated, assessed and distributed; 
   the users supposed to be affected by the change of keys need to be 
   notified.  

   Generally, there are two types of key revocation approaches: 
   implicit key revocation and explicit key revocation. Indicated by 
   the name, implicit key revocation does not need any additional 
   operations to revoke a cryptographic key. For instance, in PKI, a 
   Certificate Authority (CA) can issue a certificate for a user in 
   order to assert the relationship between the user and its public key. 
   The certificate is associated with a life period. When the period 
   expires, the user's public key is revoked as well. An explicit key 
   revocation mechanism, in contrast, needs an assigned entity such as 
   the owner a key to explicitly deliver notification when the key is 
   revoked for certain reasons. For instance, in X.500 based systems, 
   an issuer can generates a list of certificates, which have been 
   revoked but not expired yet, for users to consult. 

3. HI Revocation in HIP  

   The revocation of transient keys has been considered in the design 
   of HIP. In the basic handshaking protocol, communicating hosts 
   employ the authenticated Diffie-Hellman algorithm to distribute a 
   symmetric key which is used to generate new cryptographic keys 
   adopted in following communications. After the handshake, the hosts 
   are able to refresh their transient keys and the corresponding 
   associations, using update messages. The revocation issue with HIs, 
   however, has not been carefully considered yet. In current HIP 
   architecture, hosts are able to update their identifiers arbitrarily 
   without notifying others. This loophole can be taken advantage of by 
   attackers to, for instance, escape tracing or bypass ACLs. In this 
   section, candidate approaches and related issues are discussed. 

3.1. Implicit HI Revocation in HIP 

   The basic idea of implicit HI revocation is to associate a key with 
   a valid period and use cryptographic methodology to prove the 
   combination between the key and its valid period. In practice, the 
   valid period of a key can be transported in HIP headers either using 
   a parameter or a certificate. The issuer of the key can calculate a 
   signature for the key and its valid period. By verifying the 
   signature, users can assert whether the key is still in its valid 
   period. 

   Although the principle behind implicit key revocation is quite 
   intuitive and there have been lots of successful experience in this 

 
 
Zhang and Xu.         Expires November 27, 2009               [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft    Host Identifier Revocation in HIP           May 2009 
    

   area, there are still many practical challenges. For example, in 
   current HIP, hosts have a full control over its permanent key pairs. 
   A host can arbitrarily assign, reset, or extend the life time of its 
   HIs, which may cause serious security issues. Assume that a lazy 
   manager of a host sets an extremely long life period for the HI of 
   the host to avoid the jobs of updating key pairs. Then attackers may 
   be able to obtain enough time to compromise the key. A practical 
   solution to this problem is to allocate a trusted third party to 
   manage the life period for each HI, and the assertion of the third 
   party should be able to be verified by users.  

   However, such a security infrastructure may become a bottleneck of 
   the Internet. The infrastructure is expected to serve all the end 
   systems attached to the Internet in a global scale. Currently, there 
   have been already billions of hosts attached to the Internet. 
   Considering the other kinds of devices (e.g., mobile phones, network 
   printers, and even human beings) which has been connected or are 
   going to be connected to the Internet, the number of the users that 
   the infrastructure needs to server is even larger. Up till now, no 
   security infrastructure ever deployed has the capability to 
   effectively support such a large amount of users. In addition, the 
   Internet is comprised of multiple networks which belong to different 
   countries or organizations. As there is not a unique trust domain 
   all over the Internet, two hosts intending to communicate may belong 
   to two different trust domains, and each host may not trust the 
   assertion made by the security server in the other domain. Although 
   there have been solutions of generating trust relationship across 
   various trust domains, all these solution imposes additional 
   communications and key exchanges, which will negatively influence 
   the performance of HIP. Therefore, the HIP community argues that two 
   HIP-aware hosts should be able to communicate without any additional 
   security facilities. Actually, the only third party server 
   introduced in the base-line HIP architecture is the Rendezvous 
   Server (RVS). A RVS only relays messages for the hosts which 
   attempts to communicate with mobile hosts and provides little 
   security functionality. The hosts intending to communicate still 
   need to use the basic handshaking protocol to carry out 
   authentication and exchange secrets.  

   It needs to be clarified that we do not oppose integrating 
   additional security infrastructures with HIP. We just argue that 
   before the integration the issues mentioned above need to be 
   carefully considered.  

   Compared with explicit key revocation mechanisms, implicit key 
   revocation mechanisms introduce less overhead. No additional 

 
 
Zhang and Xu.         Expires November 27, 2009               [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft    Host Identifier Revocation in HIP           May 2009 
    

   information is needed to notify the revocation of antique keys. 
   However, implicit key revocation mechanisms are incapable in the 
   scenarios where keys need to be revoked for some reasons (e.g., 
   compromise) before they expire. In many security architectures (e.g., 
   X.509 [RFC 2459]), both implicit and explicit key revocation are 
   supported. 

3.2. Explicit HI Revocation without Third Parties 

   In a scenario where there is no assistance from trusted third 
   parties, a host refreshing its HI needs to notify the update to its 
   collaborating peers. Cryptographic methodologies must be used to 
   prove that the notification messages cannot be foiled, modified, 
   replayed so as to prevent attackers from using these messages to 
   perform attacks. An intuitive approach is to define a new type of 
   update packet. When a HI is revoked, the host carries out basic 
   handshakes with its peers, establishes security channels and then 
   transports the update message through the channel to notify the 
   revocation. If a host is communicating with its peers at the time 
   when the revocation is performed, the host can use the established 
   security channels to transport update packets directly.  

   If a host only has a small group of collaborating partners and the 
   relationship between the host and its partners is stable, the 
   solution discussed above is effective. However, if the number of 
   partners is large or changes frequently, the host has to maintain a 
   long list of partner information, and send a large amount of 
   messages to inform its partners of the revocation, not to even 
   mention that candidate partners are unpredictable on many occasions. 
   In addition, the job of maintaining partner lists normally needs the 
   involvement of human beings which are error-prone. Any omission of 
   candidate partners will cause difficulties or failures in future 
   communications. Moreover, this type of solution requires all the 
   partners to be available during the period of revocation. Otherwise, 
   the host will miss the updating information. This requirement, 
   however, are difficult to fulfill, especially when hosts communicate 
   in asynchronous style. 

3.3. Explicit HI Revocation with Third Parties 

   The notification approach mentioned above uses a "push" model, if a 
   host needs to communicate with a large number of peers, the host may 
   suffer from the overhead introduced by the revocation of its HI. In 
   this case, a "pull" model may show its advantage. That is, deploy a 
   trust third party for hosts to upload their updated HI information 
   and for users to query whenever they need. DNS can be a good 

 
 
Zhang and Xu.         Expires November 27, 2009               [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft    Host Identifier Revocation in HIP           May 2009 
    

   candidate to implement such a model. When a host refreshes its HI, 
   it can update its Resource Record (RR) on a DNS server. Other users 
   then can use the host's FQDN to find out its latest HI. Security 
   extensions of DNS have been developed, which is able to ensure that 
   only authorized hosts can update their RRs. This solution works well 
   on many occasions. However, in some scenarios, the service of 
   mapping from antique HIs to latest HIs is required. For instance, 
   DNS allows a FQDN to be mapped to multiple hosts in order to 
   facilitate load balance. Each time when receiving a query about the 
   FQDN, the DNS server returns the addressing information about a 
   different host. Therefore, when a user queries a DNS server with the 
   FQDN of the desired host and obtains a HIT different from the 
   previous one, it is difficult for the host to find out whether the 
   HI it gains is the updated HI of the desired host or the HI of 
   another host. The later condition may result in errors as the host 
   indicated by the HI does not have the state information maintained 
   by the desired host. In other resolution mechanisms which facilitate 
   mapping from HIT to IP address (e.g., DHT), the mapping service from 
   the old HI to updated HI is more important as users have no other 
   namespace to rely on.  

4. Conclusions 

   If HIP is only supposed to be an ID/Locator separating solution and 
   security is dispensable, key revocation may not be a critical issue 
   on many occasions. However, if HIP is expected to keep working 
   securely for a relatively long period, proper key management 
   mechanisms have to be provided. In fact, key management has been an 
   active research area for a long period, and lots of successful key-
   management systems (e.g., PKI) are widely adopted in practice. 
   However, because of many issues (e.g., scalability, lack of trust), 
   it is undesired to employ these key-management systems for HIP 
   directly. 

5. IANA Considerations 

   No such considerations. 

6. Acknowledgments 

   Thanks Thomas.R.Henderson for his kindly prove-reading and precious 
   comments. 





 
 
Zhang and Xu.         Expires November 27, 2009               [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft    Host Identifier Revocation in HIP           May 2009 
    

7. References 

   [RFC 2459] Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure: Certificate and 
   CRL Profile January 1999. 

    

Authors' Addresses 

    
   Dacheng Zhang 
   Huawei Technologies Co.,Ltd 
   KuiKe Building, No.9 Xinxi Rd., 
   Hai-Dian District  
   Beijing, 100085 
   P.R. China 
    
   Email: zhangdacheng@huawei.com 
    
    
   Xiaohu Xu 
   Huawei Technologies Co.,Ltd 
   KuiKe Building, No.9 Xinxi Rd., 
   Hai-Dian District  
   Beijing, 100085 
   P.R. China 
   Email: xuxh@huawei.com 
    


















 
 
Zhang and Xu.         Expires November 27, 2009               [Page 8] 

