
Network Working Group                                      Scott Bradner
Internet-Draft                                        Harvard University
                                                              Rohan Mahy
                                                                   Cisco
                                                          Allison Mankin
                                                                 USC/ISI
                                                               Joerg Ott
                                                                IPDialog
                                                             Brian Rosen
                                                                 Marconi
                                                             Dean Willis
                                                             dynamicsoft
                                                           February 2002

                           SIP Change Process
                    <draft-tsvarea-sipchange-01.txt>

1. Status of this Memo

  This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions of
  Section 10 of RFC 2026.

  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
  Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other
  groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- Drafts.

  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
  and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
  time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
  material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
  http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

  The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
  http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

2. Abstract

  The IETF's Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [RFC2543] is becoming
  popular for a growing number of applications.  One result of this
  popularity is a continuous flood of suggestions for SIP modifications
  and extensions.  This memo describes how the Transport Area directors
  along with the SIP and SIPPING working group chairs have decided to
  deal with such suggestions.




Transport ADs and SIP* Chairs                                   [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             SIP Change Process              February 2002


3. The IETF SIP Working Group

  The IETF Session Initiation Protocol (sip) Working Group is chartered
  to be the "owner" of the SIP protocol. All changes or extensions to
  SIP must first exist as SIP Working Group documents.  The SIP Working
  group is charged with being the guardian of the SIP protocol for the
  Internet.  It should only extend or change the SIP protocol when there
  are compelling reasons to do so.

  Documents that must be handled by the SIP working group include new
  SIP methods, new SIP option tags, new reponse codes, and new standards
  track SIP headers.  With the exception of "P-" headers described in
  Section 6.1, all SIP extensions must be standards track and must be
  developed in the IETF, from requirements provided by the SIPPING
  Working Group.

  SIP event packages [events] are appropriate to develop in the Working
  Groups that use them, but they will need charter approval to create a
  SIP event package as a working group effort.  The IETF will also
  require (Individual) RFC publication for registration of event
  packages developed outside the scope of an IETF working group.
  Requirements for publishing event packages are described in detail in
  Section 6.3.

4. The IETF SIPPING Working Group

  The IETF  Session Initiation Protocol Proposal Investigation (sipping)
  Working Group is chartered to be a filter in front of the SIP Working
  Group.  This working group will investigate requirements for
  applications of SIP, some of which may lead to requests for extensions
  to SIP.  These requirements may come from the community at large, or
  from individuals who are reporting the requirements determined by
  another standards body.

  The SIPPING Working Group may determine that these requirements can be
  satisfied by SIP without modifications, that the requirements are not
  sufficiently general to warrant a change to SIP, that the requirements
  justify a change to SIP, or that the requirements should be combined
  with other requirements to solve a more general problem, or to solve
  the same problem in a more flexible way.

  Because the SIP protocol gets so much attention, some application
  designers may want to use it just because it is there, such as for
  detailing cars using the new SIP BRUSH method.  SIPPING should act as
  a filter, accepting only requirements which are applicable to SIP.

  When the SIPPING working group decides on a set of requirements, it
  forwards them to the SIP working group.  The SIPPING Working Group may



Transport ADs and SIP* Chairs                                   [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             SIP Change Process              February 2002


  also document usage or applications of SIP which do not require any
  protocol extensions.

  The SIPPING working group also acts as a filter for proposed event
  packages as described in Section 6.3.

5. SIP Change Process

  Anyone who thinks that the existing SIP protocol is applicable to
  their application, yet not sufficient for their task must write an
  individual ID explaining the problem they are trying to solve, why SIP
  is the applicable protocol, and why the existing SIP protocol will not
  work.  The Internet-Draft must include a detailed set of requirements
  (distinct from solutions) that SIP would need to meet to solve the
  particular problem.  The Internet Draft must also describe in detail
  any security issues that arise from meeting the requirements.  After
  this Internet-Draft is published, the authors should send a note to
  the SIPPING Working Group mailing list to start discussion on the
  Internet-Draft.

  The SIPPING working group chairs in conjunction with the Transport
  Area Directors will determine if the particular problems raised in the
  requirements Internet-Draft warrants being added to the SIPPING
  charter based on the mailing list discussion.  The SIPPING working
  group should consider whether the requirements merge with other
  requirements from other or related applications, and refine the ID
  accordingly.

  If the chairs and the ADs both feel that the particular new problems
  should be added to the SIPPING Working Group charter, the ADs will
  present the proposed SIPPING charter modifications to the IESG and
  IAB, in accordance with the usual process for charter expansion.  If
  the IESG (with IAB advice) approves of the charter changes, the
  SIPPING working group can then work on the problems described in the
  Internet-Draft.

  In a separate Internet-Draft, the authors may describe a set of
  changes to SIP that would meet the requirements. This Internet-Draft
  would be passed on to the SIP working group for consideration (if
  warranted).  There is no requirement on the SIP working group that the
  proposed solution from this additional ID be adopted.

  The SIPPING working group may also evaluate such proposals for
  extensions if the requirements are judged to be appropriate to SIP,
  but the requirements are not sufficiently general for standards track
  activity.  The SIPPING working group will attempt to determine if the
  new proposal meets the requirements for publication as a "P-" header
  as described in Section 6.1 within a specific scope of applicability.



Transport ADs and SIP* Chairs                                   [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             SIP Change Process              February 2002


  The Transport ADs may, on a case by case basis, support a process in
  which the requirements analysis is implicit and the SIP working group
  requests addition of a charter item for an extension without a full
  SIPPING process as described.  This will be the exception.

  With respect to standardization, this process means that SIP
  extensions (with the exception of P- headers as described in Section
  6.1) come only from the SIP Working Group, and only from the IETF, as
  the body that created SIP.  The IETF will not publish a SIP extension
  RFC outside of the process described here.

  The SIP Working Group is required to protect the architectural
  integrity of SIP and must not add features that do not have general
  use beyond the specific case - they also must not add features just to
  make a particular function more efficient at the expense of simplicity
  or robustness.

  Some working groups besides SIPPING generate requirements for SIP
  solutions and/or extensions as well.  At the time of writing, these
  include SIP for Instant Messaging and Presence Leveraging Extensions
  (simple), Service in the PSTN/IN Requesting InTernet Service
  (spirits), and Telephone Number Mapping (enum).

6. Extensibility and Architecture

  In an idealized protocol model, extensible design would be self-
  contained, and it would be inherent that new extensions and new
  headers would naturally have an architectural coherence with the
  original protocol.

  However, this idealized vision has not been attained in the world of
  standards tracks protocols.  While, interopability implications can be
  addressed by capabilities negotiation rules, the effects of adding
  features that overlap or that deal with a point solution and are not
  general are much harder to control with rules.  Therefore the
  Transport Area calls for architectural guardianship and application of
  Occam's Razor by the SIP Working Group.

  We encourage other protocol working groups with highly extensible
  protocols to review whether they need more coordination of extensions
  (including restricting them to IETF) as in the SIP case.

  In keeping with the IETF tradition of "running code and rough
  consensus", it is valid to allow for development of SIP extensions
  that are either not ready for standards track, but might be understood
  for that role after some running code; or are private or proprietary
  in nature, because a characteristic motivating them is usage that is
  known not to fit the Internet architecture for SIP.  We call these



Transport ADs and SIP* Chairs                                   [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             SIP Change Process              February 2002


  "P-" headers, for "preliminary", "private", or "proprietary".

  There are two key issues to consider with respect to keeping the "P-"
  header extension space "safe":


     1. Clearly indicating the unarchitected or not-yet understood
     nature of the extension.


     2. Preventing identity conflicts between extensions.


6.1. Indicating a "P-" Header:

   Use of an "X-" prefix on textual identfiers has been widely used
   to indicate experimental extensions in other protocols, and this
   approach is applied in modified form here by use of a "P-"
   header extension.

   Informational SIP Headers can be registered as "P-" headers if
   all of the following conditions are met:


     1.  A designated expert [RFC2434] MUST review the proposal for
     applicability to SIP and conformance to these guidelines.  The
     Expert Reviewer will send email to the IESG on this determina-
     tion.  The expert reviewer can cite one or more of the guide-
     lines that haven't been followed in his/her opinion.


     2.  The proposed extension MUST NOT define SIP option tags,
     response codes, or methods.


     3.  The function of the proposed header MUST NOT overlap with
     current or planned chartered extensions.


     4.  The proposed header MUST be of purely an informational
     nature, and MUST NOT significantly change the behavior of SIP
     entities which support it.  Headers which merely provide addi-
     tional information pertinent to a request or a response are
     acceptable.  If the headers redefine or contradict normative
     behavior defined in bis or other standards track documents
     then the behavior is significantly different.





Transport ADs and SIP* Chairs                                   [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             SIP Change Process              February 2002


     5.  The proposed header MUST NOT undermine SIP security in any
     sense.  The Internet Draft proposing the new header MUST
     address security issues in detail as if it were a Standards
     Track document.  Note that, if the intended application sce-
     nario makes certain assumptions regarding security, the secu-
     rity considerations only need to meet the intended application
     scenario rather than the general Internet case.  In any case,
     security issues need to be discussed for arbitrary usage sce-
     narios (including the general Internet case).


     6.  The proposed header MUST be clearly documented in an
     (Individual or Working Group) Informational RFC, and regis-
     tered with IANA.


     7.  An applicability statement in the Informational RFC MUST
     clearly document the useful scope of the proposal, and explain
     its limitations and why it is not suitable for the general use
     of SIP in the Internet.

  Any implementation of a "P-" header (meaning "not specified by a
  standards-track RFC issued through the SIP Working Group") MUST
  include a "P-" prefix on the header, as in "P-Headername".  Note
  that "P-" extensions are not IETF standards of any kind, and MUST
  NOT be required by any production deployment considered compliant
  to IETF specififcations.  Specifically, implementations are only
  SIP compliant if a) they fall back to baseline behavior when they
  ignore all P- headers, and b) when using  P- headers they do not
  contradict any normative behavior.

6.2.  Preventing Identity Conflicts Between P-Extensions:

  In order to prevent identity conflicts between P-extensions, this
  document provides an IANA process (See: "IANA Considerations"
  below) to allow for the registration of private or experimental
  extension headers. All implemented extension headers SHOULD meet
  the P-Header requirements in 6.1, and any extension header used
  outside of a very restricted research or teaching environment
  (such as a student lab on implementing extensions) MUST meet
  those requirements and MUST be documented in an RFC and be IANA
  registered.


6.3. SIP Event Packages

  SIP events defines two different types of event pacakges: normal
  event packages, and event template-packages.  Event template-



Transport ADs and SIP* Chairs                                   [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             SIP Change Process              February 2002


  packages can only be created and registered by the publication of
  a Standards Track RFC (from an IETF Working Group).  Normal event
  packages can be created and registered by the publication of any
  Working Group RFC (Informational, Standards Track, Experimental),
  provided that the RFC is a chartered working group item.

  Individuals may also wish to publish SIP Event packages.  Indi-
  vidual proposals for registration of a SIP event package MUST
  first be published as internet-drafts for review by the SIPPING
  Working Group.  Proposals should include a strong motivational
  section, a thorough description of the proposed syntax and seman-
  tics, event package considerations, security considerations, and
  examples of usage.  The author should submit his or her proposal
  as an individual Internet Draft, and post an announcement to the
  working group mailing list to begin discussion.  The SIPPING
  Working Group will determine if the proposed package is a) an
  inappropriate usage of SIP, b) applicable to SIP but not suffi-
  ciently interesting, general, or in-scope to adopt as a working
  group effort, c) contrary to similar work planned in the Working
  Group, or d) should be adopted as or merged with charted work.

  The IETF requires (Individual) RFC publication for registration
  of event packages developed outside the scope of an IETF working
  group, according to the following guidelines:



     1) A designated expert [RFC2434] MUST review the proposal for
     applicability to SIP and conformance to these guidelines.  The
     Expert Reviewer will send email to the IESG on this determina-
     tion.  The expert reviewer can cite one or more of the guide-
     lines that haven't been followed in his/her opinion.


     2) The proposed extension MUST NOT define an event template-
     package.


     3) The function of the proposed package MUST NOT overlap with
     current or planned chartered packages.


     4) The event package MUST NOT redefine or contradict the nor-
     mative behavior of [events], [SIP], or related standards track
     extensions.






Transport ADs and SIP* Chairs                                   [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             SIP Change Process              February 2002


     5) The proposed package MUST NOT undermine SIP security in any
     sense.  The Internet Draft proposing the new package MUST
     address security issues in detail as if it were a Standards
     Track document.  Security issues need to be discussed for
     arbitrary usage scenarios (including the general Internet
     case).


     6) The proposed package MUST be clearly documented in an
     (Individual) Informational RFC, and registered with IANA.  The
     package MUST document all the package considerations required
     in Section 5 of [events]


     7) If necessary as determined by the expert reviewer or the
     chairs or ADs of the SIPPING WG, an applicability statement in
     the Informational RFC MUST clearly document the useful scope
     of the proposal, and explain its limitations and why it is not
     suitable for the general use of SIP in the Internet.


7. Security Considerations

  Complexity and indeterminate or hard to define protocol behavior,
  depending on which of many extensions operate, is a fine breeding
  ground for security flaws.

  All Internet-Drafts that present new requirements for SIP must
  include a discussion of the security requirements and implica-
  tions inherent in the proposal.  All RFCs that modify or extend
  SIP must show that they have adequate security and do not worsen
  SIP's existing security considerations.

8. IANA Considerations

  RFC XXXX [bis] directs the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority to
  establish a registry for SIP method names, a registry for SIP
  option tags, and a registry for SIP response codes, and to amend
  the practices used for the existing registry for SIP headers.

  With the exception of P-headers, entries go into these registries
  only by approval of a draft for standards track RFC (the IESG
  announcement of approval authorizes IANA to make the registra-
  tion).  For P-headers this requirement is relaxed to allow regis-
  tration when any RFC is approved by the IESG (non-standards
  track).

  Each RFC shall include an IANA Considerations section which



Transport ADs and SIP* Chairs                                   [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             SIP Change Process              February 2002


  directs IANA to create appropriate registrations.  Standard head-
  ers and messages MUST NOT begin with the leading characters "P-".

  "P-" header names MUST being with the leading characters "P-".
  No "P-" header which conflicts with (would, without the "P-" pre-
  fix have the same name as) an existing standards track header is
  allowed.  Each registration of a "P-" header will also reserve
  the name of the header as it would appear without the "P-" pre-
  fix. These "reserved standard names" MUST NOT be used in a SIP
  implementation prior to standardization of the header.

  Short forms of headers MUST only be assigned to standards track
  headers.


9. References

  [RFC 2543] "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol.", M. Handley, H.
  Schulzrinne, E. Schooler, J. Rosenberg, RFC 2543, March 1999

  [bis] "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol.", J. Rosenberg, et al,
  Work in progress.

  [events] "Event Notification in SIP", A. Roach, Internet Draft,
  Feb 2002.  Work in progress.

10. Author's Addresses

  Scott Bradner
  Email: sob@harvard.edu

  Rohan Mahy
  Email: rohan@cisco.com

  Allison Mankin
  Email: mankin@isi.edu

  Joerg Ott
  Email: jo@ipdialog.com

  Brian Rosen
  Email: brian.rosen@marconi.com

  Dean Willis
  Email: dean.willis@softarmor.com

10. Acknowledgements




Transport ADs and SIP* Chairs                                   [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             SIP Change Process              February 2002


  The Transport ADs thank our IESG and IAB colleagues
  (especially Randy Bush, Harald Alvestrand and John Klensin)
  for valuable
  discussions of extensibility issues in a wide range of protocols,
  including those that our area brings forward and others, and
  many members of the SIP community at IETF for dialogue on these
  issues for SIP.

10. Full Copyright Statement

  Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.

  This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished
  to others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise
  explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared,
  copied, published and distributed, in whole or in part, without
  restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice
  and this paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative
  works.  However, this document itself may not be modified in any
  way, such as by removing the copyright notice or references to
  the Internet Society or other Internet organizations, except as
  needed for the purpose of developing Internet standards in which
  case the procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Stan-
  dards process must be followed, or as required to translate it
  into languages other than English.

  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not
  be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

  This document and the information contained herein is provided on
  an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGI-
  NEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
  INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
  INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
  WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PUR-
  POSE.















Transport ADs and SIP* Chairs                                  [Page 10]




