



Network Working Group                                         J. Goodwin
Internet-Draft                                                       ISO
Expires: October 14, 2006                                 April 12, 2006


     A Uniform Resource Name (URN) Namespace for the International
                 Organization for Standardization (ISO)
                      draft-goodwin-iso-urn-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 14, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document describes a Uniform Resource Name Namespace
   Identification (URN NID) for the International Organization for
   Standardization (ISO).  This URN NID is intended for use for the
   identification of persistent resources published by the ISO standards
   body (including documents, document metadata, extracted resources
   such as standard schemata and standard value sets, and other
   resources).


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Specification Template
     2.1.  Namespace ID
     2.2.  Registration Information
     2.3.  Declared registrant of the namespace
     2.4.  Declaration of structure
     2.5.  Relevant ancillary documentation
     2.6.  Identifier uniqueness considerations
     2.7.  Identifier persistence considerations
     2.8.  Process for identifier resolution
     2.9.  Rules for lexical equivalence
     2.10. Conformance with URN Syntax
     2.11. Validation mechanism
     2.12. Scope
   3.  Namespace Considerations
     3.1.  Requirements
     3.2.  Alternative naming schemes
   4.  Community Considerations
   5.  IANA Considerations
   6.  Security Considerations
   7.  References
     7.1.  Normative References
     7.2.  Informative References
   Author's Address
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements


1.  Introduction

   The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was created
   by international agreement in 1947.  ISO is a network of the national
   standards institutes of many countries, on the basis of one member
   per country, with a Central Secretariat in Geneva, Switzerland, that
   coordinates the system.  ISO acts as a bridging organization in which
   a consensus can be reached on solutions that meet both the
   requirements of business and the broader needs of society, such as
   the needs of stakeholder groups like consumers and users.

   (Further information is provided at
   http://www.iso.org/iso/en/aboutiso/introduction/index.html.)

   The core mission of ISO is to develop technical standards
   constituting technical agreements which provide the framework for
   compatible technology worldwide.  ISO standards contribute to making
   the development, manufacturing and supply of products and services
   more efficient, safer and cleaner.  They make trade between countries
   easier and fairer.

   Every participating ISO member institute (full members) has the right
   to take part in the development of any standard which it judges to be
   important to its country's economy.  No matter what the size or
   strength of that economy, each participating member in ISO has one
   vote.  ISO's activities are thus carried out in a democratic
   framework where each country is on an equal footing to influence the
   direction of ISO's work at the strategic level, as well as the
   technical content of its individual standards.  Although ISO
   standards are voluntary, the fact that they are developed in response
   to market demand, and are based on consensus among the interested
   parties, ensures widespread applicability of the standards.
   Consensus, like technology, evolves and ISO takes account both of
   evolving technology and of evolving interests by requiring a review
   of its standards at least every five years to decide whether they
   should be maintained, updated or withdrawn.

   ISO publishes International Standards and other technical
   specifications that are cited in the definitions of required or
   expected practices in many industries in many nations.  These
   specifications contain dictionaries of standard terms, catalogues of
   reference values, definitions of formal languages, formal schemata
   for information capture and exchange, specifications for standard
   practices, and other information resources of general use to
   international trade and industry.  ISO wishes to create and manage
   globally unique, persistent, location-independent identifiers for
   these resources.

   This specification defines the syntax for URNs that identify
   documents developed by the International Organization for
   Standardization (ISO) in accordance with the standards development
   procedures defined in the ISO/IEC Directives, Part 1 [ISODIR-1] and
   the ISO supplement [ISODIR-S] and processed by the ISO Central
   Secretariat.  The syntax extends to identify document metadata and
   resources related to these documents or otherwise associated with
   them.  It does not extend to products derived from these documents
   and published by ISO (e.g. handbooks, compendia) or documents at or
   below the Technical Committee level.  Revisions of this specification
   may define syntax for URNs in this namespace that identify other ISO
   objects, when the ISO community defines a requirement for such
   identifiers.


2.  Specification Template

2.1.  Namespace ID

   "iso"

2.2.  Registration Information

   Version 1.5
   Date: 2006-04-11

2.3.  Declared registrant of the namespace

   J. Goodwin
   ISO Central Secretariat
   International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
   Case Postale 56
   CH-1211 Geneva 20
   Switzerland

   E-mail: goodwin@iso.org

2.4.  Declaration of structure

   The Namespace Specific Strings (NSS) of all URNs assigned by ISO will
   conform to the syntax defined in section 2.2 of [RFC2141].

   The NSS has the following ABNF [RFC2234] specification:

   NSS           = std-nss

      All URNs conforming to this specification begin the NSS with the
      prefix "std:", to denote the restriction to documents developed by
      the ISO standards development procedures as defined in the ISO/IEC
      Directives, Part 1 [ISODIR-1] and the ISO Supplement [ISODIR-S].
      Prefixes that identify ISO objects of other kinds may be defined
      in future revisions of this specification.

   std-nss       = "std:" docidentifier *supplements *docelement
                   [additions]

      The prefix "std:" distinguishes an "std-nss".  An std-nss
      identifies the ISO document that is designated by the
      "docidentifier", as extended or modified by any identified
      "supplements".  (An std-nss that identifies all parts of a
      multipart ISO document is a special case as described under the
      element "partnumber".)  If the std-nss contains an "additions"
      element, the NSS identifies a resource extracted from the ISO
      document or otherwise associated with it (see below).

   docidentifier = originator [":" type] ":" docnumber [":" partnumber]
                   ([":" status ":" edition] / [":" edition])
                   [":" docversion] [":" language]

      "docidentifier" provides the complete identification of an ISO
      document.  Each of its component elements is described below.

   originator    = "iso" / "iso-iec" / "iso-cie" / "iso-astm" /
                   "iso-ieee" / "iec"

      "originator" the organization (usually an international body) from
      which a document emanates.

      Current values:

      iso      = International Organization for Standardization

      iec      = International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), or
                 Commission internationale electrotechnique (CIE)

      iso-iec  = jointly developed by ISO and IEC

      iso-cie  = jointly developed by ISO and the Commission
                 internationale d'eclairage (CEI)

      iso-astm = jointly developed by ISO and the American Society for
                 Testing and Materials International (ASTM)

      iso-ieee = jointly developed by ISO and the Institute for
                 Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)

      Revisions of this specification may define additional values.

   type          = "data" / "guide" / "isp" / "iwa" /
                   "pas" / "r" / "tr" / "ts" / "tta"

      "type" designates the ISO deliverable type.  If the "type" element
      is not present, the classification is "international standard".
      Other current values:

      data  = Data (document type no longer published)

      guide = Guide

      isp   = International Standardized Profile

      iwa   = International Workshop Agreement

      pas   = Publicly Available Specification

      r     = Recommendation (document type no longer published)

      tr    = Technical Report

      ts    = Technical Specification

      tta   = Technology Trends Assessment

   docnumber     = DIGITS

      "docnumber" is the reference number assigned to the document by
      ISO and/or IEC.  An ISO document may comprise a single document,
      or two or more separate parts each of which is identified by
      "partnumber".

   partnumber    = "-" +( DIGIT / ALPHA / "-" )

      "partnumber" is the reference number that identifies a part of a
      multipart standard.

      Where it is required to refer to a multipart ISO document in its
      entirety, this can be designated by omitting the "partnumber"
      element.  However, this precludes the possibility of using any
      further elements except "additions".

      _NOTE_ This option has been included to align with the provision
      in the ISO/IEC Directives, Part 2, 2004 [ISODIR-2] subclause 6.2.2
      of making an undated reference to all parts of an ISO document.
      It is only permissible to use this option where the URN is
      referring to a multipart ISO document in its entirety.  Since the
      use of this option precludes the designation of the elements
      "status" and "edition", it is implicit that the URN needs to
      remain valid irrespective of any future changes to the multipart
      document (see the rules for undated references given in the ISO/
      IEC Directives, Part 2, 2004 [ISODIR-2] subclause 6.6.7.5.2).
      This shall be taken into consideration in the use (and
      maintenance) of any URN specification employing this option.

      _NOTE_ In the case where the multipart document comprises
      different types of ISO deliverable, the "type" of the core part
      (usually part 1) applies.  See the example "Reference to a
      resource related to all parts of a multipart document".

      Except for the case where it is required to refer to a multipart
      document in its entirety, this element is required if the
      identified resource is a part of an ISO document.  Otherwise, this
      element is not used.

   status        = ( "draft" / "cancelled" ) / stage

      "status" indicates the publication status of the document.  When
      the "status" element is not present, the NSS refers to a published
      document.  Other values:

      draft     = document that has not yet been accepted for
                  publication by international ballot

      cancelled = document that has been deleted or withdrawn

   stage         = "stage-" stagecode ["." iteration]

      "stage" indicates the stage code and iteration of the document.

   stagecode     = DIGIT DIGIT "."  DIGIT DIGIT

      "stagecode" is the harmonized stage code in accordance with ISO
      Guide 69:1999, "Harmonized Stage Code system (Edition 2) --
      Principles and guidelines for use" [ISOGUIDE69].

   iteration     = "v" DIGIT

      "iteration" is a sequential number which refers to a specific
      iteration of the project's lifecycle through the designated stage

      If no "iteration" is specified the reference is to the highest
      iteration available for the specified stagecode.

      _NOTE_ In the ISO Central Secretariat project management database
      the "iteration" is referred to as the "project version".

   edition       = "ed-" DIGIT

      "edition" designates a specific edition of the document.  (The
      DIGIT is the (sequential) edition number.)  If no "edition" is
      specified, the NSS refers to the latest edition.

   docversion    = "v" (simpleversion / isoversion)

   simpleversion = DIGIT

      "docversion" designates the version number of a document's
      "edition".  It is altered by correction (corrected version;
      Technical Corrigendum) or amendment (Amendment; Addendum) and is
      distinct from a revision, which changes the edition number.

      In the "simpleversion", the first version published is "1", and
      each subsequent correction or amendment increases the version
      number by 1.

      If no "docversion" is specified, the reference is to the highest
      version number available for the denoted "edition".

      Current values:

         1 - first version published

         2 - corrected version published

   isoversion    = baseversion *includedsuppl

   baseversion   = DIGIT

   includedsuppl = "-" suppltype supplnumber [ "." supplversion ]

      An "isoversion" can be linked to a simpleversion by defining an
      existing simpleversion as baseversion and listing all the
      "supplements" (corrections and amendments) incorporated into that
      version.

      Examples for the "isoversion" (internal ISO version) scheme:

         1 = first version of standard

         1-amd1.v1 = first version of standard incorporating first
         version of Amendment 1

         1-amd1.v1-amd2.v1 = first version of standard incorporating
         first version of Amendment 1 and first version of Amendment 2

         1-amd1.v2-amd2.v1-amd3 = first version of standard
         incorporating corrected version of Amendment 1, first version
         of Amendment 2, and highest version of Amendment 3

         1-cor3 = first version of standard incorporating highest
         version of Technical Corrigendum 3

         1-amd1-cor3 = first version of standard incorporating highest
         version of Amendment 1 and highest version of Technical
         Corrigendum 3

   language      = monolingual / bilingual / trilingual

   monolingual   = "en" / "fr" / "ru" / "es" / "ar"

   bilingual     = "en-fr" / "en-ru" / "fr-ru"

   trilingual    = "en-fr-ru"

      "language" designates the official ISO language(s), or the
      language of a certified translation, in which the document
      (object) is processed and published by ISO (excluding languages
      which constitute only specific elements of the content).  The
      value is one or more alpha-2 codes, each of which designates a
      language, as specified in ISO 639-1 [ISO639-1].  If no language
      element is specified, "en" is assumed.

   supplements   = ":" suppltype ":" supplnumber
                   [":" supplversion ] [":" language ]

   suppltype     = "amd" / "cor" / "add"

   supplnumber   = DIGIT

   supplversion  = "v" DIGIT

      "supplements" designate technical alterations of or additions to
      an ISO standard that do not result in a new "edition" or
      "version".  Supplements are of three types, designated by
      "suppltype":

      amd = Amendment -- a document that alters and/or adds to
            previously agreed technical provisions in an existing ISO
            document; an amendment is subject to acceptance by ballot in
            accordance with the ISO/IEC Directives, Part 1, 2004
            [ISODIR-1] subclause 2.10.3

      cor = Technical Corrigendum -- a document that corrects a
            technical error or ambiguity, or updates the ISO document in
            such a way that the modification has no effect on the
            technical normative elements; a Technical Corrigendum is not
            balloted -- see the ISO/IEC Directives, Part 1, 2004
            [ISODIR-1] subclause 2.10.2

      add = Addendum -- (document type no longer published) Addenda were
            documents that changed (by correction, addition or deletion)
            the technical requirements of an ISO document; an addendum
            was subject to acceptance by ballot in accordance with the
            ISO/IEC Directives, Part 1.  (Addenda are included in this
            RFC because some of them are still valid.)

      Supplements are numbered consecutively per ISO document, and
      within each type.

      "supplnumber" identifies the number of the supplement.

      "supplversion" designates the version of a published supplement.
      At present only two versions are used in practice: when a
      supplement is published it is a version 1.  If that supplement is
      subsequently corrected by issuing a corrected version, as
      designated by the term "Corrected" on the cover page together with
      a date, the corrected version is version 2.

      The language of a supplement can be different from that of the
      document.  For example, a supplement may apply to only one of the
      languages of a bilingual document.  For such cases, the language
      of a supplement can be identified using the "language" element
      defined above.  The interpretation is the same, except that it
      applies only to the supplement.

   docelement    = clause / term

   clause        = ":clause:" clauseno / clauserange
                   *( "," clauseno / clauserange )

   clauseno      = ( ALPHA / DIGITS ) *( "."  DIGITS )

   clauserange   = clauseno "-" clauseno

   term          = ":term:" termno / termrange
                   *( "," termno / termrange)

   termno        = ( ALPHA / DIGITS ) *( "."  DIGITS )

   termrange     = termno "-" termno

      "docelement" identifies one or more numbered subdivisions of a
      document.  Types of numbered subdivision are specified in the ISO/
      IEC Directives, Part 2 [ISODIR-2].  This RFC currently specifies
      forms for reference to terms and clauses only.  Revisions of this
      specification may define additional values.

      "clause" represents the selection of one or more clauses or
      subclauses of the specification.  The form "clauseno HYPHEN
      clauseno" designates a range of (sub)clauses and the form
      "clauseno COMMA clauseno" a list.  A list can contain ranges.

      "clauseno" designates one clause or subclause in a specification.
      When the first character of a "clauseno" is a digit, the reference
      is to the clause designated by that digit string, and to the
      subclause designated by any additional digit strings separated by
      periods.  When the first character of a "clauseno" is
      alphabetical, the reference is to the corresponding Annex, and to
      the (sub)clauses designated by additional digit strings.

      "term" represents the selection of one or more consecutive terms
      of the specification.  The form "termno HYPHEN termno" designates
      a range of terms and the form "termno COMMA termno" a list.  A
      list can contain ranges.

      "termno" designates one term in a specification.  When the first
      character of a "termno" is a digit, the reference is to the term
      designated by that digit string and by any additional digit
      strings separated by periods.  When the first character of a
      "termno" is alphabetical, the reference is to the corresponding
      Annex, and to the terms designated by additional digit strings.

   additions     = techdefined / isodefined

   techdefined   = ":tech" *techelement

   techelement   = ; unspecified

   isodefined    = ; unspecified

      "additions" are additional elements of the NSS intended to
      identify a representation of an ISO document, an extract from an
      ISO document, or some related information set, as a resource in
      its own right.

      "techdefined" represents an associated or embedded resource
      defined by the committee that develops or maintains the identified
      document.  All such "additions" begin with the keyword "tech", but
      the further syntax is defined by the committee.

      "isodefined" represents associated or embedded resources defined
      by the ISO Central Secretariat.  The definition of "additions"
      beginning with any symbol other than "tech" is reserved to the ISO
      Central Secretariat.

      The syntax of these additions is not specified in this RFC.
      Specific syntax for these additions will be specified as needed by
      the ISO Central Secretariat, or by the individual Committee that
      has the responsibility for developing or maintaining the
      identified document.  (See further discussion under Process for
      Identifier Resolution below.)

   DIGITS        = DIGIT *DIGIT

   DIGIT         = "0" / "1" / "2" / "3" / "4" /
                   "5" / "6" / "7" / "8" / "9"

   ALPHA         = "A" / "B" / "C" / "D" / "E" / "F" / "G" /
                   "H" / "I" / "J" / "K" / "L" / "M" / "N" /
                   "O" / "P" / "Q" / "R" / "S" / "T" / "U" /
                   "V" / "W" / "X" / "Y" / "Z"

   Basics of the ABNF notation used :

   " " literals (terminal character strings);
       terms not in quotes are non-terminals

   /   alternatives

   []  indicates an optional rule

   ()  indicates a group of rules, used as a single alternative or as a
       single repeating group

   *   indicates that the following term or group can repeat 0 or more
       times

   +   indicates that the following term or group can repeat 1 or more
       times

   ;   comment

   Examples

   o  Language handling:

      urn:iso:std:iso:9999:-1:ed-1:en
      refers to the 1st edition of ISO 9999-1, in English

      urn:iso:std:iso:9999:-1:ed-1:en-fr
      refers to the 1st edition of ISO 9999-1, in English/French
      (bilingual document)

   o  Originators/document type:

      urn:iso:std:iso-iec:tr:9999:-1:ed-1:en
      refers to the 1st edition of ISO/IEC TR 9999-1, in English

   o  Status:

      urn:iso:std:iso-iec:9075:-3:cancelled:ed-2:en
      urn:iso:std:iso-iec:9075:-3:stage-95.99:ed-2:en
      both refer to the cancelled 2nd edition of ISO/IEC 9075-3, in
      English

      urn:iso:std:iso-iec:9075:-3:draft:ed-4:en
      urn:iso:std:iso-iec:9075:-3:stage-30.60:ed-4:en
      both refer to the draft 4th edition of ISO/IEC 9075-3, in English

      urn:iso:std:iso:128:-20:en
      urn:iso:std:iso:128:-20:stage-90.20:ed-1:en
      both refer to the published (90.20 = under 2nd periodic review)
      1st edition of ISO 128-20, in English

      urn:iso:std:iso:128:-71:cancelled:ed-1:en
      urn:iso:std:iso:128:-71:stage-30.98.v2:ed-1:en
      both refer to the cancelled (30.98 = project deleted) 1st edition
      of ISO 128-71, in English; the second example refers specifically
      to the 2nd iteration (projectversion) at stage 30

   o  Non-numeric part number:

      urn:iso:std:iso:9999:-A02:ed-1:en
      refers to the 1st edition of ISO 9999-A02, in English

   o  Reference to a resource related to all parts of a multipart
      document:

      urn:iso:std:iso:20022:tech:xsd:camt.001.001.01
      refers to a "techdefined" resource (i.e. a resource defined by the
      committee that develops or maintains the identified document)
      associated with ISO 20022 in its entirety; in this example the
      techdefined part comprises ":xsd:camt.001.001.01"

      _NOTE_ At the time of drafting of this schema, ISO 20022 comprises
      5 parts: parts 1 and 2 are International Standards; parts 3 to 5
      are Technical Specifications.  Therefore the "doctype" standard is
      used in the URN.

   o  Docversion handling:

      urn:iso:std:iso:9999:-1:ed-1:v2:en
      refers to the corrected English version of 1st edition of ISO
      9999-1

      urn:iso:std:iso:9999:-1:ed-1:v1-amd1:en
      refers to the version comprising 1st edition of ISO 9999-1,
      incorporating the latest version of Amendment 1, in English

      urn:iso:std:iso:9999:-1:ed-1:v1:en-fr:amd:1:v2:en
      refers to the 2nd version of Amendment 1, in English, which amends
      the 1st version of edition 1 of ISO 9999-1, in English/French
      (bilingual document)

      urn:iso:std:iso:9999:-1:ed-1:v1-amd1.v1:en-fr:amd:2:v2:en
      (isoversion scheme)
      refers to the corrected version of Amendment 2, in English, which
      amends the document comprising the 1st version of edition 1 of ISO
      9999-1 incorporating the 1st version of Amendment 1, in English/
      French (bilingual document)

      urn:iso:std:iso:5817:ed-2:v2:en:cor:1:en
      refers to the 1st version of Technical Corrigendum 1, in English,
      which amends the corrected version of edition 2 of ISO 5817, in
      English

   o  Supplement handling:

      urn:iso:std:iso:9999:-1:ed-2:en:amd:1
      refers to Amendment 1 to 2nd edition of ISO 9999-1, in English

      urn:iso:std:iso:9999:-1:ed-2:en:amd:1:v2
      refers to corrected version of Amendment 1 to 2nd edition of ISO
      9999-1, in English

      urn:iso:std:iso:9999:1:ed-2:en-fr:amd:2:en
      refers to Amendment 2 in English to 2nd edition of ISO 9999-1, in
      English/French (bilingual document)

      urn:iso:std:iso:9999:-1:ed-2:en:amd:1:cor:1
      refers to Corrigendum 1 to Amendment 1 to 2nd edition of ISO
      9999-1, in English

2.5.  Relevant ancillary documentation

   ISO/IEC Directives, Part 1 [ISODIR-1] and Part 2 [ISODIR-2], and ISO
   supplement [ISODIR-S].

2.6.  Identifier uniqueness considerations

   Assignment of URNs for documents in the requested namespace will be
   managed by the ISO Central Secretariat, which will ensure that the
   assigned URNs are consistent with the ISO Directives for unique
   identification of ISO documents.

   Assignment of URNs for Technical Committee resources related to ISO
   documents will be managed by the Technical Committees developing or
   maintaining those documents.  As indicated above, each such URN will
   extend the URN for the containing document via "additions".  The
   responsibility of the Technical Committee will therefore be to ensure
   the uniqueness of the techdefined "addition" that constitutes the
   identifier for the resource within the document namespace, and thus
   the uniqueness of the overall resource identifier within the
   requested namespace.

2.7.  Identifier persistence considerations

   Assigned URNs will not be reused and will remain valid beyond the
   lifecycle of the referenced resources.  However, it should be noted
   that although the URNs remain valid, the status of the referenced
   resource may change.

2.8.  Process for identifier resolution

   Resolving document identifiers:

      This schema has been developed with the intent that a URN
      identifying an ISO document can be transformed to a valid http URI
      by replacing the requested URN namespace prefix ("iso") and the
      "std:" prefix with the domain name "standards.iso.org" and
      replacing all occurrences of ":" within the identifier with "/".
      (ISO is planning to develop a website implementation to support
      these URIs.)

      Examples:

      urn:iso:std:iso:9999:-1:ed-1:en: corresponds to:
      http://standards.iso.org/iso/9999/-1/ed-1/en/

      urn:iso:std:iso-iec:tr:9999:-1:ed-1:en: corresponds to:
      http://standards.iso.org/iso-iec/tr/9999/-1/ed-1/en/

      urn:iso:std:iso:9999:-1:ed-2:en-fr:amd:2: corresponds to:
      http://standards.iso.org/iso/9999/-1/ed-2/en-fr/amd/2/

   Resolving identifiers for "addition" resources:

      For URNs in the requested namespace that refer to additional
      resources related to ISO documents, the ISO Central Secretariat
      will specify the resolution procedure at the time it defines the
      syntax for the corresponding "addition" to the NSS.  In most
      cases, those resources will be maintained on an ISO website, as
      extensions to the HTTP URIs described above.

2.9.  Rules for lexical equivalence

   URNs are lexically equivalent if and only if they are lexically
   identical.

   The "case" of alphabetic characters in "part" elements is specified
   to be "upper case", in order to avoid ambiguity with other elements
   that may follow a docnumber, have similar representations, and begin
   with "lower case" alphabetics.

2.10.  Conformance with URN Syntax

   No special considerations.

2.11.  Validation mechanism

   None specified.

2.12.  Scope

   Global.


3.  Namespace Considerations

3.1.  Requirements

   The ISO specific requirements are as follows:

   o  globally unique, persistent identifiers

   o  location-independent identifiers

   o  human-interpretable identifiers

   o  a scheme applicable to paper documents as well as machine-readable
      documents

   o  a scheme applicable to conceptual documents and explicit forms of
      documents

   o  a scheme applicable to resources extracted from documents

   o  a scheme applicable to "metadata" associated with documents

   o  a scheme in which the identifier assignment is managed by the ISO
      Central Secretariat.

   Location-independence: Because the publication of ISO standards is a
   complex arrangement involving multiple development organizations and
   national standards institutes, a given ISO document may be available
   in a number of forms from a number of sources.  This makes it
   important to have a document identifier that is global in scope,
   widely and uniformly used, and independent of the text source used by
   any given reference.

   Human-interpretable: Many, perhaps most, references to documents
   appear in text generated by human authors.  It is important that an
   author familiar with the scheme be able to generate a correct URN for
   a document for which s/he has the ISO reference (or document
   identifier).  Conversely, it is important that a reader unfamiliar
   with the scheme be able to identify the URN as a reference to an ISO
   document, particularly an ISO standard, and also to recognize
   identifiers for forms, languages, or metadata sets.

   Paper documents: Older ISO standards that are commonly used as
   industrial references exist only in paper form or in earlier machine-
   readable forms that are not commonly used on the Internet.  It is
   important to have a document identifier scheme that extends to these
   resources as well.  (In fact, many of these have been converted to
   Internet forms, and others are being converted, but it is important
   that the identifier be independent of the form in which the document
   can be obtained at any given time.)

   Conceptual documents vs. representation forms: Because ISO documents
   are regularly maintained and re-published in multiple forms, it is
   important to have document identifiers that denote the conceptual
   document, without regard to publication form.  At the same time, it
   is necessary for certain types of use to be able to refer to specific
   editions, or specific publication forms (for example, editions in
   different languages, or to PDF or HTML versions).

   Document extracts: ISO standards may contain formal specifications in
   machine-processable languages, or formal specifications that also
   have representations in machine-processable languages.  It is useful
   to be able to extract these specifications in machine-processable
   form as separate resources, and therefore it is necessary to give
   these "extracted resources" global identifiers derived from the
   document identifier using a consistent identification scheme.

   Document metadata: Certain uses of documents and document text,
   primarily bibiliographic, also extract information from the
   documents, and that information, commonly called "metadata", is
   organized in machine-readable forms conforming to other standards.
   These metadata sets then become resources in their own right.  It is
   important to give them URN identifiers consistent with the document
   identification scheme.

3.2.  Alternative naming schemes

   Before initiating this request, ISO attempted to find an existing or
   currently proposed URN NID scheme that might be used instead of a
   dedicated scheme.  Two existing schemes were carefully considered,
   because they clearly meet part of the requirements:

   o  The OID scheme, documented in [RFC3061]

   o  The PublicId scheme, documented in [RFC3151]

   The OID scheme is derived from the joint ISO/ITU-T ASN.1 object-
   identifier scheme specified in ISO/IEC 8824-1:2002 (original edition
   1984, the RFC cites the 1988 CCITT edition of the encoding rules in
   ISO/IEC 8825).  This standard assigned to ISO the registry authority
   for all identifiers in the { iso(1) } namespace, and therefore, ISO
   controls the registry of all identifiers beginning "oid:1:".  And in
   fact, ISO has developed, and is using, an identification scheme under
   ASN.1 that meets most of the above requirements.  ISO could clearly
   define a use of the OID scheme that would be adequate to meet all of
   its technical objectives, although it would further complicate the
   current ASN.1 scheme.

   The original intent of ISO 8824 was to permit both a human-readable
   form for the identifier, to maximize intuitive recognition, and an
   encoding that minimized the number of bits needed to communicate an
   OID value over a network.  Regrettably, the encoding chosen in RFC
   3061 is much closer to the minimal bits encoding than to the human-
   readable one.  The NSS for the OID scheme consists entirely of digits
   and punctuation.  For example, the ASN.1 identifier
   { iso(1) standard(0) 7852 part(2) edition(3) }
   becomes: urn:oid:1:0:7852:2:3.

   This is difficult for a human reader or author to interpret.  It is
   also easy to mistype, and the scheme contains no "check-digits",
   which makes it difficult to validate, leading to the propagation of
   URNS that are invalid or valid but erroneous.  Finally, the all-
   numeric form conveys no hint of the name of the responsible
   organization and therefore no hint of any URL that might aid a human
   reader in interpreting the reference.  The OID scheme makes all of
   the required identifiers technically possible and technically useable
   by software, but for all practical purposes, the OID URNs are useful
   only to software.

   The PublicId scheme is derived from SGML (ISO 8879:1986 and ISO 9070:
   1991) bibliographic catalogue forms.  Narrowed to ISO publications,
   it is adequate for the unique global persistent identification of
   published documents, in both paper and machine-processable form.
   Importantly, the PublicId scheme does not have a "conceptual
   document" notion -- it identifies specific publications and editions.
   "Weak identification" could be used to implement the conceptual
   document concept, but the PublicId scheme does not document that
   interpretation.  And in any case, the PublicId scheme does not extend
   to draft documents, which are often referenced in pilot
   implementations, to separate forms of a document, or to resources
   extracted from documents.  It supports only those metadata elements
   that are defined in SGML.  The scheme could be extended to do most of
   these, but the ISO-specific extensions would not in general extend to
   the much broader base of documents identified by PublicIds.  (Version
   and edition management practices vary significantly across
   publishers, depending on their milieu.)  Further, ISO Central
   Secretariat could not and should not control the registry of such
   URNs.

   ISO therefore concluded that the alternative schemes are not adequate
   to meet the requirements of the ISO community.

   Whilst requesting a new namespace for ISO documents and their
   derivatives, ISO does not wish to discourage the use of these other
   identifiers for ISO publications.  The PublicId form, in particular,
   is useful for referring to ISO publications in a larger bibliographic
   information space.


4.  Community Considerations

   The ISO community is broad in two dimensions.  In one dimension, its
   documents are developed and used in a large variety of industries and
   professions: natural sciences, manufacturing, construction,
   transportation, information technology, social sciences, etc.  In the
   other dimension, it is a community of expert developers, standards
   managers, publishers, professional users and consumers.  And Internet
   information technologies are a part of common professional practice
   in all of these areas in both dimensions.

   ISO standards are cited in business agreements, in professional
   publications, in product descriptions, and in standards development
   and publication activities.  When these citations appear in
   electronic form, the references must be unambiguous.

   The information technology community is itself very active in the
   development and use of standards, and many ISO publications are
   developed by and for that community.  When an Internet information
   exchange uses a form specified in an ISO document, or a terminology
   defined in an ISO document, it is often necessary to identify that
   ISO specification in the envelope surrounding the exchange.  That
   identification should use a formal unambiguous identifier in a form
   readily recognized by the receiving software, and possibly by the
   ultimate human recipient of the information.

   In order to facilitate the use of existing and emerging Internet
   technologies for all of these purposes, URNs conforming to IETF RFC
   2141 represent the most useful form of formal globally unambiguous
   identifier.  The use of a managed namespace for such identifiers,
   following a consistent scheme for identifying ISO documents and their
   derivatives would be of significant benefit to the entire ISO
   community.

      It would give professional users in many industries a standard
      form for electronic reference to ISO standards in HTML, XML, PDF,
      etc., documents.

      It would give software developers a standard form for reference to
      ISO standard protocols, schemata, languages, data sets, etc.

      It would give standards developers a standard form for reference
      to other ISO publications in various stages of development.  And
      it would give them a standard form for creating identifiers for
      machine-readable information sets contained in, or derived from,
      the specifications.

      It would give standards managers and publishers a formal uniform
      scheme for reference to specific publications, editions and
      versions of ISO documents.

   While the assignment of identifiers under this scheme is managed by
   the ISO Central Secretariat, the processes by which the identified
   objects arise and acquire such identifiers are the result of
   agreements made by the member bodies.  Every such project is
   initiated by one member body and reviewed and voted on by the others.
   Every accepted project is open to participation by any member body,
   and in fact, participation by a certain minimum number (usually 5) of
   member bodies is required for acceptance of most projects.  In
   general, the member bodies are open professional and industrial
   organizations reflecting broad expertise and national interest.

   It should be noted that ISO documents in draft state are not usually
   made available outside the ISO standards development community.
   Making them available to professionals outside of the process might
   well mislead the recipients into premature adoption of practices that
   are not yet completely specified or have not yet achieved consensus,
   and therefore may well change.

   It should also be noted that ISO documents are not, in general,
   freely available over the Internet.  Rather there are complex
   agreements between ISO and its member institutes as to the rights to
   the publications and the corresponding fees that may be charged for
   paper or electronic copies of various editions.  Some ISO documents
   are freely available, and some are freely available in certain forms.
   In general, derivatives of ISO documents (schemata, metadata sets,
   etc.) are freely available over the Internet in the appropriate
   machine-readable forms.  A URL associated with a URN in the requested
   namespace may therefore lead directly to a machine-readable copy of
   the text of the document or derivative, or it may lead to a site that
   can provide that text for a fee, or it may lead to a site that can
   only sell a paper copy of the document.  Bearing in mind that ISO is
   a network of otherwise independent institutes, this behaviour is
   simply a property of the ISO community.

   Finally, it should be noted that, for many purposes, reference to the
   ISO standard is what is required, and only the product engineer or
   software tool builder actually needs access to the text.  This
   request is based on the need to standardize the form of reference,
   not the means of access.


5.  IANA Considerations

   (responsibility of the IANA registry)


6.  Security Considerations

   The ISO URN Namespace ID shares the security considerations outlined
   in [RFC3406], but has no other known security considerations.


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [ISODIR-1]
              International Organization for Standardization,
              "Procedures for the technical work", ISO/IEC
              Directives Part 1, Edition 5, 2004.

   [ISODIR-2]
              International Organization for Standardization, "Rules for
              the structure and drafting of International Standards",
              ISO/IEC Directives Part 2, Edition 5, 2004.

   [ISODIR-S]
              International Organization for Standardization,
              "Procedures specific to ISO", ISO/IEC
              Directives Supplement.

   [ISOGUIDE69]
              International Organization for Standardization,
              "Harmonized Stage Code system (Edition 2) - Principles and
              guidelines for use.",  ISO Guide 69:1999.

   [ISO639-1]
              International Organization for Standardization, "Codes for
              the representation of names of languages - Part 1: Alpha-2
              code",  ISO 639-1:2002.

   [RFC2141]  Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997.

   [RFC2234]  Crocker, D., Ed. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, November 1997.

   [RFC3406]  Daigle, L., van Gulik, D., Iannella, R., and P. Faltstrom,
              "Uniform Resource Names (URN) Namespace Definition
              Mechanisms", BCP 66, RFC 3406, October 2002.

7.2.  Informative References

   [RFC3061]  Mealling, M., "A URN Namespace of Object Identifiers",
              RFC 3061, February 2001.

   [RFC3151]  Walsh, N., Cowan, J., and P. Grosso, "A URN Namespace for
              Public Identifiers", RFC 3151, August 2001.


Author's Address

   J. Goodwin
   International Organization for Standardization
   Case Postal 56
   Geneva 20  1211
   Switzerland

   Email: goodwin@iso.org
   URI:   http://www.iso.org


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.


