



IETF                                                           B. Jordan
Internet-Draft                                      Symantec Corporation
Intended status: Informational                                A. Thomson
Expires: August 4, 2019                               LookingGlass Cyber
                                                                J. Verma
                                                           Cisco Systems
                                                        January 31, 2019


 Collaborative Automated Course of Action Operations (CACAO) for Cyber
                                Security
                     draft-jordan-cacao-charter-03

Abstract

   This is the charter for the Working Group: Collaborative Automated
   Course of Action Operations (CACAO) for Cyber Security

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 4, 2019.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of




Jordan, et al.           Expires August 4, 2019                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    CACAO                     January 2019


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Goals and Deliverables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4

1.  Introduction

   To defend against threat actors and their tactics, techniques, and
   procedures, organizations need to manually identify, create, and
   document prevention, mitigation, and remediation steps.  These steps
   when grouped together into a course of action (COA) / playbook are
   used to protect systems, networks, data, and users.  The problem is,
   once these steps have been created there is no standardized and
   structured way to document them, verify they were correctly executed,
   or easily share them across organizational boundaries and technology
   stacks.

   This working group will create a standard that implements the
   playbook model based on current industry best practices for
   cybersecurity.

   This solution will specifically enable:

   1.  the creation and documentation of COAs in a structured machine-
       readable format

   2.  organizations to perform attestations on COAs

   3.  the sharing and distribution of COAs across organizational
       boundaries and technology stacks

   4.  the verification of deployed COAs.

   This solution will contain (at a minimum) a standard JSON based data
   model, a defined set of functional capabilities and associated
   interfaces, and a mandatory to implement protocol.  This solution
   will also provide a data model for actuators to confirm the status of
   the COA execution, however, it will be agnostic of how the COA is
   implemented by the actuator.

   Each collaborative course of action will consist of a sequence of
   cyber defense actions that can be executed by the various systems
   that can act on those actions.  Further, these COAs will be
   coordinated and deployed across heterogeneous cyber security systems



Jordan, et al.           Expires August 4, 2019                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    CACAO                     January 2019


   such that both the actions requested and the resultant outcomes may
   be verified.  These COA actions will be referenceable in a connected
   data structure like the OASIS STIX V2 model that provides support for
   connected data such as threat actors, campaigns, intrusion sets,
   malware, attack patterns, and other adversarial techniques, tactics,
   and procedures (TTPs).

   Where possible the working group will consider existing efforts, like
   OASIS OpenC2 and IETF I2NSF that define the atomic actions to be
   included in a process or sequence.  The working group will not
   consider how shared actions are used/enforced, except where a
   response is expected for a specific action or step.

2.  Goals and Deliverables

   This working group has the following major goals and deliverables.
   Some of the deliverables may be published through the IETF RFC stream
   as informational or standards track documents.

   o  CACAO Use Cases and Requirements

      *  Specify the use cases and requirements

   o  CACAO Functional Architecture: Roles and Interfaces

      *  Specify the system functions and roles that are needed to
         enable Collaborative Courses of Action

   o  CACAO Protocol Specification

      *  Specify and standardize the configuration for at least one
         protocol that can be used to distribute courses of action in
         both a direct delivery and publish-subscribe method

   o  CACAO Distribution and Response Application Layer Protocol

      *  Identify and document the requirements to effectively report
         and alert on the deployment of CACAO actions and the potential
         threat response to those actions

   o  CACAO JSON Data Model

      *  Create a JSON data model that can capture and enable
         collaborative courses of action

   o  CACAO Interoperability Test Documents





Jordan, et al.           Expires August 4, 2019                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    CACAO                     January 2019


      *  Define and create a series of tests and documents to assist
         with interoperability of the various systems involved.

   The working group may decide to not publish the use cases and
   requirements and test documents as RFCs.  That decision will be made
   during the lifetime of the working group.

Authors' Addresses

   Bret Jordan
   Symantec Corporation
   350 Ellis Street
   Mountain View  CA 94043
   USA

   Email: bret_jordan@symantec.com


   Allan Thomson
   LookingGlass Cyber
   10740 Parkridge Blvd, Suite 200
   Reston  VA 20191
   USA

   Email: athomson@lookingglasscyber.com


   Jyoti Verma
   Cisco Systems
   170 West Tasman Dr.
   San Jose  CA 95134
   USA

   Email: jyoverma@cisco.com

















Jordan, et al.           Expires August 4, 2019                 [Page 4]
