MSEC Working Group                                              B. Weis 
Internet-Draft                                            Cisco Systems 
Intended status: Standards Track                               G. Gross 
Expires: August 22, 2008                            IdentAware Security 
                                                            D. Ignjatic 
                                                                Polycom 
                                                      February 22, 2008 
 
    Multicast Extensions to the Security Architecture for the Internet 
                                 Protocol  
                 draft-ietf-msec-ipsec-extensions-08.txt 
 
Status of this Memo 
                                      
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that  
   any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is  
   aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she 
   becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of  
   BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
     
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
 Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 
    
Abstract 
    
   The Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol describes 
   security services for traffic at the IP layer. That architecture 
   primarily defines services for Internet Protocol (IP) unicast 
   packets. This document describes how the IPsec security services 
   are applied to IP multicast packets. These extensions are relevant 
   only for an IPsec implementation that supports multicast. 




     
Weis                   Expires August 22, 2008               [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
Table of Contents 
    
1. Introduction.....................................................3 
  1.1 Scope.........................................................3 
  1.2 Terminology...................................................4 
2. Overview of IP Multicast Operation...............................6 
3. Security Association Modes.......................................6 
  3.1 Tunnel Mode with Address Preservation.........................7 
4. Security Association.............................................8 
  4.1 Major IPsec Databases.........................................8 
    4.1.1 Group Security Policy Database (GSPD).....................8 
    4.1.2 Security Association Database (SAD)......................11 
    4.1.3 Group Peer Authorization Database (GPAD).................11 
  4.2 Group Security Association (GSA).............................13 
  4.3 Data Origin Authentication...................................16 
  4.4 Group SA and Key Management..................................16 
    4.4.1 Co-Existence of Multiple Key Management Protocols........16 
    4.4.2 New Security Association Attributes......................17 
5. IP Traffic Processing...........................................17 
  5.1 Outbound IP Traffic Processing...............................17 
  5.2 Inbound IP Traffic Processing................................18 
6. Security Considerations.........................................21 
  6.1 Security Issues Solved by IPsec Multicast Extensions.........21 
  6.2 Security Issues Not Solved by IPsec Multicast Extensions.....21 
    6.2.1 Outsider Attacks.........................................22 
    6.2.2 Insider Attacks..........................................22 
  6.3 Implementation or Deployment Issues that Impact Security.....23 
    6.3.1 Homogeneous Group Cryptographic Algorithm Capabilities...23 
    6.3.2 Groups that Span Two or More Security Policy Domains.....23 
    6.3.3 Source-Specific Multicast Group Sender Transient Locators23 
7. IANA Considerations.............................................24 
8. Acknowledgements................................................24 
9. References......................................................24 
  9.1 Normative References.........................................24 
  9.2 Informative References.......................................24 
Appendix A - Multicast Application Service Models..................27 
  A.1 Unidirectional Multicast Applications........................27 
  A.2 Bi-directional Reliable Multicast Applications...............27 
  A.3 Any-To-Any Multicast Applications............................28 
Author's Address...................................................29 
Full Copyright Statement...........................................29 
Intellectual Property..............................................30 
 


 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008               [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
   The Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol [RFC4301] 
   provides security services for traffic at the IP layer. It 
   describes an architecture for IPsec compliant systems, and a set of 
   security services for the IP layer. These security services 
   primarily describe services and semantics for IPsec Security 
   Associations (SAs) shared between two IPsec devices. Typically, 
   this includes SAs with traffic selectors that include a unicast 
   address in the IP destination field, and results in an IPsec packet 
   with a unicast address in the IP destination field. The security 
   services defined in RFC 4301 can also be used to tunnel IP 
   multicast packets, where the tunnel is a pairwise association 
   between two IPsec devices.  RFC4301 defined manually keyed 
   transport mode IPsec SA support for IP packets with a multicast 
   address in the IP destination address field. However, RFC4301 did 
   not define the interaction of an IPsec subsystem with a Group Key 
   Management protocol or the semantics of a tunnel mode IPsec SA with 
   an IP multicast address in the outer IP header. 
    
   This document describes OPTIONAL extensions to RFC 4301 that 
   further define the IPsec security architecture for groups of IPsec 
   devices to share SAs. In particular, it supports SAs with traffic 
   selectors that include a multicast address in the IP destination 
   field, and that result in an IPsec packet with an IP multicast 
   address in the IP destination field. It also describes additional 
   semantics for IPsec Group Key Management (GKM) subsystems. Note 
   that this document uses the term "GKM protocol" generically and 
   therefore it does not assume a particular GKM protocol. 
    
   An IPsec implementation that does not supports multicast is not 
   required to support these extensions. 
    
   Throughout this document, RFC 4301 semantics remain unchanged by 
   the presence these multicast extensions unless specifically noted 
   to the contrary. 
    
1.1 Scope 
    
   The IPsec extensions described in this document support IPsec 
   Security Associations that result in IPsec packets with IPv4 or 
   IPv6 multicast group addresses as the destination address. Both 
   Any-Source Multicast (ASM) and Source-Specific Multicast (SSM) 
   [RFC3569] group addresses are supported. These extensions are used 
   when management policy requires IP multicast packets protected by 
   IPsec to remain IP multicast packets. When management policy 
   requires that the IP multicast packets are encapsulated as IP 
   unicast packets (e.g., because the network connected to the 
   unprotected interface does not support IP multicast), the 
   extensions in this document are not used. 
    
 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008               [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
   These extensions also support Security Associations with IPv4 
   Broadcast addresses that result in an IPv4 link-level broadcast 
   packet, and IPv6 Anycast addresses [RFC2526] that result in an IPv6 
   Anycast packet. These destination address types share many of the 
   same characteristics of multicast addresses because there may be 
   multiple candidate receivers of a packet protected by IPsec. 
    
   The IPsec architecture does not make requirements upon entities not 
   participating in IPsec (e.g., network devices between IPsec 
   endpoints). As such, these multicast extensions do not require 
   intermediate systems in a multicast enabled network to participate 
   in IPsec. In particular, no requirements are placed on the use of 
   multicast routing protocols (e.g., PIM-SM [RFC4601]) or multicast 
   admission protocols (e.g., IGMP [RFC3376]. 
    
   All implementation models of IPsec (e.g., "bump-in-the-stack", 
   "bump-in-the-wire") are supported. 
    
   This version of the multicast IPsec extension specification 
   requires that all IPsec devices participating in a Security 
   Association are homogeneous. They MUST share a common set of 
   cryptographic transform and protocol handling capabilities. The 
   semantics of an "IPsec composite group" [COMPGRP], a heterogeneous 
   IPsec cryptographic group formed from the union of two or more sub-
   groups, is an area for future standardization. 
                              
1.2 Terminology 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 
   [RFC2119]. 
    
    
   The following key terms are used throughout this document. 
    
   Any-Source Multicast (ASM) 
      The Internet Protocol (IP) multicast service model as defined 
      in RFC 1112 [RFC1112]. In this model one or more senders source 
      packets to a single IP multicast address. When receivers join 
      the group, they receive all packets sent to that IP multicast 
      address. This is known as a (*,G) group. 
       
   Group Controller Key Server (GCKS) 
      A Group Key Management (GKM) protocol server that manages IPsec 
      state for a group. A GCKS authenticates and provides the IPsec 
      SA policy and keying material to GKM group members. 
    



 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008               [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
   Group Key Management (GKM) Protocol 
      A key management protocol used by a GCKS to distribute IPsec 
      Security Association policy and keying material. A GKM protocol 
      is used when a group of IPsec devices require the same SAs. For 
      example, when an IPsec SA describes an IP multicast 
      destination, the sender and all receivers need to have the 
      group SA. 
    
   Group Key Management Subsystem 
      A subsystem in an IPsec device implementing a Group Key 
      Management protocol. The GKM subsystem provides IPsec SAs to 
      the IPsec subsystem on the IPsec device. Refer to RFC 3547 
      [RFC3547] and RFC 4535 [RFC4535] for additional information. 
       
   Group Member 
      An IPsec device that belongs to a group. A Group Member is 
      authorized to be a Group Sender and/or a Group Receiver. 
       
   Group Owner 
      An administrative entity that chooses the policy for a group. 
       
   Group Security Association (GSA) 
      A collection of IPsec Security Associations (SAs) and GKM 
      Subsystem SAs necessary for a Group Member to receive key 
      updates. A GSA describes the working policy for a group. Refer 
      to RFC 4046 [RFC4046] for additional information. 
       
   Group Security Policy Database (GSPD) 
      The GSPD is a multicast-capable security policy database, as 
      mentioned in RFC3740 and RFC4301 section 4.4.1.1. Its semantics 
      are a superset of the unicast SPD defined by RFC4301 section 
      4.4.1. Unlike a unicast SPD-S in which point-to-point traffic 
      selectors are inherently bi-directional, multicast security 
      traffic selectors in the GSPD-S introduce a "sender only", 
      "receiver only" or "symmetric" directional attribute. Refer to 
      section 4.1.1 for more details. 
    
   Group Receiver 
      A Group Member that is authorized to receive packets sent to a 
      group by a Group Sender. 
       
   Group Sender 
      A Group Member that is authorized to send packets to a group. 
    
   Source-Specific Multicast (SSM) 
      The Internet Protocol (IP) multicast service model as defined 
      in RFC 3569 [RFC3569]. In this model, each combination of a 
      sender and an IP multicast address is considered a group. This 
      is known as an (S,G) group. 
    
   Tunnel Mode with Address Preservation 
 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008               [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
      A type of IPsec tunnel mode used by security gateway 
      implementations when encapsulating IP multicast packets such 
      that they remain IP multicast packets. This mode is necessary 
      for IP multicast routing to correctly route IP multicast 
      packets protected by IPsec. 
    
2. Overview of IP Multicast Operation 
    
   IP multicasting is a means of sending a single packet to a "host 
   group", a set of zero or more hosts identified by a single IP 
   destination address. IP multicast packets are delivered to all 
   members of the group with either "best-efforts" reliability 
   [RFC1112], or as part of a reliable stream (e.g., NORM) [RFC3940]. 
    
   A sender to an IP multicast group sets the destination of the 
   packet to an IP address that has been allocated for IP multicast. 
   Allocated IP multicast addresses are defined in RFC 3171, RFC 3306, 
   and RFC 3307 [RFC3171] [RFC3306] [RFC3307]. Potential receivers of 
   the packet "join" the IP multicast group by registering with a 
   network routing device [RFC3376] [RFC3810], signaling its intent to 
   receive packets sent to a particular IP multicast group. 
    
   Network routing devices configured to pass IP multicast packets 
   participate in multicast routing protocols (e.g., PIM-SM) 
   [RFC4601]. Multicast routing protocols maintain state regarding 
   which devices have registered to receive packets for a particular 
   IP multicast group. When a router receives an IP multicast packet, 
   it forwards a copy of the packet out of each interface for which 
   there are known receivers. 
 
3. Security Association Modes 
    
   IPsec supports two modes of use: transport mode and tunnel mode.  
   In transport mode, IP Authentication Header (AH) [RFC4302] and IP 
   Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) [RFC4303] provide protection 
   primarily for next layer protocols; in tunnel mode, AH and ESP are 
   applied to tunneled IP packets. 
    
   A host implementation of IPsec using the multicast extensions MAY 
   use either transport mode or tunnel mode to encapsulate an IP 
   multicast packet. These processing rules are identical to the 
   rules described in Section 4.1 of [RFC4301]. However, the 
   destination address for the IPsec packet is an IP multicast 
   address, rather than a unicast host address. 
    
   A security gateway implementation of IPsec MUST use a tunnel mode 
   SA, for the reasons described in Section 4.1 of [RFC4301]. In 
   particular, the security gateway needs to use tunnel mode to 
   encapsulate incoming fragments, since IPsec cannot directly 
   operate on fragments. 
    
 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008               [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
3.1 Tunnel Mode with Address Preservation 
    
   New header construction semantics are required when tunnel mode is 
   used to encapsulate IP multicast packets that are to remain IP 
   multicast packets. These semantics are due to the following unique 
   requirements of IP multicast routing protocols (e.g., PIM-SM 
   [RFC4601]). This document describes these new header construction 
   semantics as "tunnel mode with address preservation", which are 
   described as follows. 
    
   - When an IP multicast packet is received by a host or router the 
      destination address of the packet is compared to the local IP 
      multicast state. If the destination of an IP multicast packet is 
      changed the host or router receiving the IP multicast packet 
      will not process it properly. Therefore, an IPsec host or 
      security gateway needs to preserve the multicast IP destination 
      address after IPsec tunnel encapsulation. 
       
   - IP multicast routing protocols typically create multicast 
      distribution trees based on the source address as well as the 
      group address. If an IPsec security gateway changes the source 
      address of an IP multicast packet (to its own IP address), the 
      resulting IPsec protected packet may fail Reverse Path 
      Forwarding (RPF) checks performed by other routers. A failed RPF 
      check may result in the packet being dropped. To accommodate 
      routing protocol RPF checks, the security gateway implementing 
      the IPsec multicast extensions SHOULD preserve the original 
      packet IP source address. However, it should be noted that a 
      security gateway performing source address preservation will not 
      receive ICMP PMTU or other messages intended for the security 
      gateway. Security gateway applications not requiring source 
      address preservation will be able to receive ICMP PMTU messages 
      and process them as described in section 6.1 of RFC 4301.   
    
   Because some applications of address preservation may require only 
   the destination address to be preserved, specification of 
   destination address preservation and source address preservation 
   are separated in the above description. Destination address 
   preservation and source address preservation attributes are 
   described in the Group Security Policy Database (GSPD) (defined 
   later in this document), and are copied into corresponding SAD 
   entries. 
    
   Address preservation is applicable only for tunnel mode IPsec SAs 
   that specify the IP version of the encapsulating header to be the 
   same version as that of the inner header. When the IP versions are 
   different, IP multicast packets can be encapsulated using a tunnel 
   interface, for example as described in [RFC4891], where the tunnel 
   is also treated as an interface by IP multicast routing protocols. 
 

 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008               [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
   In summary, retaining both the IP source and destination addresses 
   of the inner IP header allows IP multicast routing protocols to 
   route a packet properly when the packet is protected by IPsec. 
   This result is necessary in order for the multicast extensions to 
   allow a host or security gateway to provide IPsec services for IP 
   multicast packets. This method of RFC 4301 tunnel mode is known as 
   "tunnel mode with address preservation". 
 
    
4. Security Association 
 
4.1 Major IPsec Databases 
    
   The following sections describe the GKM Subsystem and IPsec 
   extension interactions with the IPsec databases. The major IPsec 
   databases need expanded semantics to fully support multicast. 
    
4.1.1 Group Security Policy Database (GSPD) 
    
   The Group Security Policy Database is a security policy database 
   capable of supporting both unicast security associations as 
   defined by RFC 4301 and the multicast extensions defined by this 
   specification. The GSPD is considered to be the SPD, with the 
   addition of the semantics relating to the multicast extensions 
   described in this section. 
 
   This document describes a new "Address Preservation" (AP) flag 
   indicating that tunnel mode with address preservation is to be 
   applied to a GSPD entry. The AP flag has two attributes: AP-L used 
   in the processing of the local tunnel address, and AP-R used in the 
   processing of the remote tunnel process. This flag is added to the 
   GSPD "Processing info" field of the GSDP. The following text 
   reproduced from Section 4.4.1.2 of RFC 4301 includes this 
   additional processing. (Note: for brevity, only the Processing info 
   related to tunnel processing has been reproduced.) 
    
         o Processing info -- which action is required -- PROTECT, 
           BYPASS, or DISCARD.  There is just one action that goes 
           with all the selector sets, not a separate action for each 
           set. If the required processing is PROTECT, the entry 
           contains the following information. 
            - IPsec mode -- tunnel or transport 
            - (if tunnel mode) local tunnel address -- For a non 
               mobile host, if there is just one interface, this is 
               straightforward; if there are multiple interfaces, this 
               must be statically configured.  For a mobile host, the 
               specification of the local address is handled 
               externally to IPsec. If tunnel mode with address 
               preservation is specified for the local tunnel address, 
               the AP-L attribute is set to TRUE for the local tunnel 
               address and the local tunnel address is unspecified. 
 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008               [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
               The presence of the AP-L attribute indicates that the 
               inner IP header source address will be copied to the 
               outer IP header source address during IP header 
               construction for tunnel mode. 
            - (if tunnel mode) remote tunnel address -- There is no 
               standard way to determine this.  See 4.5.3, "Locating a 
               Security Gateway". If tunnel mode with address 
               preservation is specified for the remote tunnel 
               address, the AP-R attribute is set to TRUE for the 
               remote tunnel address and the remote tunnel address is 
               unspecified. The presence of the AP-R attribute 
               indicates that the inner IP header destination address 
               will be copied to the outer IP header destination 
               address during IP header construction for tunnel mode. 
 
   This document describes unique directionality processing for GSPD 
   entries with a remote IP multicast address. Since an IP multicast 
   address must not be sent as the source address of an IP packet 
   [RFC1112], directionality of Local and Remote address and ports is 
   maintained during incoming SPD-S and SPD-I checks rather than 
   being swapped. Section 4.4.1 of RFC 4301 is amended as follows: 
    
            Representing Directionality in an SPD Entry 
          
               For traffic protected by IPsec, the Local and Remote 
               address and ports in an SPD entry are swapped to 
               represent directionality, consistent with IKE 
               conventions.  In general, the protocols that IPsec 
               deals with have the property of requiring symmetric 
               SAs with flipped Local/Remote IP addresses. However, 
               SPD entries with a remote IP multicast address do not 
               have their Local and Remote address and ports in an 
               SPD entry swapped during incoming SPD-S and SPD-I 
               checks. 
    
   A new Group Security Policy Database (GSPD) attribute is 
   introduced: GSPD entry directionality. The following text is added 
   to the bullet list of SPD fields described in Section 4.4.1.2 of 
   RFC 4301.  
         o Directionality -- can one of three types: "symmetric", 
           "sender only" or "receiver only". "Symmetric" indicates 
           that a pair of SAs are to be created (one in each 
           direction as specified by RFC 4301). GSPD entries marked 
           as "sender only" indicate that one SA is to be created in 
           the outbound direction. GSPD entries marked as "receiver 
           only" indicate that one SA is to be created in the inbound 
           direction. GSPD entries marked as "sender only" or 
           "receiver only" SHOULD support multicast IP addresses in 
           their destination address selectors. If the processing 
           requested is BYPASS or DISCARD and a "sender only" type is 
           configured the entry SHOULD be put in GSPD-O only. 
 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008               [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
           Reciprocally, if the type is "receiver only", the entry 
           SHOULD go to GSPD-I only.  
    
   GSPD entries created by a GCKS may be assigned identical SPIs to 
   SAD entries created by IKEv2 [RFC4306]. This is not a problem for 
   the inbound traffic as the appropriate SAs can be matched using 
   the algorithm described in RFC 4301 section 4.1. However, the 
   outbound traffic needs to be matched against the GSPD selectors so 
   that the appropriate SA can be created.  
    
   To facilitate dynamic group keying, the outbound GSPD MUST 
   implement a policy action capability that triggers a GKM protocol 
   registration exchange (as per Section 5.1 of [RFC4301]). For 
   example, the Group Sender GSPD policy might trigger on a match 
   with a specified multicast application packet entering the 
   implementation via the protected interface, or emitted by the 
   implementation on the protected side of the boundary and directed 
   toward the unprotected interface.. The ensuing Group Sender 
   registration exchange would set up the Group Sender's outbound SAD 
   entry that encrypts the multicast application's data stream. In 
   the inverse direction, group policy may also set up an inbound 
   IPsec SA. 
    
   At the Group Receiver endpoint(s), the IPsec subsystem MAY use 
   GSPD policy mechanisms (e.g., trigger on detection of IGMP/MLD 
   join group exchange) that initiate a GKM protocol registration 
   exchange. The ensuing Group Receiver registration exchange would 
   set up the Group Receiver's inbound SAD entry that decrypts the 
   multicast application's data stream. In the inverse direction, the 
   group policy may also set up an outbound IPsec SA (e.g., when 
   supporting an ASM service model). 
    
   The IPsec subsystem MAY provide GSPD policy mechanisms that 
   automatically initiate a GKM protocol de-registration exchange. 
   De-registration allows a GCKS to minimize exposure of the group's 
   secret key by re-keying a group on a group membership change 
   event. It also minimizes cost on a GCKS for those groups that 
   maintain member state. One such policy mechanism could be the 
   detection of IGMP/MLD leave group exchange. However, a security 
   gateway Group Member would not initiate a GKM protocol de-
   registration exchange until it detects that there are no more 
   receivers behind a protected interface. 
    
   Additionally, the GKM subsystem MAY set up the GSPD/SAD state 
   information independent of the multicast application's state. In 
   this scenario, the group's Group Owner issues management 
   directives that tell the GKM subsystem when it should start GKM 
   registration and de-registration protocol exchanges. Typically the 
   registration policy strives to make sure that the group's IPsec 
   subsystem state is "always ready" in anticipation of the multicast 
   application starting its execution. 
 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008              [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
    
4.1.2 Security Association Database (SAD) 
 
   The SAD contains an item describing whether tunnel or transport 
   mode is applied to traffic on this SA. The text in RFC 4301 Section 
   4.4.2.1 is amended to describe Address Preservation. 
    
         o IPsec protocol mode: tunnel or transport.  Indicates which 
           mode of AH or ESP is applied to traffic on this SA. When 
           tunnel mode is specified, the data item also indicates 
           whether or not address preservation is applied to the 
           outer IP header. Address preservation MUST NOT be 
           specified when the IP version of the encapsulating header 
           and IP version of the inner header do not match. The local 
           address, remote address, or both addresses MAY be marked 
           as being preserved during tunnel encapsulation. 
    
   An inbound multicast SA MUST be configured with the source 
   addresses of each Group Sender peer authorized to transmit to the 
   multicast SA in question.  
    
4.1.3 Group Peer Authorization Database (GPAD) 
    
   The multicast IPsec extensions introduce a new data structure 
   called the Group Peer Authorization Database (GPAD). Analogous to 
   the PAD (refer to RFC 4301 section 4.4.3), the GPAD provides a link 
   between a Group Key Management protocol and the SPD. The GPAD 
   contains three group role authorization rule sets. 
    
   A group role authorization rule set specifies which peers are 
   authorized to participate in a group in a given Group Role. The 
   GCKS GKM subsystem examines these rules to determine whether a 
   candidate Group Member has the authority to join the group. A Group 
   Member GKM subsystem uses these rules to decide which systems are 
   authorized to act as a GCKS for a given group. The third group role 
   authorization rule set determines which Group Members are 
   authorized to send data to the group. 
    
   When making a group role authorization decision, the GKM subsystem 
   queries the GPAD with the 3-tuple {Group Identifier, Group Role, 
   GKM ID}. These three GPAD search indices are defined as follows: 
    
   . Group Identifier - The Group Identifier is an opaque byte string 
      of IKE ID type Key ID that identifies a secure multicast group. 
      The Group Identifier byte string MUST be at least four bytes 
      long and less than 256 bytes long. The GPAD administrator MUST 
      assign each Group Identifier a unique value within the scope of 
      all secure multicast groups administered by the GPAD's security 
      domain. 


 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008              [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
   . Group Role - There are three types of group roles: Group Member, 
      Group Sender (i.e., a Group Member authorized to be a multicast 
      sender), and GCKS. A Group Member may be authorized to act in 
      more than one role within a given group. 

   . GKM ID - The GKM ID is the identifier used in the GKM protocol's 
      identification payload. The GKM protocol MUST support the six 
      IKE ID payload types specified in RFC 4301 section 4.4.3.1. 

    
   A Group Role authorization rule set is an ordered list of GPAD 
   Entry Identifiers. GPAD Entry Identifiers have the same syntax and 
   pattern matching semantics as the PAD Entry Identifiers defined in 
   RFC 4301 section 4.4.3.1. Every group has three group role 
   authorization rule sets, one group role authorization rule set per 
   Group Role. Within the GPAD, the group authorization rule sets are 
   indexed by the 2-tuple {Group Identifier, Group Role}. 
    
   When the GKM subsystem needs to make an authorization decision, it 
   linearly searches the selected group role authorization rule set 
   until either it acquires a GPAD Entry Identifier match to the GKM 
   ID, or it reaches the end of the rule set. A match authorizes the 
   GKM ID to act in the specified Group Role. The no find condition 
   indicates the GKM ID is not authorized for the requested Group 
   Role. 
    
   For long lived large-scale groups, there are operational and 
   security benefits to having an automated and distributed group 
   security policy management facility. The security policy changes 
   can be rapidly propagated across the whole group membership rather 
   than at the pace of manual administration at individual systems. In 
   the context of the GPAD, the management facility promotes the 
   timely and accurate introduction of newly authorized Group Members, 
   updates to existing role authorizations, and the revocation of a 
   compromised Group Member's role authorizations. The latter 
   capability intercepts a compromised Group Member from re-joining 
   the group. 
    
   For example, some GKM protocols (e.g., GSAKMP [RFC4535]) distribute 
   their group's GPAD, GSPD, and SAD configuration in a security 
   policy token [RFC4534] signed by the group's policy authority, also 
   known as the Group Owner (GO). Each Group Member GSAKMP subsystem 
   receives the policy token (using a method not described in this 
   memo) and verifies the Group Owner's signature on the policy token. 
   If that GO signature is accepted, then the Group Member's GSAKMP 
   subsystem dynamically updates the GPAD, GSPD, and SAD with the 
   policy token's contents. Alternatively, the group's security policy 
   management facility could be based on a trusted configuration 
   management protocol rather than a GKM protocol. 
    

 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008              [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
   A group security policy management facility is not mandated by this 
   specification. The GPAD MUST have a trusted management interface 
   that allows the manual creation, editing, and deletion of the group 
   role authorization rule sets. The GPAD, GSPD, and SAD databases MAY 
   be configured by a group security policy management facility 
   through that same management interface. How an IPsec subsystem 
   implementation coordinates the manual and automated database 
   modifications to avoid conflicts is a local matter outside the 
   scope of this specification. 
    
   The GPAD MUST provide a management interface capability that allows 
   an administrator to enforce that the scope of a GKM group's policy 
   specified GSPD/SAD modifications is restricted to only those 
   traffic data flows that belong to that group. This authorization 
   MUST be configurable at GKM group granularity. In the inverse 
   direction, the GPAD management interface MUST provide a 
   mechanism(s) to ensure that IKEv2 security associations do not 
   negotiate traffic selectors that conflict or override GKM group 
   policies. 
    
4.2 Group Security Association (GSA) 
    
   An IPsec implementation supporting these extensions will support a 
   number of security associations: one or more IPsec SAs, and one or 
   more GKM SAs used to download IPsec SAs [RFC3740]. These SAs are 
   collectively referred to as a Group Security Association (GSA). 
 
4.2.1 Concurrent IPsec SA Life Spans and Re-key Rollover 
 
   During a secure multicast group's lifetime, multiple IPsec group 
   security associations can exist concurrently. This occurs 
   principally due to two reasons: 
         
   - There are multiple Group Senders authorized in the group, each 
     with its own IPsec SA which maintains anti-replay state. A group 
     that does not rely on IP Security anti-replay services can share 
     one IPsec SA for all of its Group Senders. 

   - The life spans of a Group Sender's two (or more) IPsec SAs are 
     allowed to overlap in time, so that there is continuity in the 
     multicast data stream across group re-key events. This capability 
     is referred to as "re-key rollover continuity". 

   The rekey continuity rollover algorithm depends on an IPsec SA 
   management interface between the GKM subsystem and the IPsec 
   subsystem. The IPsec subsystem MUST provide management interface 
   mechanisms for the GKM subsystem to add IPsec SAs and to delete 
   IPsec SAs. For illustrative purposes, this text defines the rekey 
   rollover continuity algorithm in terms of two timer parameters 
   that govern IPsec SA lifespans relative to the start of a group 
 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008              [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
   rekey event. However, it should be emphasized that the GKM 
   subsystem interprets the group's security policy to direct the 
   correct timing of IPsec SA activation and deactivation. A given 
   group policy may choose timer values that differ from those 
   recommended by this text. The two rekey rollover continuity timer 
   parameters are: 
    
   1. Activation Time Delay (ATD) - The ATD defines how long after the 
      start of a rekey event to activate new IPsec SAs. The ATD 
      parameter is expressed in units of seconds. Typically, the ATD 
      parameter is set to the maximum time it takes to deliver a 
      multicast message from the GCKS to all of the group's members. 
      For a GCKS that relies on a Reliable Multicast Transport 
      Protocol (RMTP), the ATD parameter could be set equal to the 
      RTMP protocol's maximum error recovery time. When a RMTP is not 
      present, the ATD parameter might be set equal to the network's 
      maximum multicast message delivery latency across all of the 
      group's endpoints. The ATD is a GKM group policy parameter. This 
      value SHOULD be configurable at the Group Owner management 
      interface on a per group basis. 
    
   2. Deactivation Time Delay (DTD) - The DTD defines how long after 
      the start of a rekey event to deactivate those IPsec SAs that 
      are destroyed by the rekey event. The purpose of the DTD 
      parameter is to minimize the residual exposure of a group's 
      keying material after a rekey event has retired that keying 
      material. The DTD is independent of and should not to be 
      confused with the IPsec SA soft lifetime attribute. The DTD 
      parameter is expressed in units of seconds. Typically, the DTD 
      parameter would be set to the ADT plus the maximum time it takes 
      to deliver a multicast message from the Group Sender to all of 
      the group's members. For a Group Sender that relies on a RMTP, 
      the DTD parameter could be set equal to ADT plus the RTMP 
      protocol's maximum error recovery time. When a RMTP is not 
      present, the DTD parameter might be set equal to ADT plus the 
      network's maximum multicast message delivery latency across all 
      of the group's endpoints. A GKM subsystem MAY implement the DTD 
      as a group security policy parameter. If a GKM subsystem does 
      not implement the DTD parameter then other group security policy 
      mechanisms MUST determine when to deactivate an IPsec SA. 
    
   Each group re-key multicast message sent by a GCKS signals the 
   start of a new Group Sender IPsec SA time epoch, with each such 
   epoch having an associated set of two IPsec SAs. Note that this 
   document refers to re-key mechanisms as being multicast because of 
   the inherent scalability of IP multicast distribution. However, 
   there is no particular reason that re-keying mechanisms must be 
   multicast. For example, [ZLLY03] describes a method of re-key 
   employing both unicast and multicast messages. 
    
   The group membership interacts with these IPsec SAs as follows: 
 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008              [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
    
   - As a precursor to the Group Sender beginning its re-key rollover 
     continuity processing, the GCKS periodically multicasts a Re-Key 
     Event (RKE) message to the group. The RKE multicast MAY contain 
     group policy directives, new IPsec SA policy, and group keying 
     material. In the absence of a RMTP, the GCKS may re-transmit the 
     RKE a policy-defined number of times to improve the availability 
     of re-key information. The GKM subsystem starts the ATD and DTD 
     timers after it receives the last RKE retransmission. 

   - The GKM subsystem interprets the RKE multicast to configure the 
     group's GSPD/SAD with the new IPsec SAs. Each IPsec SA that 
     replaces an existing SA is called a "leading edge" IPsec SA. The 
     leading edge IPsec SA has a new Security Parameter Index (SPI) 
     and its associated keying material keys it. For a time period of 
     ATD seconds in duration after the GCKS multicasts the RKE, a 
     Group Sender does not yet transmit data using the leading edge 
     IPsec SA. Meanwhile, other Group Members prepare to use this 
     IPsec SA by installing the new IPsec SAs to their respective 
     GSPD/SAD. 

   - After waiting for the ATD period, such that all of the Group 
     Members have received and processed the RKE message, the GKM 
     subsystem directs the Group Sender to begin to transmit using the 
     leading edge IPsec SA with its data encrypted by the new keying 
     material. Only authorized Group Members can decrypt these IPsec 
     SA multicast transmissions. 

   - The Group Sender's "trailing edge" SA is the oldest security 
     association in use by the group for that sender. All authorized 
     Group Members can receive and decrypt data for this SA, but the 
     Group Sender does not transmit new data using the trailing edge 
     IPsec SA after it has transitioned to the leading edge IPsec SA. 
     The trailing edge IPsec SA is deleted by the group's GKM 
     subsystems after the DTD time period has elapsed since the RKE 
     transmission. 

   This re-key rollover strategy allows the group to drain its in 
   transit datagrams from the network while transitioning to the 
   leading edge IPsec SA. Staggering the roles of each respective 
   IPsec SA as described above improves the group's synchronization 
   even when there are high network propagation delays. Note that due 
   to group membership joins and leaves, each Group Sender IPsec SA 
   time epoch may have a different group membership set. 
    
   It is a group policy decision whether the re-key event transition 
   between epochs provides forward and backward secrecy. The group's 
   re-key protocol keying material and algorithm (e.g., Logical Key 
   Hierarchy, refer to [RFC2627] and Appendix A of [RFC4535]) enforces 
   this policy. Implementations MAY offer a Group Owner management 
   interface option to enable/disable re-key rollover continuity for a 
 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008              [Page 15] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
   particular group. This specification requires that a GKM/IPsec 
   implementation MUST support at least two concurrent IPsec SA per 
   Group Sender and this re-key rollover continuity algorithm. 
    
    
4.3 Data Origin Authentication 
    
   As defined in [RFC4301], data origin authentication is a security 
   service that verifies the identity of the claimed source of data. 
   A Message Authentication Code (MAC) is often used to achieve data 
   origin authentication for connections shared between two parties. 
   However, typical MAC authentication methods using a single shared 
   secret are not sufficient to provide data origin authentication 
   for groups with more than two parties. With a MAC algorithm, every 
   group member can use the MAC key to create a valid MAC tag, 
   whether or not they are the authentic originator of the group 
   application's data. 
    
   When the property of data origin authentication is required for an 
   IPsec SA distributed from a GKCS, an authentication transform 
   where the originator keeps a secret should be used. Two possible 
   algorithms are TESLA [RFC4082] or RSA digital signature [RFC4359]. 
    
   In some cases, (e.g., digital signature authentication transforms) 
   the processing cost of the algorithm is significantly greater than 
   an HMAC authentication method. To protect against denial of 
   service attacks from a device that is not authorized to join the 
   group, the IPsec SA using this algorithm may be encapsulated with 
   an IPsec SA using a MAC authentication algorithm. However, doing 
   so requires the packet to be sent across the IPsec boundary a 
   second time for additional inbound processing (see Section 5.2 of 
   [RFC4301]). This use of AH or ESP encapsulated within AH or ESP 
   accommodates the constraint that AH and ESP define an Integrity 
   Check Value (ICV) for only a single authenticator transform.  
 
4.4 Group SA and Key Management 
    
4.4.1 Co-Existence of Multiple Key Management Protocols 
 
   Often, the GKM subsystem will be introduced to an existent IPsec 
   subsystem as a companion key management protocol to IKEv2 
   [RFC4306]. A fundamental GKM protocol IP Security subsystem 
   requirement is that both the GKM protocol and IKEv2 can 
   simultaneously share access to a common Group Security Policy 
   Database and Security Association Database. The mechanisms that 
   provide mutually exclusive access to the common GSPD/SAD data 
   structures are a local matter. This includes the GSPD-outbound 
   cache and the GSPD-inbound cache. However, implementers should note 
   that IKEv2 SPI allocation is entirely independent from GKM SPI 
   allocation because group security associations are qualified by a 
   destination multicast IP address and may optionally have a source 
 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008              [Page 16] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
   IP address qualifier. See [RFC4303, Section 2.1] for further 
   explanation. 
    
   The Peer Authorization Database does require explicit coordination 
   between the GKM protocol and IKEv2. Section 4.1.3 describes these 
   interactions. 
    
4.4.2 New Security Association Attributes 
    
   A number of new security association attributes are defined to 
   convey extensions defined in this document. Each GKM protocol 
   supporting this architecture MUST support the following list of 
   attributes described elsewhere in this document. 
    
   - Address Preservation (Section 3.1). This attribute describes 
   whether address preservation is to be applied to the SA on the 
   source address, destination address, or both source and 
   destination addresses. 
    
   - Directional attribute (Section 4.1.1). This attribute describes 
   whether a pair of SAs (one in each direction) is to be installed 
   (to match the "symmetric" SPD directionality), only in the 
   outbound direction (to match "receiver only" SPD directionality), 
   or only in the inbound direction (to match "sender only" SPD 
   directionality). 
    
   - Any of the cryptographic transform-specific parameters and keys 
   that are sent from the GCKS to the Group Members (e.g., data 
   origin authentication parameters as described in section 4.3). 
    
   - Re-key rollover procedure time intervals (section 4.2.1). The 
   time that the Group Receiver IPsec subsystems will wait after 
   creating the leading edge IPsec SA before they will retire the 
   trailing edge IPsec SA. Also, the time that the Group Sender will 
   delay before it starts transmitting on the leading edge's IPsec 
   SA. 
         
5. IP Traffic Processing 
    
   Processing of traffic follows Section 5 of [RFC4301], with the 
   additions described below when these IP multicast extensions are 
   supported. 
    
5.1 Outbound IP Traffic Processing 
    
   If an IPsec SA is marked as supporting tunnel mode with address 
   preservation (as described in Section 3.1), either or both of the 
   outer header source or destination addresses are marked as being 
   preserved.  
    

 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008              [Page 17] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
   Header construction for tunnel mode is described in Section 5.1.2 
   of RFC 4301. The first bullet of that section is amended as 
   follows: 
    
         o If address preservation is not marked in the SAD entry for 
           either the outer IP header Source Address or Destination 
           Address, the outer IP header Source Address and 
           Destination Address identify the "endpoints" of the tunnel 
           (the encapsulator and decapsulator). If address 
           preservation is marked for the IP header Source Address, 
           it is copied from the inner IP header Source Address. If 
           address preservation is marked for the IP header 
           Destination Address, it is copied from the inner IP header 
           Destination Address. The inner IP header Source Address 
           and Destination Addresses identify the original sender and 
           recipient of the datagram (from the perspective of this 
           tunnel), respectively. Address preservation MUST NOT be 
           marked when the IP version of the encapsulating header and 
           IP version of the inner header do not match. 
    
   Note (3) regarding construction of tunnel addresses in Section 
   5.1.2.1 of RFC 4301 is amended as follows: 
    
         (3) Unless marked for address preservation Local and Remote 
              addresses depend on the SA, which is used to determine 
              the Remote address, which in turn determines which Local 
              address (net interface) is used to forward the packet. 
              If address preservation is marked for the Local address, 
              it is copied from the inner IP header. If address 
              preservation is marked for the Remote address, that 
              address is copied from the inner IP header. 
    
5.2 Inbound IP Traffic Processing 
    
   IPsec-protected packets generated by an IPsec device supporting 
   these multicast extensions may (depending on its GSPD policy) 
   preserve a destination address such that the IP destination address 
   is not an IPsec device. This requires an IPsec device supporting 
   these multicast extensions to process IP traffic that is not 
   addressed to the IPsec device itself. The following additions to 
   IPsec inbound IP traffic processing are necessary. 
    
   For compatibility with RFC 4301, the phrase "addressed to this 
   device" is taken to mean packets with a unicast destination address 
   belonging to the system itself, and multicast packets that are 
   received by the system itself. However, multicast packets not 
   received by the IPsec device are not considered addressed to this 
   device. 
    


 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008              [Page 18] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
   The discussion of processing Inbound IP Traffic described in 
   Section 5.2 of RFC 4301 is amended as follows. The first dash in 
   item 2 is amended as follows: 
    
         - If the packet appears to be IPsec protected and it is 
            addressed to this device, or appears to be IPsec protected 
            and is addressed to a multicast group, an attempt is made 
            to map it to an active SA via the SAD. 
    
   A new item is added to the list between items 3a and 3b to describe 
   processing of IPsec packets with destination address preservation 
   applied: 
    
         3aa. If the packet is addressed to a multicast group and AH 
            or ESP is specified as the protocol, the packet is looked 
            up in the SAD. Use the SPI plus the destination or SPI 
            plus destination and source addresses, as specified in 
            Section 4.1. If there is no match, the packet is directed 
            to SPD-I lookup. Note that if the IPsec device is a 
            security gateway, and the SPD-I policy is to PYPASS the 
            packet, a subsequent security gateway along the routed 
            path of the multicast packet may decrypt the packet.  
    
   Figure 3 in RFC 4301 is updated to show the new processing path 
   defined in item 3aa. 
    

























 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008              [Page 19] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
                       Unprotected Interface 
                                | 
                                V 
                             +-----+   IPsec protected 
         ------------------->|Demux|-------------------+ 
         |                   +-----+                   | 
         |                      |                      | 
         |            Not IPsec |                      | 
         |                      |  IPsec protected not | 
         |                      V  addressed to device | 
         |     +-------+    +---------+ and not in SAD | 
         |     |DISCARD|<---|SPD-I (*)|<------------+  | 
         |     +-------+    +---------+             |  | 
         |                   |                      |  | 
         |                   |-----+                |  | 
         |                   |     |                |  | 
         |                   |     V                |  | 
         |                   |  +------+            |  | 
         |                   |  | ICMP |            |  | 
         |                   |  +------+            |  | 
         |                   |                      |  V 
      +---------+            |                   +-----------+ 
  ....|SPD-O (*)|............|...................|PROCESS(**)|...IPsec 
      +---------+            |                   | (AH/ESP)  | Boundary 
         ^                   |                   +-----------+ 
         |                   |       +---+             | 
         |            BYPASS |   +-->|IKE|             | 
         |                   |   |   +---+             | 
         |                   V   |                     V 
         |               +----------+          +---------+   +----+ 
         |--------<------|Forwarding|<---------|SAD Check|-->|ICMP| 
           nested SAs    +----------+          | (***)   |   +----+ 
                               |               +---------+ 
                               V 
                       Protected Interface 
 
            Figure 1.  Processing Model for Inbound Traffic 
                       (amending Figure 3 of RFC 4301) 
    
    
   The discussion of processing Inbound IP Traffic described in 
   Section 5.2 of RFC 4301 is amended to insert a new item 6 as 
   follows. 
    
         6. If an IPsec SA is marked as supporting tunnel mode with 
           address preservation (as described in Section 3.1), the 
 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008              [Page 20] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
           marked address (i.e., source and/or destination address) 
           on the outer IP header MUST be verified to be the same 
           value as the inner IP header. If the addresses are not 
           consistent, the IPsec system MUST discard the packet, as 
           well as treat the inconsistency as an auditable event. 
 
    
6. Security Considerations 
    
   The IP security multicast extensions defined by this specification 
   build on the unicast-oriented IP security architecture [RFC4301]. 
   Consequently, this specification inherits many of the RFC4301 
   security considerations and the reader is advised to review it as 
   companion guidance. 
    
6.1 Security Issues Solved by IPsec Multicast Extensions 
    
   The IP security multicast extension service provides the following 
   network layer mechanisms for secure group communications: 
    
   - Confidentiality using a group shared encryption key. 
    
   - Group source authentication and integrity protection using a 
     group shared authentication key. 
    
   - Group Sender data origin authentication using a digital 
     signature, TESLA, or other mechanism. 
    
   - Anti-replay protection for a limited number of Group Senders 
     using the ESP (or AH) sequence number facility. 
    
   - Filtering of multicast transmissions identified with a source 
     address of systems that are not authorized by group policy to be 
     Group Senders. This feature leverages the IPsec state-less 
     firewall service (i.e., SPD-I and/or SDP-O entries with a packet 
     disposition specified as DISCARD). 
    
   In support of the above services, this specification enhances the 
   definition of the SPD, PAD, and SAD databases to facilitate the 
   automated group key management of large-scale cryptographic groups. 
    
6.2 Security Issues Not Solved by IPsec Multicast Extensions 
    
   As noted in RFC4301 section 2.2, it is out of scope of this 
   architecture to defend the group's keys or its application data 
   against attacks targeting vulnerabilities of the operating 
   environment in which the IPsec implementation executes. However, it 
   should be noted that the risk of attacks originating by an 
   adversary in the network is magnified to the extent that the group 
   keys are shared across a large number of systems. 
    
 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008              [Page 21] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
   The security issues that are left unsolved by the IPsec multicast 
   extension service divide into two broad categories: outsider 
   attacks, and insider attacks. 
    
6.2.1 Outsider Attacks 
    
   The IPsec multicast extension service does not defend against an 
   Adversary outside of the group who has: 
    
   - the capability to launch a multicast flooding denial-of-service 
     attack against the group, originating from a system whose IPsec 
     subsystem does not filter the unauthorized multicast 
     transmissions. 
    
   - compromised a multicast router, allowing the Adversary to corrupt 
     or delete all multicast packets destined for the group endpoints 
     downstream from that router. 
    
   - captured a copy of an earlier multicast packet transmission and 
     then replayed it to a group that does not have the anti-replay 
     service enabled. Note that for a large-scale any-source multicast 
     group, it is impractical for the Group Receivers to maintain an 
     anti-replay state for every potential Group Sender. Group 
     policies that require anti-replay protection for a large-scale 
     any-source-multicast group should consider an application layer 
     total order multicast protocol. 
    
6.2.2 Insider Attacks 
    
   For large-scale groups, the IP security multicast extensions are 
   dependent on an automated Group Key Management protocol to 
   correctly authenticate and authorize trustworthy members in 
   compliance to the group's policies. Inherent in the concept of a 
   cryptographic group is a set of one or more shared secrets 
   entrusted to all of the group's members. Consequently, the 
   service's security guarantees are no stronger than the weakest 
   member admitted to the group by the GKM system. The GKM system is 
   responsible for responding to compromised group member detection by 
   executing a re-key procedure. The GKM re-keying protocol will expel 
   the compromised group members and distribute new group keying 
   material to the trusted members. Alternatively, the group policy 
   may require the GKM system to terminate the group. 
    
   In the event that an Adversary has been admitted into the group by 
   the GKM system, the following attacks are possible and they can not 
   be solved by the IPsec multicast extension service: 
    
   - The Adversary can disclose the secret group key or group data to 
     an unauthorized party outside of the group. After a group key or 
     data compromise, cryptographic methods such as traitor tracing or 

 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008              [Page 22] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
     watermarking can assist in the forensics process. However, these 
     methods are outside the scope of this specification. 
    
   - The insider Adversary can forge packet transmissions that appear 
     to be from a peer group member. To defend against this attack for 
     those Group Sender transmissions that merit the overhead, the 
     group policy can require the Group Sender to multicast packets 
     using the data origin authentication service. 
    
   - If the group's data origin authentication service uses digital 
     signatures, then the insider Adversary can launch a computational 
     resource denial of service attack by multicasting bogus signed 
     packets. 
    
6.3 Implementation or Deployment Issues that Impact Security 
    
6.3.1 Homogeneous Group Cryptographic Algorithm Capabilities 
    
   The IP security multicast extensions service can not defend against 
   a poorly considered group security policy that allows a weaker 
   cryptographic algorithm simply because all of the group's endpoints 
   are known to support it. Unfortunately, large-scale groups can be 
   difficult to upgrade to the current best in class cryptographic 
   algorithms. One possible approach to solving many of these problems 
   is the deployment of composite groups that can straddle 
   heterogeneous groups [COMPGRP]. A standard solution for 
   heterogeneous groups is an activity for future standardization. In 
   the interim, synchronization of a group's cryptographic 
   capabilities could be achieved using a secure and scalable software 
   distribution management tool. 
    
6.3.2 Groups that Span Two or More Security Policy Domains 
    
   Large-scale groups may span multiple legal jurisdictions (e.g 
   countries) that enforce limits on cryptographic algorithms or key 
   strengths. As currently defined, the IPsec multicast extension 
   service requires a single group policy per group. As noted above, 
   this problem remains an area for future standardization. 
    
6.3.3 Source-Specific Multicast Group Sender Transient Locators 
    
   A Source Specific Multicast (SSM) Group Sender's source IP address 
   can dynamically change during a secure multicast group's lifetime. 
   Examples of the events that can cause the Group Sender's source 
   address to change include but are not limited to NAT, a mobility 
   induced change in the care-of-address, and a multi-homed host 
   using a new IP interface. The change in the Group Sender's source 
   IP address will cause those GSPD entries related to that multicast 
   group to become out of date with respect to the group's multicast 
   routing state. In the worst case, there is a risk that the Group 
   Sender's data originating from a new source address will be BYPASS 
 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008              [Page 23] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
   processed by a security gateway. If this scenario was not 
   anticipated, then it could leak the group's data. Consequently, it 
   is recommended that SSM secure multicast groups have a default 
   DISCARD policy for all unauthorized Group Sender source IP 
   addresses for the SSM group's destination IP address. 
    
7. IANA Considerations 
    
   This document has no actions for IANA. 
    
8. Acknowledgements 
    
   The authors wish to thank Steven Kent, Russ Housley, Pasi Eronen, 
   and Tero Kivinen for their helpful comments.  
    
   The "Guidelines for Writing RFC Text on Security Considerations" 
   [RFC3552] was consulted to develop the Security Considerations 
   section of this memo. 
    
9. References 
    
9.1 Normative References 
    
   [RFC1112] Deering, S., "Host Extensions for IP Multicasting," RFC 
             1112, August 1989. 
    
   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
             Requirement Level", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
 
   [RFC4301] Kent, S. and K. Seo, "Security Architecture for the 
             Internet Protocol", RFC 4301, December 2005. 
    
   [RFC4302] Kent, S., "IP Authentication Header", RFC 4302, December 
             2005. 
    
   [RFC4303] Kent, S., "IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP)", RFC 
             4303, December 2005. 
 
9.2 Informative References 
 
   [COMPGRP] Gross G. and H. Cruickshank, "Multicast IP Security 
             Composite Cryptographic Groups", draft-ietf-msec-ipsec-
             composite-group-01.txt, work in progress, February 2007. 
    
   [RFC2526] Johnson, D., and S. Deering, "Reserved IPv6 Subnet 
             Anycast Addresses", RFC 2526, March 1999. 
    
   [RFC2627] Wallner, D., Harder, E. and R. Agee, "Key Management for 
             Multicast: Issues and Architectures", RFC 2627, 
             September 1998. 
    
 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008              [Page 24] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
   [RFC2914] Floyd, S., "Congestion Control Principles", RFC 2914, 
             September 2000. 
    
   [RFC3171] Albanni, Z., et al., "IANA Guidelines for IPv4 
             Multicast Address Assignments", RFC 3171, August 2001. 
    
   [RFC3306] Haberman B. and D. Thaler, "Unicast-Prefix-based IPv6 
             Multicast Addresses", RFC3306, August 2002. 
    
   [RFC3307] Haberman B., "Allocation Guidelines for IPv6 Multicast 
             Addresses", RFC3307, August 2002. 
    
   [RFC3376] Cain, B., et al., "Internet Group Management Protocol, 
             Version 3", RFC 3376, October 2002. 
    
   [RFC3547] Baugher, M., Weis, B., Hardjono, T., and H. Harney, "The 
             Group Domain of Interpretation", RFC 3547, December 
             2002. 
    
   [RFC3552] Rescorla, E., et al., "Guidelines for Writing RFC Text on 
             Security Considerations", RFC 3552, July 2003. 
    
   [RFC3569] Bhattacharyya, S., "An Overview of Source-Specific 
             Multicast (SSM)", RFC 3569, July 2003. 
    
   [RFC3740] Hardjono, T., and B. Weis, "The Multicast Group Security 
             Architecture", RFC 3740, March 2004. 
    
   [RFC3810] Vida, R., and L. Costa, "Multicast Listener Discovery 
             Version 2 (MLDv2) for IPv6", RFC 3810, June 2004. 
    
   [RFC3940] Adamson, B., et al., "Negative-acknowledgment (NACK)-
             Oriented Reliable Multicast (NORM) Protocol", RFC 3940, 
             November 2004. 
    
   [RFC4046] Baugher, M., Dondeti, L., Canetti, R., and F. Lindholm, 
             "Multicast Security (MSEC) Group Key Management 
             Architecture", RFC4046, April 2005. 
    
   [RFC4082] Perrig, A., et al., "Timed Efficient Stream Loss-
             Tolerant Authentication (TESLA): Multicast Source 
             Authentication Transform Introduction", RFC 4082, June 
             2005. 
    
   [RFC4306] Kaufman, C., "Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2) Protocol", 
             RFC 4306, December 2005. 
    
   [RFC4359] Weis, B., "The Use of RSA/SHA-1 Signatures within 
             Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) and Authentication 
             Header (AH)", RFC 4359, January 2006. 
    
 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008              [Page 25] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
   [RFC4534] Colegrove, A., and H. Harney, "Group Security Policy 
             Token v1", RFC 4534, June 2006. 
    
   [RFC4535] Harney, H., Meth, U., Colegrove, A., and G. Gross, 
             "GSAKMP: Group Secure Association Key Management 
             Protocol", RFC 4535, June 2006. 
    
   [RFC4601] Fenner, B., et al., "Protocol Independent Multicast - 
             Sparse Mode (PIM-SM): Protocol  Specification 
             (Revised)",  RFC 4601, August 2006. 
    
   [RFC4891] Graveman R., et al., "Using IPsec to Secure IPv6-in-IPv4 
             Tunnels", RFC 4891, May 2007. 
    
   [ZLLY03] Zhang, X., et al., "Protocol Design for Scalable and 
             Reliable Group Rekeying", IEEE/ACM Transactions on 
             Networking (TON), Volume 11, Issue 6, December 2003. See 
             http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/lam/Vita/Cpapers/ZLLY01.p
             df. 
 































 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008              [Page 26] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
Appendix A - Multicast Application Service Models 
    
   The vast majority of secure multicast applications can be 
   catalogued by their service model and accompanying intra-group 
   communication patterns. Both the Group Key Management (GKM) 
   Subsystem and the IPsec subsystem MUST be able to configure the 
   GSPD/SAD security policies to match these dominant usage scenarios. 
   The GSPD/SAD policies MUST include the ability to configure both 
   Any-Source-Multicast groups and Source-Specific-Multicast groups 
   for each of these service models. The GKM Subsystem management 
   interface MAY include mechanisms to configure the security policies 
   for service models not identified by this standard. 
    
A.1 Unidirectional Multicast Applications 
 
   Multi-media content delivery multicast applications that do not 
   have congestion notification or retransmission error recovery 
   mechanisms are inherently unidirectional. RFC 4301 only defines bi-
   directional unicast traffic selectors (as per sections 4.4.1 and 
   5.1 with respect to traffic selector directionality). The GKM 
   Subsystem requires that the IPsec subsystem MUST support 
   unidirectional SPD entries, which cause a Group Security 
   Association (GSA) to be installed in only one direction. Multicast 
   applications that have only one group member authorized to transmit 
   can use this type of group security association to enforce that 
   group policy. In the inverse direction, the GSA does not have a SAD 
   entry, and the GSPD configuration is optionally set up to discard 
   unauthorized attempts to transmit unicast or multicast packets to 
   the group. 
    
   The GKM Subsystem's management interface MUST have the ability to 
   set up a GKM Subsystem group having a unidirectional GSA security 
   policy. 
    
A.2 Bi-directional Reliable Multicast Applications 
 
   Some secure multicast applications are characterized as one Group 
   Sender to many receivers, but with inverse data flows required by a 
   reliable multicast transport protocol (e.g., NORM). In such 
   applications, the data flow from the sender is multicast, and the 
   inverse flow from the group's receivers is unicast to the sender. 
   Typically, the inverse data flows carry error repair requests and 
   congestion control status. 
    
   For such applications, it is advantageous to use the same IPsec SA 
   for protection of both unicast and multicast data flows. This does 
   introduce one risk: the IKEv2 application may choose the same SPI 
   for receiving unicast traffic as the GCKS chooses for a group 
   IPsec SA covering unicast traffic. If both SAs are installed in 
   the SAD, the SA lookup may return the wrong SPI as the result of 
   an SA lookup. To avoid this problem, IPsec SAs installed by the 
 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008              [Page 27] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
   GKM SHOULD use the 2-tuple {destination IP address, SPI} to 
   identify each IPsec SA. In addition, the GKM SHOULD use a unicast 
   destination IP address that does not match any destination IP 
   address in use by an IKE-v2 unicast IPsec SA. For example, suppose 
   a Group Member is using both IKEv2 and a GKM protocol, and the 
   group security policy requires protecting the NORM inverse data 
   flows as described above. In this case, group policy SHOULD 
   allocate and use a unique unicast destination IP address 
   representing the NORM Group Sender. This address would be 
   configured in parallel to the Group Sender's existing IP 
   addresses. The GKM subsystems at both the NORM Group Sender and 
   Group Receiver endpoints would install the IPsec SA protecting the 
   NORM unicast messages such that the SA lookup uses the unicast 
   destination address as well as the SPI. 
    
   The GSA SHOULD use IPsec anti-replay protection service for the 
   sender's multicast data flow to the group's receivers. Because of 
   the scalability problem described in the next section, it is not 
   practical to use the IPsec anti-replay service for the unicast 
   inverse flows. Consequently, in the inverse direction the IPsec 
   anti-replay protection MUST be disabled. However, the unicast 
   inverse flows can use the group's IPsec group authentication 
   mechanism. The group receiver's GSPD entry for this GSA SHOULD be 
   configured to only allow a unicast transmission to the sender node 
   rather than a multicast transmission to the whole group. 
    
   If an ESP digital signature authentication is available (e.g., RFC 
   4359), source authentication MAY be used to authenticate a receiver 
   node's transmission to the sender. The GKM protocol MUST define a 
   key management mechanism for the Group Sender to validate the 
   asserted signature public key of any receiver node without 
   requiring that the sender maintain state about every group 
   receiver. 
    
   This multicast application service model is RECOMMENDED because it 
   includes congestion control feedback capabilities. Refer to 
   [RFC2914] for additional background information. 
    
   The GKM Subsystem's Group Owner management interface MUST have the 
   ability to set up a symmetric GSPD entry and one Group Sender. The 
   management interface SHOULD be able to configure a group to have at 
   least 16 concurrent authorized senders, each with their own GSA 
   anti-replay state. 
    
A.3 Any-To-Any Multicast Applications 
    
   Another family of secure multicast applications exhibits an "any to 
   many" communications pattern. A representative example of such an 
   application is a videoconference combined with an electronic 
   whiteboard. 
    
 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008              [Page 28] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
   For such applications, all (or a large subset) of the Group Members 
   are authorized multicast senders. In such service models, creating 
   a distinct IPsec SA with anti-replay state for every potential 
   sender does not scale to large groups. The group SHOULD share one 
   IPsec SA for all of its senders. The IPsec SA SHOULD NOT use the 
   IPsec anti-replay protection service for the sender's multicast 
   data flow to the Group Receivers. 
    
   The GKM Subsystem's management interface MUST have the ability to 
   set up a group having an Any-To-Many Multicast GSA security policy. 
 
 
Author's Address 
    
   Brian Weis 
   Cisco Systems 
   170 W. Tasman Drive, 
   San Jose, CA 95134-1706 
   USA 
    
   Phone: +1-408-526-4796 
   Email: bew@cisco.com 
    
   George Gross 
   IdentAware Security 
   977 Bates Road 
   Shoreham, VT 05770 
   USA 
    
   Phone: +1-908-268-1629 
   Email: gmgross@identaware.com 
    
   Dragan Ignjatic 
   Polycom 
   1000 W. 14th Street 
   North Vancouver, BC V7P 3P3 
   Canada 
    
   Phone: +1-604-982-3424 
   Email: dignjatic@polycom.com 
    
    
 
Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 
    
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 
    
 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008              [Page 29] 

Internet-Draft     Multicast Extensions to RFC 4301  February 22, 2008 
    
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS 
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
Intellectual Property 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
 
Acknowledgement 
    
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF 
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA). 















 
Weis, et al.           Expires August 22, 2008              [Page 30] 

