






INTERNET-DRAFT                                                  C. Apple
<draft-apple-schema-proc-list-00.txt>                  AT&T Laboratories
Expires: May 6, 1998                                         M. Mealling
                                                 Network Solutions, Inc.
                                                         6 November 1997




                  Directory Schema Listing Procedures
                 <draft-apple-schema-proc-list-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft. Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups. Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet- Drafts
   Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
   munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or
   ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

Abstract

   This memo documents procedures for listing directory service schemas
   in a centrally operated, administered, and maintained repository.
   This repository will be available as a resource to directory protocol
   and service implementors to facilitate schema discovery.

1.0 Introduction

   There is a growing number of places where schema for Internet
   Directory Services are being defined, with varying degrees of
   documentation.  This plethora of schemas is unavoidable in the light
   of the needs of different service communities, but it makes it
   difficult for directory service builders to find and make use of an
   existing schema that will serve their needs and increase
   interoperability with other systems. A listing service providing a
   single point of discovery for directory service schema will promote
   schema reuse, reduce duplication of effort, and thus promote



Apple, Mealling                                                 [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Directory Schema Listing Procedures    6 November 1997


   directory service interoperability. Listed schema will be assiged a
   permanent serial number (similar to those assigned to RFCs) as a part
   of the listing process. This listing process was defined to ensure
   that schema writers can publish their schema in a public forum so
   that they will be re-used.

   The IETF schema listing service has public read access and
   restricted, moderated write access. Currently, this listing service
   is centrally operated, administered, and maintained by TBD. The
   schema listing repository is mirrored to ensure some level of
   redundancy for read access.

   This document defines schema listing procedures which use TBD as the
   primary listing repository operator.

1.1 Terms and Definitions

   Information Object - a descriptive abstraction of some real-world
   object

   Schema - a collection of definitions for related information objects

   Listing Meta Data - characteristics that differentiate one schema
   from another; used to catalog schema

   Listing Content - a formal specification of a schema using a profile
   of [MIMEDIR] created to provide a template for syntax and content
   transfer encoding of directory service protocol schema

   Schema Listing - the combination of listing meta data and all
   available listing content for a particular schema

   Repository - a database in which schema listings are stored

   Schema Listing Request - a schema listing formatted using [MIME]
   constructs that is submitted for consideration as a schema listing to
   be published in a repository

   Operator - an organization that administers and maintains a
   repository

   Primary Repository - the repository that masters the schema listings
   database

   Shadow Repository - a repository that mirrors the primary repository

   Contact Person - the name of the individual who holds the authority
   to update a schema listing and who should be contacted if questions



Apple, Mealling                                                 [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Directory Schema Listing Procedures    6 November 1997


   or concerns arise related to a schema listing or schema listing
   request

   Listing Authority Contact - the name of the individual who holds
   authority to replace a contact person; can be either the contact
   person for a schema listing or an alternate contact within the
   organization to which the contact person belongs (this allows one
   person organizations to list schema)

   The terms for specifying requirement level described in [RFC2119] are
   used in this document.

2.0 Directory Schema Listing

2.1 Schema Listing Request Architecture Diagram


                      Schema Writer
                            |  <-----------------schema listing request
                            V
            Schema Listing Request Review List
                            |
                            V
                +-----------------------+
                |Significant objections | YES
                |raised within 2 weeks? |----> Back to the drawing board....
                +-----------------------+
                            | NO (List Moderator recommends that schema listing
           Schema Listing-->|     be published subject to comments on list.)
               Request      V
                   +-----------------+
                   |Request meets    | NO
                   |all requirements?| ----> Back to the drawing board....
                   +-----------------+
                            | YES
                            |  <-----------------schema listing meta data
                            V                    and listing content
                  Repository Mirroring Agent
                   |        |    ...      |
                   V        V             V
           +----------+ +----------+ +----------+
           |Repository| |Repository| |Repository| where: 1 is the primary
           |    1     | |    2     | |    n     |        2..n are replicas
           +----------+ +----------+ +----------+


   Listing of a new schema starts with the construction of a listing
   request. Schema writers send in schema listing requests to a



Apple, Mealling                                                 [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Directory Schema Listing Procedures    6 November 1997


   moderated request review list. Following a comment period of 2 weeks,
   if no significant objections are raised (determined by the
   moderator), the moderator sends the listing request to the primary
   listing repository operator, subject to incorporation of relevant
   comments by the schema writer.  Listing requests are checked to
   verify compliance with the requirements and conditions discussed
   below and assigned a permanent serial number.  A mirroring agent
   replicates the new listing across the primary and mirrored copies of
   the listing repository database.

   The following sections describe the requirements and procedure.

2.2 Listing Requirements

   Listing requests are all expected to conform to various requirements
   laid out in the following sections.

2.2.1 Functionality Requirements

   Listings MUST include two different types of information:

      (1) listing meta data

      (2) listing content

   Listing meta data will be used to catalog the listed schema by
   characteristics that differentiate schema.

   Listing content MUST be limited to the specification of the schema
   itself.  Different profiles containing listing content MAY be
   included in the same listing request.

   Listing content MUST actually function as a directory schema.

   Listing of schema that include listing content that does not function
   as a directory schema is PROHIBITED.

2.2.2 Naming Requirements

   All listings MUST have a valid OID as their name.

   The primary listing repository operator MUST construct an OID for
   each listing based on the combination of

   + a root OID obtained from IANA specifically
     for use in the schema listing service

   + a sequence number assigned to each schema



Apple, Mealling                                                 [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Directory Schema Listing Procedures    6 November 1997


     listing by the primary repository operator

     + a version number assigned to each schema
     listing by the primary repository operator
   The schema writer MUST allocate a temporary name for all schema
   listing requests. This listing request name must based on one of the
   following:

      + an OID allocated from within an OID subtree which
        the schema writer or their organization administers

      + a GUID generated according to [GUIDGEN] or [GUIDOTHER]


2.2.3 Content Formatting and Transfer Encoding Requirements

   All schema listings MUST employ a common data format.

   Listing meta data and listing content format and transfer encoding
   MUST utilize appropriate [MIMEDIR] profiles.

   Currently, four [MIMEDIR] profiles have been defined for use in the
   schema listing service:

      [MIMELDAP] MUST be used to format and encode LDAPv3 listing
      content.

      [MIMEWHOIS] MUST be used to format and encode WHOIS++ listing
      content.

      [MIMERWHOIS] MUST be used to format and encode RWHOIS listing
      content.

      [METASYN] MUST be used to format and encode meta data for all
      schema listings and listing requests.

   Other [MIMEDIR] profiles MAY be defined for use in the schema listing
   service; this procedures document will be updated reflect such
   changes.

2.2.4 Security Requirements

   An analysis of security issues for listed schema SHOULD be performed
   prior to submitting a listing request. However, regardless of what
   security analysis has or has not been done, all descriptions of
   security issues MUST be as accurate as possible. In particular, a
   statement that there are "no security issues associated with this
   type" MUST not be confused with "the security issues associates with



Apple, Mealling                                                 [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Directory Schema Listing Procedures    6 November 1997


   this type have not been assessed".

   There is absolutely NO REQUIREMENT that listed schema be secure or
   completely free from risks.  Nevertheless, all known security risks
   SHOULD be identified in the listing request.

   The security considerations section of all requests is subject to
   continuing evaluation and modification, and in particular MAY be
   extended by use of the "comments on schema listings" mechanism
   described in subsequent sections.

   Some of the issues that SHOULD be looked at in a security analysis of
   a schema listing are:

      (1) A schema listing might include specifications mandating
          exposure of certain attributes which would result in
          compromising the privacy of an organization or
          individual.

      (2) A schema listing might be intended for use by
          applications requiring some sort of security
          assurances not provided by the schema specified
          in the listing content.

2.2.5 Usage and Implementation Non-requirements

   In the directory services environment, where information on the
   embedded schema knowledge of a directory client is frequently not
   available to a server, maximum interoperability is attained by
   restricting the schema used to those agreed upon by the large
   community of directory service technology developers and users. This
   was asserted in the past as a reason to limit the number of possible
   schema to one via standards processes and resulted in a change
   process with a significant hurdle and delay for those seeking to
   modify and extend standard schema to better suite their needs.
   Eventually, various individuals and organizations began using non-
   standard schema, making interoperability difficult to achieve.

   The need for "common" or "meta" schema listings does not require
   limiting the listing of new schema listings. If a limited set of
   schema is recommended for a particular application, that should be
   asserted by a separate intended use statement specific for the
   application and/or environment.

   As such, universal support and implementation of a schema is NOT a
   requirement for listing it.  If, however, a schema is explicitly
   intended for limited use, this should be noted in its listing.




Apple, Mealling                                                 [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Directory Schema Listing Procedures    6 November 1997


2.2.6 Publication Requirements

   Requests for schema listed in the IETF schema listing service MAY be
   published as RFCs. The primary listing repository operator will
   retain copies of all schema listing requests that meet the
   requirements specified below and "publish" them as part of the schema
   listing repository.

   The listing of a schema does not imply endorsement, approval, or
   recommendation by the IETF or even certification that the
   specification is adequate for the intended use of the schema. To
   become Internet Standards, protocol, data objects, or whatever must
   go through the IETF standards process. This is too difficult and too
   lengthy a process for the convenient listing of schema.

   It is expected that applicability statements for particular
   applications will be published from time to time that recommend
   implementation of, and support for, schema that have proven
   particularly useful in those contexts.

2.3 Listing Procedure

   The following procedure has been implemented by the primary listing
   repository operator for review and approval of new schema listings.
   This is not a formal standards process, but rather an administrative
   procedure intended to foster re-use of directory services schema and
   to provide a method for collecting schema in a publicly accessible
   repository.

   Submitting listing requests can be done via mail, treating posting of
   a formatted request containing the specification of listing content
   (in all available types) and supporting material (meta data) to the
   ietf-schema-review@TBD list, as a first step.


2.3.1 Announcement and Community Review

   While listed schema are NOT REQUIRED to be published as RFCs, they
   MUST be posted to the ietf-schema-review@TBD list, allowing a review
   and comment period of at least 2 weeks. This is necessary to prevent
   the malicious as well as unintended introduction of obviously bogus
   or frivolous schema into the listing repository.

   Schema writers wishing to have their schema listed by the primary
   listing repository operator, MUST specify any such schema (one per
   request) according to one or more of the following [MIMEDIR]
   profiles: [MIMELDAP], [MIMEWHOIS], or [MIMERWHOIS]. Other such
   profiles may be defined elsewhere and this procedures document will



Apple, Mealling                                                 [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Directory Schema Listing Procedures    6 November 1997


   be update to reflect such process changes.

   Listing meta data, as specified in [METASYN], MUST also be included
   in this request.  A template for listing requests is specified in
   paragraph 2.8.  Schema writers MUST use this template.

   Once written, the request should be sent to ietf-schema-review@TBD.

2.3.2 Community Review and Assessment

   At this stage of the schema listing process, a place holder, such as
   the ever popular TBD (to be determined) MAY be used in place of an
   actual OID value for the name of the schema specified in the listing
   request.

   Moderated discussions on the ietf-schema-review@TBD mailing list will
   enable a means of gauging concensus as to whether or not the schema
   being proposed is bogus. If there is no significant reason to believe
   that a schema is useful or if it appears to be a bogus or malicious
   request, the moderator will not submit a listing request to the
   primary listing repository operator; otherwise, they may do so.

   If the listing request is to be published, the temporary name (an OID
   or GUID) for the schema listing MUST be replaced with a constructed
   OID by the primary listing repository operator.

2.3.3 Primary Repository Operator Listing

   Provided that the schema listing request meets the requirements
   defined in paragraph 2.1, the ietf-schema-review@TBD list moderator
   will send a listing request to the primary repository operator, which
   will check the schema listing for validity, and make the schema
   listing available to the community.

2.4 Comments on Schema Listings

   Comments on listed schema may be submitted by members of the IETF
   community to for consideration by the rest of the community and the
   primary listing repository operator. These comments will be passed on
   to the owner of the schema if possible. Submitters of comments may
   request that their comment be attached to the schema listing itself.
   If the ietf-schema-review@TBD list moderator is able to establish
   concensus affirming the inclusion of such a comment, it will be made
   accessible in conjunction with the schema listing itself.

2.5 Location of List of Available Schema

   Schema listings will be posted in the anonymous FTP directory



Apple, Mealling                                                 [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Directory Schema Listing Procedures    6 November 1997


   "ftp://TBD.host.name/schema/" and all listed schema will be listed in
   a periodically issued RFC. The schema listing content and other
   supporting material may also be published as an Informational RFC by
   sending it to "rfc-editor@isi.edu" (please follow the instructions to
   RFC authors [RFC1543]).

2.6 Primary Repository Operator Procedures for Listing Schemas

   Schema will be listed by the primary repository operator
   automatically and without any formal review as long as the following
   minimal conditions are met:

      (1) Schema MUST function as an actual directory service schema.
          In particular, generic database schema MUST NOT be listed.

      (2) All schema listings MUST have a valid OID as their name.

      (3) All schema listing requests MUST include both meta data and
          listing content.

      (4) Schema listing meta data MUST comply with [METASYN].

      (5) Schema listing content MUST be compliant with at least one
          of the following [MIMEDIR] profiles:

             + [MIMELDAP] (for LDAPv3 schema specifications)
             + [MIMEWHOIS] (for WHOIS++ schema specifications)
             + [MIMERWHOIS] (for RWHOIS schema specifications)

          Other [MIMEDIR] profiles may be defined in the future and this
          document will be updated to reflect such additional profiles.

      (6) Equivalent schema listing content specified using different
      [MIMEDIR]
          profiles MAY be included in the same listing request.

      (7) Any security considerations given must not be obviously
          bogus. It is neither possible nor necessary for the
          primary listing repository operator to conduct a
          comprehensive security review of schema listings.
          However, the listing request review committee
          (the members of the listing request review
          mailing list) has the authority and expertise
          to identify obviously incompetent material
          and exclude it.

      (8) Schema listing requests MAY be signed using PGP/MIME
          as described in [RFC2015]. The primary listing repository



Apple, Mealling                                                 [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Directory Schema Listing Procedures    6 November 1997


          operator MUST be able to accept schema listing requests
          in PGP/MIME messages, although they are NOT REQUIRED
          to validate or retain the signatures.

      (9) The listing request MUST be formatted according to
          paragraph 2.8.

      (10) If the listing request includes one or more external,
          URI-based references to information associated with
          the schema specified in the request, a fingerprint
          of this information MUST be included with each such
          reference as specified in [METASYN]. The schema writer
          must also include a special caveat meta data element
          (as specified in [METASYN]) if at least one such
          reference is included in the request.

2.7 Change Control

   Once a schema listing has been published by the primary repository
   operator, the contact person may request a change to its definition.
   The contact person for a listed schema is defined to be the person or
   organizational role or entity who submitted the original listing
   request.

   The change request follows the same procedure as the listing request

      (1) Publish the revised schema listing proposal on
          the ietf-schema-review@TBD list.

      (2) Leave at least two weeks for comments.

      (3) Publish using the primary listing repository
          operator after formal review if required.

   Changes SHOULD be requested only when there are serious omission or
   errors in the published specification. When review is required, a
   change request MAY be denied if it renders entities that were valid
   under the previous definition invalid under the new definition.
   However, the primary listing repository provider SHOULD attempt to
   verify the authority of a person claiming to be the contact for a
   schema listing to change it, prior to implementing such changes.

   The contact person for a schema MAY pass responsibility for the
   schema to another person or agency by informing the primary listing
   repository operator and the ietf-schema-announce list; this can be
   done without discussion or review.

   The IESG may reassign responsibility for a schema. The most common



Apple, Mealling                                                [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Directory Schema Listing Procedures    6 November 1997


   case of this will be to enable changes to be made to types where the
   contact person for the listing has died, moved out of contact, or is
   otherwise unable to make changes that are important to the community.

   Schema listings will not be deleted; schema which are no longer
   believed appropriate for use can be declared OBSOLETE by a change to
   their "intended use" field; such schema will be clearly marked in the
   lists published by the primary listing repository operator.

2.8 Listing Proposal Format

   To: ietf-schema-review@TBD
   Subject: schema listing request
   Content-Type: multipart/related; start=2@foo.com; boundary="boundary"
   Content-ID: top@foo.com

   --boundary
   Content-Type: text/directory; profile="schema-meta-0"
   Content-ID: 3@foo.com
   (meta data elements and values as specified in [METASYN] and embedded
   in a text/directory MIME component of profile "schema-meta-0")

   --boundary
   Content-Type: text/directory; profile="schema-ldap-0"
   Content-ID: 3@foo.com

   (a schema specification compliant with [MIMELDAP])

   --boundary
   Content-Type: text/directory; profile="schema-whoispp-0"
   Content-ID: 4@foo.com

   (a schema specification compliant with [MIMEWHOIS])

   --boundary
   Content-Type: text/directory; profile="schema-rwhois-0"
   Content-ID: 5@foo.com

   (a schema specification compliant with [MIMERWHOIS])

   --boundary--

2.9 Primary Repository Operator Responsibilities and Constraints

   The data residing in the repository is not the property of the
   repository operator. Since the schema actually listed are the
   intellectual property of the entities creating the listing, the
   repository operator cannot claim them as intellectual property. All



Apple, Mealling                                                [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Directory Schema Listing Procedures    6 November 1997


   meta data surrounding the system is considered to be either in the
   public domain or is owned by the IANA (or some other suitable
   entity). The repository operator can make no claims whatsoever of
   ownership over any data in the repository.

   The repository operator can also make no determinations of
   appropriateness or suitability of a schema to be listed. This
   responsibility rests solely with the members of the listing request
   review committee (the members of the review mailing list). If the
   list coordinator requests that the repository operator publish a
   schema listing, the repository operator MUST include the schema
   listing or be relieved of the reponsibility of running the
   repository.

   Currently, the ability to advertise products and services on the
   repository web site to recoup monies used in operating the service is
   allowed. At any time, the submittal committee make make a policy
   decision on the appropriateness of ads on the repository pages.

3.0 Security Considerations

   As described in [LISTRQMT], the subject of trust with respect to most
   aspects of the service involving the exchange of information
   (submitting a listing request, updating an existing schema listing,
   or retrieving a schema listing) is not addressed in this document.
   However, the primary schema listing repository operator will take
   reasonable steps to ensure that information associated with the
   service is as accurate and authentic as possible.

   If users of the schema listing service obtain and use schema from the
   repository, they SHOULD verify that any fingerprints contained as a
   part of the listing meta data for external references to related
   content outside of the repository are valid. This can be verified by
   computing the MD5 checksum of the referenced content and comparing it
   with the fingerprint value. If this verification fails, the user of
   this schema information can assume that this external content has
   changed after the listing was published. In any case, no repository
   operator has control over external content referenced by URIs in the
   meta data.  Thus the establishment of trust as it relates to the
   validity of fingerprints and the content which they represent is the
   solely user's responsibility and is optional.

4.0 Acknowledgements

   The format and much of the content in this document is based on
   [RFC2048].

   The engineering team for listing service requirements:



Apple, Mealling                                                [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Directory Schema Listing Procedures    6 November 1997


      Chris Apple - AT&T Labs
      Michael Mealling - NSI
      Sanjay Jain - Oracle
      John Strassner - Cisco
      Sam Sun - CNRI
      Mark Wahl - Critical Angle
      Chris Weider - Microsoft

4.0 References

   [FILESYN] C. Apple, "Directory Schema Listing File Name Syntax",
   INTERNET-DRAFT <draft-apple-schema-file-list-00.txt>, October 1997.

   [GUIDGEN] P. Leach, R. Salz, "UUIDs and GUIDs", INTERNET-DRAFT
   <draft-leach-uuids-guids-00.txt>, February 1997.

   [GUIDOTHER] Open Group CAE Specification C309 "DCE: Remote Procedure
   Call", August 1994.

   [LISTRQMT] C. Apple, "Directory Schema Listing Requirements",
   INTERNET-DRAFT <draft-apple-schema-rqmts-list-02.txt>, October 1997.

   [METASYN] C. Apple, "A MIME Directory Profile for Schema Listing Meta
   Data", INTERNET-DRAFT <TBD>, TBP.

   [MIMELDAP] M. Wahl, "A MIME Directory Profile for LDAP Schema",
   INTERNET-DRAFT <draft-wahl-mime-schema-00.txt>, October 1997.

   [MIMEWHOIS] TBP.

   [MIMERWHOIS] TBP.

   [RFC2015] M. Elkins, "MIME Security with Pretty Good Privacy (PGP)",
   RFC 2015, October 1996.

   [RFC2048] N. Freed, J. Klensin, J. Postel, "Multipurpose Internet
   Mail Extensions (MIME) Part Four: Registration Procedures", RFC 2048,
   November 1997.

5.0 Authors' Address

   Chris Apple
   Room 2F-165
   AT&T Laboratories
   600 Mountain Ave
   Murray Hill, NJ 07974
   US




Apple, Mealling                                                [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Directory Schema Listing Procedures    6 November 1997


   Phone: +1 908 582 2409
   Fax:   +1 908 582 3296
   Email: capple@att.com


   Michael Mealling
   505 Huntmar Park Drive
   Herndon, VA 22070
   US

   Phone: +1 703 742 0400
   Fax: +1 703 742 9552
   Email: michaelm@rwhois.net


                This Internet-Draft expires on May 6, 1998.



































Apple, Mealling                                                [Page 14]
