INTERNET-DRAFT                                           Manjunath Iyer
Expires: December 18, 2006                      Celstream
                                                          June 18, 2006

 

 
      Integrated algorithm for QoS in  MANET
               draft-manjunath-manet-integrated-qos-00.txt
                                        

Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents 
   that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or 
   she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which 
   he or she becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with 
   Section 6 of BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet 
   Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working  
   groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working 
   documents as Internet-Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by 
   other documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use 
   Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite them other 
   than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed 
   at http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.  

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 18, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract


Meeting the agreed service quality in a mobile ad hoc network 
is tough and addressed in [RFC1677]. A mechanism is provided 
in [RFC2501]. In this draft, usage of an integrated algorithm 
is described. The fading RF channels introduce the harmful 
self-similarity in to the traffic. To counter the same, another 
self-similar controlling mechanism may be inserted for the better 
wireless network performance and optimal resource utilization. 



Manjunath              Expires December18, 2006          [Page  1] 

 
Internet-Draft  Integrated algorithm for QoS in  MANET  June 2006

1.  Introduction

1.1  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

1.2  Overview

    
In a wireless ad hoc network, where the channel characteristics are not 
fixed, providing the information over the network status through a 
feedbackpath would be difficult. Hence a virtual feedback may be 
provided. The virtual feedback would not be from end to end. It could 
be confined to a small part of the wireless channel such as a base 
station or a switch.  

Providing a piece- wise feedback at one or more points along the path 
would impart interesting properties. The entire channel behaves as 
though a kind of feedback is provided from end to end.


1.3  Integration of Quality of service 

The methods for Meeting the service parameters in a wireless channel 
are provided in [RFC1677].One of the issues with the RF channels is 
that the characteristics of the channel vary overtime and space. An 
adaptive model that looks more at the traffic characteristics than the 
channel characteristics is more realistic to the problem of traffic 
shaping. Towards meeting the service quality, a scheduling algorithm 
is assigned to meet each of the service qualities putting a stringent 
time bound constraint for switching over the algorithms dynamically as 
suggested in the [RFC2501]. A single controller that removes the 
redundancies among the set of algorithms MAY be used to cater for the 
different algorithms. 




Manjunath              Expires December18, 2006          [Page  2] 

Internet-Draft     Integrated algorithm for QoS in  MANET  June 2006






2. Impact of piecewise feedback

The piece wise feedback imparts self-similarity for the traffic that 
passes across the controller. This self-similarity has to counter 
the one introduced as a result of fading over the wireless channel. 
Providing the self-similarity through the controller may be linked to 
the usage a single scheduler that learns the scheduling rules. A control 
element with feedback results in multiple resolution at the output. 
Each of these resolutions map on to a QoS or scheduling algorithm.

The converse is also true.  A set of rules may be learnt by a controller 
with feedback, that imparts self-similarity in the network. The 
self-similarity arises as result of the long-range dependency coming 
from the usage of an array of the previous outputs from the feedback 
path in the decision making process for QoS or scheduling. 

The multiple scheduling algorithms are brought in by providing 
different weightages for the different feedback signals in the 
decision making process. Intuitively, any decision process can be 
captured by an arbitrary function that is expressible in terms of 
differentials of different orders. 

The scheduling algorithms catering for different QoS are similar in 
nature but differ in scale. They map on to the different outputs of 
the non-linear controller.
 









 






Manjunath              Expires December18, 2006          [Page  3] 

Internet-Draft    Integrated algorithm for QoS in  MANET  June 2006


3.  Security Considerations 


  The wirelwss ad hoc networks are prone to intrusion. Due consideration 
SHALL be given for the security by defining the securiy as a QoS 
parameter.

 
 


4.  IANA Considerations 

This document has no actions for IANA.

 
 
Manjunath              Expires December18, 2006          [Page  4] 
 


Internet-Draft    Integrated algorithm for QoS in  MANET    June 2006
 


5.  References

5.1 Normative References 


     [RFC2119] Bradner, S. "Key Words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.  

  

5.2 Informative References 


  
   [RFC1677] Adamson, B., "Tactical Radio Frequency Communication 
Requirements for IPng", RFC 1677, August 1994.

   [RFC2501] J. Macker and S. Corson,"Routing protocol 
    performance issues and evaluationconsiderations", January 1999 

 
Manjunath              Expires December18, 2006          [Page  5] 
 


Internet-Draft  Integrated algorithm for QoS in  MANET    June 2006
 
6.  Author's Address 

   Manjunath.R
   Celstream.
   9,Prestige bluechip
   Opp.Christ college
   Bangalore-560029
   INDIA
   Phone: 80-41191919
   E-mail: manju_r_99@yahoo.com
           
      





 
 
Manjunath              Expires December18, 2006          [Page  6] 


Internet-Draft  Integrated algorithm for QoS in  MANET    June 2006

7.  Acknowledgements 

   The author acknowledges the creators of the RFCs referred in this
 draft for the valuable information and the extensions based on 
 which this draft has been created   

   The following individuals directly contributed for encouragement,
   identifying   Issues,  suggesting resolutions to the issues found in 
   this document: Srinivas Rao, Rangaraj. This document benefited
   from all these contributions. 

   The author acknowledges the encouragement and services rendered
   by his family members and colleagues during the preparation of the 
   document.   





 
 
Manjunath              Expires December18, 2006          [Page  7] 


Internet-Draft  Integrated algorithm for QoS in  MANET    June 2006
 
8.  Full Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is 
   subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in 
   BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors retain 
   all their rights.  

   This document and the information contained herein are 
   provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE 
   ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), 
   THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE 
   DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT 
   NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES 
   OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 





 
 
Manjunath              Expires December18, 2006          [Page  8] 
 

Internet-Draft   Integrated algorithm for QoS in  MANET   June 2006
 
9.  Intellectual Property Statement  

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of    
   any Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might 
   be claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the 
   technology described in this document or the extent to which 
   any license under such rights might or might not be 
   available; nor does it represent that it has made any 
   independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can 
   be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.  

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and 
   any assurances of licenses to be made available, or the 
   result of an attempt made to obtain a general license or 
   permission for the use of such proprietary rights by 
   implementers or users of this specification can be obtained 
   from the IETF on-line IPR repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.  

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its 
   attention any copyrights, patents or patent applications, 
   or other proprietary rights that may cover technology that 
   may be required to implement this standard.  Please address 
   the information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org.
 
Manjunath     Expires December18, 2006                [Page 9] 












