


Network Working Group                                         J. Klensin
Internet-Draft                                         February 08, 2004
Expires: August 8, 2004


                  Narrowing IESG Process Flexibilities
                  draft-klensin-process-planb-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 8, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   One basic model for IETF operations is that the IESG is given general
   guidance in specific procedural documents but sufficient discretion
   and flexibility to adapt the rules and make new ones in order to make
   the IETF work smoothly.  This model underlies a number of reform
   proposals, including recent ones from this author.  However, there
   has been an undercurrent of suspicion from some members of the
   community -- suspicion that the IESG is abusive of that discretion
   and cannot be trusted.  Those suspicions have, to some extent, been
   reinforced by questions about IESG-adopted procedures that seem to
   contradict procedures approved by the community and documented in
   BCPs.  The community cannot move forward with models based on both
   trust and distrust in the IESG's ability, and level of
   responsibility, to do its job.  In an attempt to focus this part of



Klensin                  Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Process Prohibitions             February 2004


   the debate, this document proposes to dramatically narrow IESG's
   scope of authority and discretion.

   In particular, it proposes to move the IESG, procedurally, onto an
   "anything not explicitly required is forbidden" model, and, indeed, a
   very narrow and punitive member of that family.  While the author
   believes this would be a terrible idea, it appears to be time that
   the community either focuses on it and moves in this direction or
   stops wasting time hinting about it.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.1 Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Proposal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . .  6































Klensin                  Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Process Prohibitions             February 2004


1. Introduction

   One basic model for IETF operations is that the IESG is given general
   guidance in specific procedural documents but sufficient discretion
   and flexibility to adapt the rules and make new ones in order to make
   the IETF work smoothly.  This model underlies a number of reform
   proposals, including recent ones from this author.  However, there
   has been an undercurrent of suspicion from some members of the
   community -- suspicion that the IESG is abusive of that discretion
   and cannot be trusted.  Those suspicions have, to some extent, been
   reinforced by questions about IESG-adopted procedures that seem to
   contradict procedures approved by the community and documented in
   BCPs.  The community cannot move forward with models based on both
   trust and distrust in the IESG's ability, and level of
   responsibility, to do its job.  In an attempt to focus this part of
   the debate, this document proposes to dramatically narrow IESG's
   scope of authority and discretion.

   This document proposes that there is an IETF consensus that the IESG
   should not have the discretionary authority to make changes in,
   extend, or even interpret, written IETF procedures.   This author
   hopes that consensus does not exist and, indeed, that the opposite
   consensus exists because he believes that having a set of rigid
   procedures that can be modified only by full community review is the
   path to permanent paralysis.   But a number of mailing list
   discussions have implied that such consensus exists and that it is
   not appropriate for IESG to have broad discretion in procedural
   matters, so this document is offered as a way to focus that
   discussion.

1.1 Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "SHALL", "REQUIRED", "SHOULD", "RECOMMENDED",
   and "MAY" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC
   2119 [1].

2. Proposal

   It is the consensus of the community that IETF procedures as
   expressed in, e.g., BCP 9 [2] and BCP 25 [3] are adequate, necessary,
   and sufficient for IETF operations and that any modifications,
   extensions, or additional details to those procedures that are to be
   established as general procedural rules must be documented, reviewed
   by the community, and adopted as reflections of community consensus
   before being utilized.

   Consequently:




Klensin                  Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Process Prohibitions             February 2004


   1.  All procedures, standing rules, "nits", standing working group
       procedures, or requirements for I-D or RFC format or content,
       adopted by IESG action without I-D publication, IETF Last Call
       and (at least pending) RFC publication since the September 1998
       publication date of RFC 2418 are abolished as of ninety days
       after approval of this document unless they are approved during
       that period using the procedures below.  This provision is
       referred to elsewhere in this document as the "ninety day sunset"
       provision.  Ninety days was chosen to allow a reasonable,
       although minimum, time for publication of drafts, discussion, a
       four-week Last Call, and IESG review and determination of action
       to be taken.
   2.  Within the ninety day period, the IESG may generate one or more
       Internet-Drafts proposing relevant procedures, circulate them for
       discussion within the community, and then initiate a four-week
       Last Call.   If the Last Call demonstrates community consensus,
       the IESG MAY adopt some or all of the specified procedures as
       proposed and request publication of the relevant documents as BCP
       RFCs, updating BCP 9 and/or BCP 25 as appropriate.
   3.  The IESG may, at any time and using the procedures outlined in
       BCP 9 and/or BCP 25, create design teams, working groups, or
       other bodies and charter them to design and/or evaluate
       procedural modifications. However, the creation of such groups to
       review particular proposed procedures will not impact or suspend
       the "ninety day" provisions above unless the work of those groups
       is completed, subjected to Last Call, and approved within that
       period.
   4.  Future new or modified procedures may be adopted only by a
       process that involves publication of drafts, community review,
       IETF Last Call, IESG determination of community consensus,
       approval and publication.
   5.  All IESG decisions required above are subject to the usual
       appeals provisions and procedures.  However, IESG MUST NOT take
       any actions to adopt procedures using mechanisms in violation of
       those outlined above or take actions not authorized by the
       various procedural documents. Should IESG take such action, the
       IESG members supporting it are subject to recall according to the
       procedures described in BCP 10 [4] with the additional
       stipulation that, if a recall action is brought citing this
       document, the recall committee may only make a determination as
       to whether the IESG member supported the procedural violation.
       If they conclude that he or she did support it, recall is
       mandatory and no other considerations apply.

   The author would like to stress, again, that he does not consider
   this proposal a good idea and that at least a few of its provisions
   might be excessively draconian even if it were.




Klensin                  Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Process Prohibitions             February 2004


3. Security Considerations

   This document specifies a drastically revised model for enforcing and
   extending IETF procedures. It does not raise or consider any
   protocol-specific security issues. However, the author notes that the
   "ninety day sunset" rule would presumably eliminate the current
   requirement for a "Security Considerations" section, and some
   boilerplate specified by the IESG, in all RFCs.   If the proposal is
   adopted, those who believe those provisions are important should take
   quick action to reinstate them.

4. Acknowledgements

   The author wishes to credit stories about Damocles and Dionysius the
   Elder for considerable inspiration in formulating some of the
   provisions of this proposal.

Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels'", RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", RFC
        2026, BCP 0009, October 1996.

   [3]  Bradner, S., "IETF Working Group Guidelines and Procedures", BCP
        0025, RFC 2418, September 1998.

   [4]  Galvin, J., "IAB and IESG Selection, Confirmation, and Recall
        Process: Operation of the Nominating and Recall Committees", BCP
        0010, RFC 2727, March 1997.


Author's Address

   John C Klensin
   1770 Massachusetts Ave, #322
   Cambridge, MA  02140
   USA

   Phone: +1 617 491 5735
   EMail: john-ietf@jck.com









Klensin                  Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            Process Prohibitions             February 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Klensin                  Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            Process Prohibitions             February 2004


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Klensin                  Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 7]

