Network Working Group                                       Sean Turner 
Internet Draft                                                     IECA 
Intended Status: Standard Track                        Santosh Chokhani 
                                                     CygnaCom Solutions 
Expires: January 14, 2009                                 July 14, 2008 
 
 
                                      
       Clearance and CA Clearance Constraints Certificate Extensions 
                draft-turner-caclearanceconstraints-01.txt 


Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 14, 2009. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 

Abstract 

   This document defines the syntax and semantics for the Clearance 
   attribute and the Authority Clearance Constraints extension in X.509 
   certificates.  The Clearance attribute is used to indicate the 
   clearance held by the subject.  The Clearance attribute may appear in 
   the subject directory attributes extension of a public key 
 
 
 
Turner & Chokhani      Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft   Clearance and CA Clearance Constraints       July 2008 
    

   certificate or in the attributes field of an attribute certificate.  
   The Authority Clearance Constraints certificate extension values in a 
   Trust Anchor (TA), a CA public key certificate, and an Attribute 
   Authority (AA) attribute certificate in a certification path 
   constrain the effective Clearance of the subject of the last 
   certificate in the certification path.   

Table of Contents 

   1. Introduction...................................................2 
      1.1. Terminology...............................................3 
      1.2. ASN.1 Syntax Notation.....................................3 
   2. Clearance Attribute............................................3 
   3. Authority Clearance Constraints Certificate Extension..........4 
   4. Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraints Processing.......5 
      4.1. Collecting Constraints....................................6 
         4.1.1. Certification Path Processing........................6 
            4.1.1.1. Inputs..........................................6 
            4.1.1.2. Initialization..................................6 
            4.1.1.3. Basic Certificate Processing....................7 
            4.1.1.4. Preparation for Certificate i+1.................8 
            4.1.1.5. Wrap-up Procedure...............................8 
            4.1.1.6. Outputs.........................................9 
   5. Application of Algorithm to Attribute Certificates.............9 
   6. Security Considerations.......................................10 
   7. IANA Considerations...........................................10 
   8. References....................................................10 
      8.1. Normative References.....................................10 
      8.2. Informative References...................................11 
   Appendix A. ASN.1 Module.........................................12 
    
1. Introduction 

   Organizations that have implemented a security policy can issue 
   certificates that include an indication of the clearance values held 
   by the subject.  The Clearance attribute indicates the security 
   policy, the clearance levels held by the subject, and additional 
   authorization information held by the subject.  This specification 
   makes use of the ASN.1 syntax for clearance from [RFC3281]. 

   Some organizations have multiple TAs, CAs, and/or AAs and these 
   organizations may wish to indicate to relying parties which clearance 
   values from a particular TA, CA, or AA should be accepted.  For 
   example, consider the security policies described in [RFC3114], where 
   a security policy has been defined for Amoco with three security 
   classification values (HIGHLY CONFIDENTIAL, CONFIDENTIAL, and 
   GENERAL). To constrain a CA for just one security classification, the 
 
 
Turner & Chokhani      Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft   Clearance and CA Clearance Constraints       July 2008 
    

   Authority Clearance Constraints certificate extension would be 
   included in the CA's certificate. 

   Cross-certified domains can also make use of the Authority Clearance 
   Constraints certificate extension to indicate which clearance values 
   should be acceptable to relying parties. 

1.1. Terminology 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119]. 

1.2. ASN.1 Syntax Notation 

   All X.509 public key certificate [RFC5280] extensions are defined 
   using ASN.1 [X.680].  All X.509 attribute certificate [RFC3281] 
   extensions are defined using ASN.1 [X.680]. 

2. Clearance Attribute 

   The Clearance attribute in a certificate indicates the clearances 
   held by the subject.  It uses the clearance attribute syntax from 
   Section 4.4.6 of [RFC3281], which is included below for convenience, 
   in the Attributes field.  A certificate MUST include either zero or 
   one instance of the Clearance attribute. 

   The following object identifier identifies the Clearance attribute 
   (either in the subject directory attributes extension of a public key 
   certificate or in the Attributes field of an attribute certificate): 

     id-at-clearance OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { joint-iso-ccitt(2) 
       ds(5) module(1) selected-attribute-types(5) clearance(55) } 

   The ASN.1 syntax for the Clearance attribute is as follows: 

     Clearance  ::=  SEQUENCE { 
       policyId           [0] OBJECT IDENTIFIER, 
       classList          [1] ClassList DEFAULT {unclassified}, 
       securityCategories [2] SET OF SecurityCategory OPTIONAL 
     } 






 
 
Turner & Chokhani      Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft   Clearance and CA Clearance Constraints       July 2008 
    

     ClassList  ::=  BIT STRING { 
       unmarked       (0), 
       unclassified   (1), 
       restricted     (2), 
       confidential   (3), 
       secret         (4), 
       topSecret      (5) 
     } 

     SecurityCategory ::= SEQUENCE { 
       type      [0]  IMPLICIT OBJECT IDENTIFIER, 
       value     [1]  ANY DEFINED BY type 
     } 

   The Clearance attribute takes its meaning from Section 4.4.6 of 
   [RFC3281], which is repeated here for convenience: 

     - policyId identifies the security policy to which the clearance 
      relates.  The policyId indicates the semantics of the classList 
      and securityCategory fields. 

     - classlist identifies the security classifications. Six basic 
      values are defined in bit positions 0 through 5 and more may be 
      defined by an organizational security policy. 

     - securityCategories provides additional authorization information. 

   If a trust anchor's public key is used directly, then the Clearance 
   associated with the trust anchor, if any, should be used as the 
   effective clearance (also defined as effective-clearance for a 
   certification path). 

3. Authority Clearance Constraints Certificate Extension 

   The Authority Clearance Constraints certificate extension indicates 
   to the relying party what clearances should be acceptable for the 
   subject of the last certificate in the certification path containing 
   the TA, the CA, or the AA.  It is only meaningful in trust anchor, CA 
   certificates, or AA certificates.  A trust anchor, CA certificate, or 
   AA certificate MUST include either zero or one instance of the 
   Authority Clearance Constraints certificate extension.  The Authority 
   Clearance Constraints certificate extension MAY be critical or non-
   critical. 

   Absence of this certificate extension in a TA, in a CA certificate, 
   or in an AA certificate indicates that clearance of the subject of 

 
 
Turner & Chokhani      Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft   Clearance and CA Clearance Constraints       July 2008 
    

   the last certificate in the certification path containing the TA, the 
   CA or the AA is not constrained by the respective TA, CA or AA. 

   The following object identifier identifies the Authority Clearance 
   Constraints certificate extension: 

     id-ce-authorityClearanceConstraints OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { 
       id-TBSL } 

   The ASN.1 syntax for the Authority Clearance Constraints certificate 
   extension is as follows: 

     AuthorityClearanceConstraints ::= SEQUENCE SIZE (1..MAX) 
                                         OF Clearance 

   The syntax for Authority Clearance Constraints certificate extension 
   contains Clearance values that the CA or the AA asserts.  The 
   sequence MUST NOT include more than one entry with the same policyId.  
   This constraint is enforced during Clearance and Authority Clearance 
   Constraints Processing described below.  If more than one entry with 
   the same policyId is present in AuthorityClearanceConstraints 
   certificate extension, the certification path is rejected. 

4. Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraints Processing 

   Authority Clearance Constraints certificate extension processing 
   determines the effective clearance (henceforth called effective-
   clearance) for the end certificate.  Authority Clearance Constraints 
   certificate extension in the TA and in each certificate up to but not 
   including the end certificate in a certification path impact the 
   effective-clearance.  If there is more than one path to the end-
   entity certificate, each path is processed independently.  The 
   process involves two steps: 

     1) collecting the Authority Clearance Constraints; and 

     2) using Authority Clearance Constraints in the certification path 
       and the Clearance in the end certificate to determine the 
       effective-clearance for the subject of the end certificate. 

   Assuming a certification path consisting of n certificates, the 
   effective-clearance for the subject of the end certificate is the 
   intersection of Clearance in the subject certificate, Authority 
   Clearance Constraints, if present, in trust anchor and all Authority 
   Clearance Constraints present in intermediate certificates.  Any 
   effective-clearance calculation algorithm that performs this 
   calculation and provides the same outcome as the one from the 
 
 
Turner & Chokhani      Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft   Clearance and CA Clearance Constraints       July 2008 
    

   algorithm described herein is considered compliant with the 
   requirements of this RFC. 

   When processing a certification path, Authority Clearance Constraints 
   are maintained in one state variable: permitted-clearances.  When 
   processing begins, permitted-clearances is initialized to the special 
   value all-clearances if Authority Clearance Constraints certificate 
   extension is not present in the trust anchor, otherwise this value is 
   initialized to Authority Clearance Constraints associated with the 
   trust anchor.  The permitted-clearances state variable is updated 
   each time an intermediate certificate that contains an Authority 
   Clearance Constraints certificate extension in the path is processed. 

   When processing the end certificate, the value in the Clearance 
   certificate extension in the end certificate is intersected with the 
   permitted-clearances state variable. 

   The output of Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraint 
   certificate extensions processing is the effective-clearance, which 
   could also be an empty list; and success or failure with reason code 
   for failure. 

4.1. Collecting Constraints 

   Authority Clearance Constraints are collected from the trust anchor 
   and the intermediate certificates in a certification path. 

4.1.1. Certification Path Processing 

   When processing Authority Clearance Constraints certificate extension 
   for the purposes of validating Clearance in the end certificate, the 
   processing described in this section or an equivalent algorithm MUST 
   be included in the certification path validation.  The processing is 
   presented as additions to the certification path validation algorithm 
   described in section 6 of [RFC5280]. 

4.1.1.1. Inputs 

   Trust anchor information may include the 
   AuthorityClearanceConstraints structure to specify Authority 
   Clearance Constraints for the trust anchor.  The trust anchor may be 
   constrained or unconstrained. 

4.1.1.2. Initialization 

   Examine the trust anchor information and verify that it does not 
   contain more than one instance of AuthorityClearanceConstraints 
 
 
Turner & Chokhani      Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft   Clearance and CA Clearance Constraints       July 2008 
    

   extension.  If the trust anchor information contains more than one 
   instance of AuthorityClearanceConstraints extension, set effective-
   clearance to an empty list, set error code to "multiple extension 
   instances", and exit with failure. 

   Create a state variable named permitted-clearances.  If the trust 
   anchor contains an AuthorityClearanceConstraints extension, then the 
   initial value of permitted-clearances is the 
   AuthorityClearanceConstraints extension from the trust anchor.   

   Examine the permitted-clearances for the same Policy ID appearing 
   more then once.  If a policyID appears more than once in the 
   permitted-clearance state variable, set effective-clearance to an 
   empty list, set error code to "multiple instances of same clearance", 
   and exit with failure. 

   If the trust anchor does not contain an AuthorityClearanceConstraints 
   extension, the permitted-clearances variable is assigned the special 
   value all-clearances. 

4.1.1.3. Basic Certificate Processing 

   If the certificate is the last certificate (i.e., certificate n), 
   skip the steps listed in this section. 

   Examine the certificate and verify that it does not contain more than 
   one instance of AuthorityClearanceConstraints extension.  If the 
   certificate contains more than one instance of 
   AuthorityClearanceConstraints extension, set effective-clearance to 
   an empty list, set error code to "multiple extension instances", and 
   exit with failure. 

   If the AuthorityClearanceConstraints certificate extension is not 
   present in the certificate, no action is taken, and the permitted-
   clearances value is unchanged. 

   If the AuthorityClearanceConstraints certificate extension is present 
   in the certificate, set the variable temp-clearances to 
   AuthorityClearanceConstraints certificate extension.  Examine the 
   temp-clearances for the same Policy ID appearing more then once.  If 
   a policyID appears more than once in the temp-clearances state 
   variable, set effective-clearance to an empty list, set error code to 
   "multiple instances of same clearance", and exit with failure. 

   If the AuthorityClearanceConstraints certificate extension is present 
   in the certificate and permitted-clearances contains the all-

 
 
Turner & Chokhani      Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft   Clearance and CA Clearance Constraints       July 2008 
    

   clearances special value, then assign permitted-clearances the value 
   of the temp-clearances. 

   If the AuthorityClearanceConstraints certificate extension is present 
   in the certificate and permitted-clearances does not contain the all-
   clearances special value, take the intersection of temp-clearances 
   and permitted-clearances by repeating the following steps for each 
   clearance in the permitted-clearances state variable: 

     - If the policyID associated with the clearance is absent in the 
      temp-clearances, delete the clearance structure associated with 
      the policyID from the permitted-clearances state variable. 

     - If the policyID is present in the temp-clearances: 

       -- For every classList bit, assign the classList bit a value of 
          one (1) for the policyID in permitted-clearances state 
          variable if the bit is one (1) in both the permitted-
          clearances state variable and the temp-clearances for that 
          policyID; otherwise assign the bit a value of zero (0). 

       -- If no bits are one (1) for the classList, delete the clearance 
          structure associated with the policyID from the permitted-
          clearances state variable and skip the next step of processing 
          securityCategories. 

       -- Calculate securityCategories intersection in accordance with 
          guidelines associated with the security policy represented by 
          the policyID. 

4.1.1.4. Preparation for Certificate i+1 

   No additional action associated with the Clearance attribute or 
   AuthorityClearanceConstraints certificate extensions is taken during 
   this phase of certification path validation as described in section 6 
   of [RFC5280]. 

4.1.1.5. Wrap-up Procedure 

   To complete the processing, perform the following steps for the last 
   certificate (i.e., certificate n). 

   Examine the certificate and verify that it does not contain more than 
   one instance of Clearance attribute.  If the certificate contains 
   more than one instance of Clearance attribute, set effective-
   clearance to an empty list, set error code to "multiple instances of 
   an attribute", and exit with failure. 
 
 
Turner & Chokhani      Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft   Clearance and CA Clearance Constraints       July 2008 
    

   If the Clearance attribute is not present in the end certificate, set 
   effective-clearance to an empty list and exit with success. 

   Set effective-clearance to the value from the Clearance attribute in 
   the end certificate.  Let us say policyID in effective-clearance is 
   X. 

   If permitted-clearance is an empty list, set effective-clearance to 
   an empty list and exit with success. 

   If the permitted-clearance has special value of all-clearances, exit 
   with success. 

   If the policyID X in effective-clearance is absent from the 
   permitted-clearance, set effective-clearance to an empty list and 
   exit with success. 

   Assign those classList bits in effective-clearance a value of one (1) 
   that have a value of one (1) both in effective-clearance and in the 
   clearance structure in permitted-clearance associated with policyID 
   X.  Assign all other classList bits in effective-clearance a value of 
   zero (0). 

   If none of the classList bits have a value of one (1) in effective-
   clearance, set effective-clearance to an empty list and exit with 
   success. 

   Set securityCategories in effective-clearance as an intersection of 
   the securityCategories in the effective-clearance and 
   securityCategories in the permitted-clearances for policyID X as 
   defined by the policyID X. 

   Exit with Success 

4.1.1.6. Outputs 

   If certification path validation processing succeeds, effective-
   clearance contains the effective clearance for the subject of the 
   certification path.  Processing also returns success or failure 
   indication and reason for failure, if applicable. 

5. Application of Algorithm to Attribute Certificates 

   The algorithm presented in Section 4 is public key certificate 
   centric.  Its application to attribute certificates is 
   straightforward as described below. 

 
 
Turner & Chokhani      Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft   Clearance and CA Clearance Constraints       July 2008 
    

   If the current [RFC3281] constraint of not having chain of attribute 
   certificate chain is observed, the AC Issuer (i.e., AA) Authority 
   Clearance Constraints is used as the TA Authority Clearance 
   Constraints for the initialization step described in Section 4.1.1.2. 
   Since there is no intermediate steps, sections 4.1.1.3. and 4.1.1.4. 
   will not be executed. 

   If the current [RFC3281] constraint of not having chain of attribute 
   certificate chain is removed, the Source of Authority in the 
   Attribute Certificate chain becomes the TA for the purpose of Section 
   4.  

6. Security Considerations 

   Certificate issuers must recognize that absence of the 
   AuthorityClearanceConstraints in a CA or AA certificate means that in 
   terms of the clearance, the subject Authority is not constrained. 

   Absence of Clearance attribute in a certificate means that the 
   subject has not been assigned any clearance. 

   If there is no Clearance associated with a TA, it means that the TA 
   has not been assigned any clearance. 

   If the local security policy considers the clearance held by a 
   subject or those supported by a CA or AA to be sensitive, then the 
   Clearance attribute or Authority Clearance Constraints should only be 
   included if the subject's and Authority's certificate can be privacy 
   protected.  Also in this case, distribution of trust anchors and 
   associated Authority Clearance Constraints extension or Clearance 
   must also be privacy protected. 

7. IANA Considerations 

   None.  Please remove this section prior to publication as an RFC. 

8. References 

8.1. Normative References 

   [RFC2119]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
               Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

   [RFC5280]   Cooper, D. et. al., "Internet X.509 Public Key 
               Infrastructure Certificate and Certification Revocation 
               List (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, May 2008. 

 
 
Turner & Chokhani      Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft   Clearance and CA Clearance Constraints       July 2008 
    

   [RFC3281]   Farrell, S., and Housley, R., "An Internet Attribute 
               Certificate Profile for Authorization", RFC 3281, April 
               2002. 

   [X.680]     ITU-T Recommendation X.680 (1997) | ISO/IEC 8824-1:1997. 
               Information Technology - Abstract Syntax Notation One. 

8.2. Informative References 

   [RFC3114]   Nicolls, W., "Implementing Company Classification Policy 
               with S/MIME Security Label", RFC3114, May 2002. 




































 
 
Turner & Chokhani      Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft   Clearance and CA Clearance Constraints       July 2008 
    

Appendix A. ASN.1 Module 

   This appendix provides the normative ASN.1 definitions for 
   the structures described in this specification using ASN.1 as defined 
   in X.680. 

   Clearance-AuthorityClearanceConstraints93 { id-TBSL } 

   DEFINITIONS IMPLICIT TAGS ::= 

   BEGIN 

   -- EXPORTS ALL -- 

   IMPORTS 

   -- IMPORTS from [RFC3281] 

   id-at-clearance, Clearance 
      FROM PKIXAttributeCertificate 
      { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)  
        security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) id-mod(0) 
        id-mod-attribute-cert(12) 
      } 

   -- IMPORTS from [RFC5280] 

   EXTENSION 
     FROM PKIX1Explicit93  
      { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1) 
        security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) id-mod(0) 
        id-pkix1-explicit-93(3) 
      } 
   ; 

   -- Clearance attribute OID and syntax 

   -- The following is a '93 version for clearance. 
   -- It is included for convenience. 

   -- id-at-clearance OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= 
   --  { joint-iso-ccitt(2) ds(5) module(1) selected-attribute-types(5) 
   --    clearance (55) 
   -- } 



 
 
Turner & Chokhani      Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft   Clearance and CA Clearance Constraints       July 2008 
    

   -- Clearance  ::=  SEQUENCE { 
   --   policyId            [0] OBJECT IDENTIFIER, 
   --   classList           [1] ClassList DEFAULT {unclassified}, 
   --   securityCategories  [2] SET OF SecurityCategory  OPTIONAL 
   -- } 

   -- ClassList  ::=  BIT STRING { 
   --   unmarked      (0), 
   --   unclassified  (1), 
   --   restricted    (2), 
   --   confidential  (3), 
   --   secret        (4), 
   --   topSecret     (5) 
   -- } 

   -- SECURITY-CATEGORY ::= TYPE-IDENTIFIER 

   -- SecurityCategory ::= SEQUENCE { 
   --   type  [0]   
   --      IMPLICIT TYPE-IDENTIFIER.&id({SupportedSecurityCategories}), 
   --   value [1] 
   --      TYPE-IDENTIFIER.&Type({SupportedSecurityCategories}{@type}) 
   -- } 

   -- Authority Clearance Constraints certificate extension OID 
   -- and syntax 

   id-ce-AuthorityClearanceConstraints OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-TBSL } 

   AuthorityClearanceConstraints EXTENSION ::= { 
     SYNTAX         AuthorityClearanceConstraints 
     IDENTIFIED BY  id-ce-AuthorityClearanceConstraints 
   } 
    
   AuthorityClearanceConstraints ::= SEQUENCE SIZE (1..MAX) OF Clearance 

   END 










 
 
Turner & Chokhani      Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft   Clearance and CA Clearance Constraints       July 2008 
    

Author's Addresses 

   Sean Turner 

   IECA, Inc. 
   3057 Nutley Street, Suite 106 
   Fairfax, VA 22031 
   USA 

   EMail: turners@ieca.com 

   Santosh Chokhani 
   CygnaCom Solutions, Inc. 

   Email: schokhani@ocygnacom.com 
































 
 
Turner & Chokhani      Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft   Clearance and CA Clearance Constraints       July 2008 
    

Full Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS 
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

Intellectual Property 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

Acknowledgment 

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF 
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA). 



 
 
Turner & Chokhani      Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 15] 

