

                 Provider Provisioned VPN WG                                Marco Carugi 
                 Internet Draft:                                         Nortel Networks 
                 draft-carugi-ppvpn-l2solution-doc-guidelines-                           
                 01.txt 
                 Expiration Date: August 2003                                            
                                                                                         
                                                                                          
                                                                            February 2003 
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                   
                        Guidelines on the structure of a PPVPN Layer 2 solution document 
                                                      
                
                   
                1. Status of this Memo 
                   
                  This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
                  all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
                   
                  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
                  Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
                  other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
                  Drafts. 
                   
                  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
                  months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
                  at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
                  reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
                   
                  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
                       http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
                  The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
                       http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
                
                
                   
                2. Abstract 
                   
                  This document provides guidelines on how to structure a PPVPN Layer 2 
                  solution document.  
                  The intent is to provide a common way of describing the various 
                  functional components of a Layer 2 solution, making easier their 
                  identification as well as the mechanisms providing those 
                  functionalities, and, possibly, facilitating further convergence in 
                  the solution space. 
                  These guidelines have been discussed internally to the PPVPN Layer 2 
                  design team and agreed as a recommendation, although not mandatory, 
                  to authors of PPVPN L2 solution drafts. 
                   
                3. Conventions Used 
                   
                    
                     Carugi    Expires: August 2003               [Page 1] 
                     Internet Draft    draft-carugi-ppvpn-l2solution-doc-guidelines-
                     00.txt    Feb 2003 
                   
                  The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
                  "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
                  this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC-2119]. 
                
                    
                
                4. Recommended structure of a Layer 2 solution document 
                   
                  The following constitutes the recommended structure: 
                   
                
                  Status of this Memo  
                  Copyright Notice  
                  Abstract  
                  Conventions Used  
                  Table of Contents (optional)  
                   
                  1. Introduction  
                  (The following sections are not mandatory, just suggestions)  
                  1.1 Overview  
                  1.2 Scope  
                  1.3 Functional Components  
                  (components of functional decomposition described in this doc)  
                   
                  2. Topology  (aka Model, Functional Architecture, ...)  
                  2.1 Picture   
                  2.2 Terminology  
                   
                  3. Control Plane  
                  3.1 Discovery (optional)  
                  3.1.1 Functions  
                  (discovery functions offered in this doc)  
                  3.1.2 Protocol Specification  
                  (if discovery functions exist, protocol extensions)  
                  3.2 Demultiplexor Exchange  (optional)  
                  3.2.1 Functions  
                  (exchange functions offered in this doc)  
                  3.2.2 Protocol Specification  
                  (if exchange functions exist, protocol extensions)  
                  3.3 Signaling (optional)    
                  3.3.1 Functions  
                  (signaling components covered in this doc)  
                  3.3.2 Protocol Specification  
                   
                   
                  4. Data Plane  
                  4.1 Encapsulation  
                  (preferably just a pointer to docs in PWE3 WG)  
                  4.2 Forwarding  
                   
                  5. Deployment Scenarios (optional)  
                  5.1 Decomposition (if any) 
                  (axes of decomposition)  
                   
                     Carugi    Expires: August 2003               [Page 2] 
                     Internet Draft    draft-carugi-ppvpn-l2solution-doc-guidelines-
                     00.txt    Feb 2003 
                   
                  5.1.1 Motivation for decomposition 
                  (criteria, applicability)  
                  5.1.2 Protocol Extensions in support of decomposition  
                  (including requirements)   
                  5.2  Inter-AS 
                  5.3, 5.4, ‡ Other scenarios (QoS support, resiliency, etc.) 
                   
                  6. Information model (optional)  
                  (it may alternatively follow section 2)  
                   
                  7. Security Considerations  
                   
                  8. Compliance with PPVPN L2 requirements    
                  It describes how the solution satisfies (which) requirements [1]   
                  (this section may alternatively constitute a specific complementary draft)   
                                     
                  9.  References 
                  9.1 Normative References  
                  9.2 Informative References  
                   
                  10. IANA Considerations  
                   
                  11. Acknowledgments  
                   
                  12. Authors' Addresses  
                   
                  13. Full Copyright Statement 
                
                
                
                5. Security Considerations  
                       
                   No security issues for this memo.  
                   
                       
                6. References 
                   
                  [1]  Serbest, Y, Augustyn, W (editors) "Service Requirements for 
                  Layer 2 Provider Provisioned Virtual Private Networks", work in 
                  progress  
                   
                
                7. Authors' Addresses 
                   
                  Marco Carugi 
                  Nortel Networks  
                  Parc d∆activitâs de Magny Les Jeunes Bois 
                  78928 Chateaufort - France  
                  Phone: (33) 1 6955 7027 
                  Email: marco.carugi@nortelnetworks.com 
                   
                   
                     Carugi    Expires: August 2003               [Page 3] 
                     Internet Draft    draft-carugi-ppvpn-l2solution-doc-guidelines-
                     00.txt    Feb 2003 
                   
                8. Full Copyright Statement  
                       
                  Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.   
                  This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to  
                  others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it  
                  or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published  
                  and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any  
                  kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph  
                  are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this  
                  document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing  
                  the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other  
                  Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of  
                  developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for  
                  copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be  
                  followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than  
                  English.  
                       
                  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be  
                  revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.  
                  This document and the information contained herein is provided on an  
                  "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING  
                  TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING  
                  BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION  
                  HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF  
                  MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
                   
                     Carugi    Expires: August 2003               [Page 4] 