
INTERNET-DRAFT                                   W. Biemolt,         SEC
NGTRANS WG                                       M. Kaat,            SEC
March 2000                                       T. Larder,        CISCO
                                                 H. Steenman,       AT&T
                                                 R. van der Pol, SURFnet
                                                 G. Tsirtsis,         BT
                                                 Y. Sekiya,          ISI
                                                 A. Durand,          SUN
   




	A Guide to the Introduction of IPv6 in the IPv4 World

      <draft-ietf-ngtrans-introduction-to-ipv6-transition-03.txt>


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

Abstract

   This document is a guide to the introduction of IPv6 in the IPv4 
   based Internet or Intranets.  Several general issues to start IPv6 
   networking in a predominantly IPv4 world are discussed, such as IPv6
   addresses, IPv6 DNS and routing issues.  Short descriptions are given
   of the different transition tools and mechanisms that
   translate between IPv6 and IPv4 and/or tunnel IPv6 over IPv4.  The 
   remainder of this document describes how IPv6 can be introduced in 
   various environments, such as ISPs, Internet Exchanges and end user 
   environments.  Suggestions are given on the use of the different 
   translation and migration tools in each environment.



Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 1]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000





Table of Contents

   Status of this Memo..............................................1
   1. Introduction .................................................3
   2. General IPv6 deployment issues................................3
     2.1 IPv6 addressing ...........................................4
     2.2 IPv6 and DNS...............................................4
     2.3 Routing in IPv6............................................4
   3. Basic transition mechanism....................................7
     3.1 Dual IP stack..............................................7
     3.1 Tunneling..................................................7
   4. The Tools In System Solutions.................................7
     4.2 Connecting IPv6 islands....................................7
       4.2.1 Configured tunnels.....................................7
       4.2.2 Automatic tunnels......................................7
       4.2.3 Tunnel broker..........................................7
       4.2.4 6TO4...................................................8
       4.2.5 6OVER4.................................................8
     4.3 Communication between IPv4 and IPv6 nodes..................9
       4.3.1 Dual stack model......................................10
       4.3.2 Limited Dual stack model..............................10
       4.3.3 SOCKS64...............................................10
       4.3.4 SIIT..................................................10
       4.3.5 NAT-PT................................................10
       4.3.6 BIS...................................................10
       4.3.7 DSTM..................................................10
   5. Case Studies, categorization.................................11
     5.1 Large organization with a lot of global IPv4 addresses....11
     5.2 Large organization with few global IPv4 addresses.........12
     5.3 Office or home network with one global ipv4 address.......12
     5.4 New network with brand new services.......................13
     5.5 ISP case..................................................13
     5.6 Internet Exchange.........................................14
   6. Case studies, examples.......................................15
     6.1 Isolated IPv6 host in an IPv4 Domain......................15
     6.2 Small/Medium Organization using a NAT.....................18
     6.3 Introducing IPv6 in an ISP environment....................23
     6.4 Internet Exchange.........................................25
   7. Security considerations......................................27
   References......................................................27
   Authors' addresses..............................................29
   Appendix A - Example of IPv6 address usage......................30
      A.1 IPv6 Address Assignments.................................30
      A.2 IPv6 Registration Issues.................................32
      A.3 Example of IPv6 address usage............................32
   Appendix B - Example of IPv6 address usage......................35
      B.1 Forward mapping..........................................35
      B.2 Reverse mapping..........................................35
      B.3 Implementations..........................................36







Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 2]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000



1. Introduction
 
   This document is a guide to the introduction of IPv6 in the current
   IPv4 based Internet or Intranets.  Section 2 shortly introduces some
   aspects concerning the introduction of IPv6 like addressing, DNS and
   routing.  Addressing and DNS issues are more extensively discussed in
   the Appendices A and B respectively.
    
   In sections 3 and 4 short descriptions will be given of the different
   translation and migration tools and mechanisms that translate between
   IPv6 and IPv4 and/or tunnel IPv6 over IPv4.
    
   In sections 5 and 6 we will discuss how IPv6 can be introduced in
   various typical environments. An overview is presented in chapter 5 
   where environments are categorized and the applicability of the 
   different tools are discussed. In chapter 6 some examples of "real 
   live" environments are presented.
    
   This document addresses the use of IPv6 in a unicast environment.
   Migration of IPv4 to IPv6 multicast environments has not been 
   considered.
    
   This document is not intended to describe the complete migration from
   IPv4 to IPv6 for the whole Internet. It is however an attempt to 
   describe the possibilities to introduce IPv6 in a predominantly IPv4
   environment and have both IPv6 and IPv4 connectivity within the 
   desired scope.
   



2. General IPv6 deployment issues

   The implementation of an IPv6 network is comparable to the
   implementation of an IPv4 network.  In both cases address space needs
   to be obtained and the Domain Name System (DNS) and routing should
   be set up correctly.  In Appendix A it is discussed how to obtain
   aggregatable globally routable IPv6 address space [RFC2374] and how
   to register this address space.  Furthermore, it is discussed how
   IPv6 hosts can be registered in the DNS.  Section 2.3 discusses some
   IPv6 routing issues.

   The transition from current IPv4 hosts will most probably follow a
   dual stack strategy.  It is also foreseen however that new devices
   might be introduced on the network as IPv6 only hosts.  Besides 
   upgrading hosts and routers to IPv6 a few other issues need to be 
   addressed like addressing, DNS and routing. These are shortly
   discussed in the following paragraph.




Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 3]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000



2.1 IPv6 addressing

   Some general information concerning IPv6 addressing is discussed in
   Appendix A.

2.2 IPv6 and DNS

   Applications are not supposed to directly handle IP addresses but
   should use names.  The mapping between host names and IP addresses
   in the Domain Name System (DNS) is a crucial service on the Internet
   [RFC1034, RFC1035].  This service is provided by DNS servers. 
   Using an A record a name can point to an IPv4 address
   (forward mapping) and using a PTR record an IPv4 address can be
   mapped back to a name (reverse mapping).

   This mechanism cannot easily be extended to support IPv6 addresses.
   Some enhancements are needed to use DNS with IPv6 addresses
   [RFC1886].  To support the storage of IPv6 addresses within DNS and 
   to facilitate renumbering currently other extensions are being 
   defined [DNSLOOKUP].

   A more extensive discussion on IPv6 and DNS is presented in 
   Appendix B.

2.3 Routing in IPv6

   To exchange reachability information routing protocols are used.
   There are two types of routing protocols, the intra-domain (IGP) and
   inter-domain (EGP) routing protocols.  In the IPv4 world commonly
   used IGPs are RIP, OSPF and IS-IS and the EGP that is used is
   mostly BGP4.  Besides the use of routing protocols static routing can
   also be used.

   To use routing protocols in IPv6 networks they should be adjusted
   to be able to handle IPv6 routing information.
   RIP (RIPng) [RFC2080, RFC2081], BGP4 (BGP4+) [RFC2283, BGP4-IPV6],
   and OSPF [RFC2740] have IPv6 extensions defined.
   On the core of the 6bone, BGP4+ is recommended.

   IPv6 routing is very strict in aggregation.  Care must be taken what
   to announce to other ISPs, especially in peerings with other TLA
   ISPs.  ISPs should only announce sub-TLAs and smaller (i.e. at most 
   a /29) to other TLA ISPs.  The TLA ISP can decide which (sub-)TLAs it
   will announce to another TLA ISPs according to its routing policy.
   The TLA ISP is allowed to announce prefixes larger than a /29 to



Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 4]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000



   ISPs and customers that fall inside its own (sub-)TLA.  Usually, a
   /48 is the largest prefix that will be announced.

   An NLA ISP can be multi-homed to several TLA ISPs.  The NLA ISP will
   get a next level NLA from all of them, but the NLA ISP should not
   announce these NLAs to all TLA ISPs.  The NLA ISP should only 
   announce the NLA that was given by that TLA ISP to that TLA ISP.  On
   the other side, the NLA ISP will announce all NLAs to its customers.

   For specific information about routing aspects of IPv6 transition
   see [RFC2185] and for 6bone routing guidelines see by [RFC2772]
   that obsoletes [RFC2546].




3. Basic transition mechanism


    [RFC1933] defines some basic mechanism:

   
    - Dual IP stack. Providing complete support for both IPv4 and
      IPv6 in hosts or routers.

    - IPv6 over IPv4 tunneling. Encapsulating IPv6 packets within
      IPv4 headers to carry them over IPv4 routing infrastructures.



       +-------------------+  +--------+
       | application       |  | IPv6   |
       +-------------------+  | domain |   +--------+
       |  TCP / UDP        |  +--------*---*        |
       +-------------------+               |  IPv4  |
       |    IPv4 | IPv6    |               |networks|
       +-------------------+               |        *---*--------+
       |   network layer   |               +--------+   |  IPv6  |
       |                   |                            | domain |
       +-------------------+                            +--------+

       a. dual stack node      b. route IPv6 over IPv4 only networks


3.1 Dual IP stack

   Dual stack nodes will be able to interoperate directly with both
   IPv4 and IPv6 nodes.  They must provide resolver libraries capable of
   dealing with the IPv4 A records as well as the IPv6 AAAA or A6 records.
   When both A and AAAA or A6 records are listed in the DNS there are three
   different options [RFC1933], (i) return only IPv6 address(es), (ii)
   return only IPv4 address(es) or (iii) return both IPv4 and IPv6
   addresses.  The selection of which address type to return, or, in
   which order can affect what type of IP traffic is generated.  

3.2 Tunneling

   IPv6 nodes (or networks) that are separate by IPv4 infrastructures
   can build a virtual link by configuring a tunnel.  IPv6 packets going
   towards another IPv6 domain will then be encapsulated within IPv4
   packets.  The tunnel end-points are two IPv4 addresses and
   two IPv6 addresses.  Two types of tunneling can be employed:
   configured and automatic.  Configured tunnels are created by
   manual configuration.  The 6bone itself is an example of a network
   containing mainly configured tunnels.
   Automatic tunnels on the other hand do not need manual configuration.  The
   tunnel end-points are automatically determined by using IPv4 compatible
   IPv6 addresses [RFC2373].



4. The Tools In System Solutions


   When introduicing IPv6 in the Internet, one faces two different
   sets of problems. The first one is related to have IPv6
   communications among two or more IPv6 islands isolated in the
   IPv4 world. The second set is related to the establishment of
   (or some sort of) communications between the existing IPv4 world 
   and the new IPv6 world.
   
   In the first set of problems, solutions are generaly based
   on dual stacks routers and IPv6 in IPv4 tunnels.

   Mechanism to solve the second set of problems rely on dual stack
   techniques, application level gateways, NAT technology or on
   temporary allocation of IPv4 address and IPv4 in IPv6 tunneling.



4.1 Connecting IPv6 islands

   The mechanism describe here are designed to enable IPv6
   communication between IPv6 islands isolated in the IPv4 world.
   All of them relay on tunnels.


4.1.1 Configured tunnels

   Manually configured tunnels can be used to connect IPv6 hosts or
   networks over an IPv4 infrastructure.  Typically configured tunnels
   are used between sites where traffic will be exchanged regularly.

   Applicability scope:        site 
   IPv4 requirements:          IPv4 inter connectivity between sites 
   IPv4 address requirements:  >= 1 per site
   IPv6 requirements:          none
   IPv6 address requirements:  none specific 
   Host requirements:          IPv6 stack or IPv4/IPv6 stack
   Router requirements:        IPv4/IPv6 stack 
   Other requirements:         none


4.1.2 Automatic tunnels

   Automatic tunnels are used as configured tunnels to connect separated
   IPv6 hosts or networks.  Automatic tunnels are created when needed 
   and broken up when no longer necessary.  Typically Automatic tunnels
   are used between individual hosts or between networks where only 
   incidentally there is a need for traffic exchange.  A pre-requisite 
   for the use of Automatic tunnels is the existence of IPv4 compatible 
   addresses for the IPv6 hosts that need intercommunication.  These 
   addresses allow the hosts to derive the IPv4 addresses of the tunnel
   endpoints from the IPv6 addresses.

   Applicability scope:        host
   IPv4 requirements:          IPv4 interconnectivity between sites 
   IPv4 address requirements:  >= 1 per site
   IPv6 requirements:          none 
   IPv6 address requirements:  IPv4 compatible addresses 
   Host requirements:          IPv4/IPv6 stack 
   Router requirements:        none
   Other requirements:         none

4.1.3 Tunnel Broker

   Configuring tunnels usually require cooperation of the two parties
   to set up the correct tunnel enpoints. The tunnel broker model
   is a concept to help people to collect the necessary information to
   set up the tunnels. A tunnel broker can be viewed as an IPv6 ISP
   offering connectivity through IPv6 over IPv4 tunnels.
   Current implementations are web based tools that allows
   interactive setup of an IPv6 over IPv4 tunnel.  By requesting a
   tunnel, the host gets assigned an IPv6 address out of the address
   space of the tunnel provider.  DNS will be updated automatically. 
   The created tunnel will provide IPv6 connectivity between the tunnel
   provider's IPv6 environment and the isolated host.

   Applicability scope:        host
   IPv4 requirements:          none specific 
   IPv4 address requirements:  1 
   IPv6 requirements:          none 
   IPv6 address requirements:  none 
   Host requirements:          IPv4/IPv6 stack, IPv4 Web browser 
   Router requirements:        none 
   Other requirements:         Tunnel server


4.1.4 6TO4

   The 6to4 [6TO4] tool is applicable for the interconnection of
   isolated IPv6 domains in an IPv4 world.  The egress router of the
   IPv6 domain creates a tunnel to the other domain.  The IPv4 endpoints
   of the tunnel are identified in the prefix of the IPv6 domain.  This
   prefix is made up of a unique 6TO4 TLA plus an NLA that identifies
   the site by the IPv4 address of the translating egress router.

   Another interesting effect of 6to4 is that it automaticaly derives
   a /48 IPv6 from an IPv4 address. With this mechanism, sites can
   start to deploy IPv6 without having to ask IPv6 address space
   from the registries. It is also very valuable in the absence
   of IPv6 ISP as it reduce to zero the management of tunnels.

   Applicability scope:        site 
   IPv4 requirements:          IPv4 interconnectivity between sites 
   IPv4 address requirements:  >= 1 per site
   IPv6 requirements:          globally unique 6to4 prefix (TLA624)
   IPv6 address requirements:  none 
   Host requirements:          IPv6 stack 
   Router requirements:        implementation of special forwarding and 
                               decapsulation rules 
   Other requirements:         creation of DNS record that reflects 6TO4
                               prefix and "IPv4" address NLA

4.1.5 6OVER4

   6over4 [RFC2529] interconnects isolated IPv6 hosts in a site through
   IPv6 in IPv4 encapsulation without explicit tunnels.  A virtual link
   is created using an IPv4 multicast group with organizational local
   scope.  IPv6 multicast addresses are mapped to IPv4 multicast
   addresses to be able to do Neighbor Discovery.  To route between the
   IPv6 Internet and the 6over4 domain in an organization, a router
   needs to be configured as 6over4 on at least one interface.

   Applicability scope:        host 
   IPv4 requirements:          IPv4 multicast connectivity between hosts
   IPv4 address requirements:  1 per host
   IPv6 requirements:          none 
   IPv6 address requirements:  none
   Host requirements:          IPv4/IPv6 stack
   Router requirements:        6over4 configuration to route between
                               different virtual links and/or virtual
                               links and the IPv6 Internet 
   Other requirements:         To connect IPv6 hosts on different
                               physical links, IPv4 Multicast routing 
                               must be enabled on the routers connecting
                               the links

4.2 Communication between IPv4 and IPv6 nodes.

   when IPv6 islands are installed and connected together using
   one or several of the above mechanism, communication between
   IPv6 hosts is enabled. Communication between an IPv4 host and
   an IPv6 host may be important to establish. This can be done
   by several ways, either by relaying at the application level,
   or translating at the network layer or by temporarely allocating
   an IPv4 address to the IPv6 node.

   Note on Protocol Translation:

   Typically a protocol translator maps the fields in the packets header
   of one of the protocols to semantically similar fields in the packet
   header of the other protocol.
   A set of rules for the translation between IPv4
   and IPv6 is defined in the SIIT [RFC2765] proposal further discussed
   below.  It should be noted in IPv4 applications it is not uncommon
   that the application has knowledge of information from the network
   layer (like address length or addresses itself).  An example of this
   is FTP.  This makes it necessary not only to translate the network
   layer packets but also translate at the application layer.


4.2.1 Dual stack model

   In the dual stack model, all IPv6 nodes, hosts or routers, are
   dual stacked.  That way, communication to IPv4 nodes takes
   place with the IPv4 stack and communcation with the IPv6 world
   takes place with the IPv6 stack. The limitation of this approach
   is the need to allocate an IPv4 address to each new IPv6 equipment.

   Applicability scope:        site 
   IPv4 requirements:          IPv4 addressing plan and IPv4 routing plan
   IPv4 address requirements:  1 per host, many per router
   IPv6 requirements:          IPv6 addressing plan and IPv6 routing plan
   IPv6 address requirements:  1 per host, many per router
   Host requirements:          IPv4/IPv6 stack
   Router requirements:        IPv4/IPv6 stack, IPv6 routing protocols
   Other requirements:         


4.2.2 Limited Dual stack model

   In the limited dual stack model, only the "server" node are
   dual-stacked. The new "client node" are IPv6 only. A server node
   is defined as a node hosting enterprise Internet services, such as
   file sharing, DNS, web... A client node is defined as a node
   not offering those services.
   With this approach, much less IPv4 addresses are used,
   but communication between client nodes is broken. To re-establish
   it, application layer gateways are installed for strategic services.

   Applicability scope:        site 
   IPv4 requirements:          use existing IPv4 infrastructure
   IPv4 address requirements:  1 per server node
   IPv6 requirements:          IPv6 addressing plan and IPv6 routing plan
   IPv6 address requirements:  1 per new host, many per new router
   Host requirements:          IPv4/IPv6 stack on servers, IPv6 stack
                               on new clients
   Router requirements:        IPv4/IPv6 stack, IPv6 routing protocols
   Other requirements:         


4.2.3 SOCKS64

   The SOCKS Gateway [SOCKS-GATE] tool is a gateway system that accepts
   enhanced [SOCKS-EXT] SOCKS [RFC1928] connections from IPv4 hosts
   and relays it to IPv4 or IPv6 hosts.  Especially for "socksified"
   sites, who already use SOCKS aware clients and a SOCKS server, SOCKS
   Gateway provides an easy way to let IPv4 hosts connect to IPv6 hosts.
   No DNS modifications or address mapping is needed.  The principle can
   also be used to allow IPv6 hosts to connect to IPv4 hosts, IPv4 hosts
   over IPv6 networks and IPv6 hosts over IPv4 networks.  The later 
   cases resemble tunnel techniques without possible problems with
   fragmentation or hop limits.

   Applicability scope:        site
   IPv4 requirements:          none specific 
   IPv4 address requirements:  1 per host
   IPv6 requirements:          >= 1 per site
   IPv6 address requirements:  none
   Host requirements:          clients should be "socksified"
   Router requirements:        none 
   Other requirements:         dual stack SOCKS server


4.2.4 SIIT

   The [SIIT] protocol describes a method to translate between IPv6 and
   IPv4.  Translation is limited to the IP packet header.  The work does
   not describe a method to assign a temporary IPv4 address to the IPv6
   node. The translator is operating in a stateless mode, which means
   that translation needs to be done for every packet.

   Applicability scope:        site
   IPv4 requirements:          none
   IPv4 address requirements:  1 temporary per IPv6 host 
   IPv6 requirements:          none
   IPv6 address requirements:  IPv4-mapped and IPv4-translated addresses
                               to identify IPv4 nodes and IPv6 capable 
                               nodes respectively 
   Host requirements:          IPv6 stack 
   Router requirements:        none 
   Other requirements:         none


4.2.5 NAT-PT

   NAT-PT, defined in [RFC2766] address the communication between
   IPv6 only and IPv4 only hosts.  The communication is realised by use
   of a dedicated device that does the translation between IPv4 and IPv6
   addresses and keeps state during the time of the session.
   The NAT-PT device also includes an application layer gateway to make
   translation possible between IPv4 and IPv6 DNS requests and answers.

   Applicability scope:        site
   IPv4 requirements:          none 
   IPv4 address requirements:  >=1 per site 
   IPv6 requirements:          none 
   IPv6 address requirements:  none 
   Host requirements:          IPv6 stack 
   Router requirements:        none, but the router might be the NAT-PT
                               device 
   Other requirements:         none


4.2.6 BIS

   The Bump-In-The-Stack [RFC2767] model allows for the use of non IPv6
   capable applications on an IPv4 host to communicate with
   IPv6 only hosts.  Added to the IPv4 stack are three modules
   that intervene between the application and the network, an
   extension to the name resolver, an address mapper and a translator.
   The main idea is that when an IPv4 application needs to communicate
   with an IPv6 only host, the IPv6 address of that host is mapped into 
   an IPv4 address out of a pool local to the dual stack hosts.  The 
   IPv4 packet generated for the communication is translated into an 
   IPv6 packet according to SIIT.
   One can view Bump-in-the-stack as a particular implementation
   of NAT-PT within the IP stack of a host.
   Note that a similar technique can be implemented it the library
   level on a dual stack host.

   Applicability scope:        host
   IPv4 requirements:          none specific 
   IPv4 address requirements:  pool of private address space per host 
   IPv6 requirements:          none 
   IPv6 address requirements:  none 
   Host requirements:          IPv6/IPv4 stack plus extensions 
   Router requirements:        none 
   Other requirements:         none


4.2.7 DSTM

   Dual Stack Transition Mechanism [DSTM] is a combination of two
   mechanisms, Assignment of IPv4 Global Addresses to IPv6 hosts,
   (AIIH) and Dynamic Tunneling Interface (DTI).
   AIIH is based on cooperation between DNS and DHCPv6 [DHCPv6].

   The main idea is that when an IPv4/IPv6 host wants to communicate
   with an IPv4 only host, it requests for the duration of the
   communication a temporary IPv4 address to the AIIH server.
   If an IPv4 host wants to initiate a communication with
   an IPv4/IPv6 host, it first ask the DNS for an A record.
   The DNS server in charge of the final resolution will ask the DHCPv6
   server to allocate a temporary IPv4 address for the dual stack host
   and it will sends back this address in an A record to the IPv4 host.
   The DHCPv6 server will send a reconfigure command to the dual stack host
   to assign that temporary IPv4 address. The implementation of this part
   of the mechanism is optional.

   In the absence of IPv4 internal routing  infrastructure,
   the dual stack host will encapsulate IPv4 packets in IPv6 packets
   to a tunnel endpoint that wil decapsulate them and inject them
   in the IPv4 infrastructure. This encapsulation is done by the DTI
   virtual interface.

   Applicability scope:        site 
   IPv4 requirements:          none specific 
   IPv4 address requirements:  >= 1 per site 
   IPv6 requirements:          DHCPv6 extensions [DHCPv6-EXT]
   IPv6 address requirements:  none 
   Host requirements:          IPv4/IPv6 stack
   Router requirements:        none
   Other requirements:         none



5. Case Studies, categorization

5.1 Large organization with a lot of global IPv4 addresses

5.1.1 Description

   - large organization
   - multiple sites
   - No shortage of IPv4 address space, i.e. every host in the 
     organization has Global Iv4 address.
   - not possible to migrate at once
   - introduction of IPv6 will be in islands in IPv4 ocean

5.1.2 Possible transition mechanism(s)

5.1.2.1 Internal communication

   - Dual Stack/Tunneling
   - 6over4 if a multicast environment is available
   - Translation is only necessary if islands of IPv6 only devices are 
     created

5.1.2.2 External communication

   In case the provider does not supply IPv6 connectivity, for
   connectivity with other IPv6 domains use:

   - Configured Tunnels
   - Automatic tunnels (6TO4)

   For connectivity with the IPv4 world use the existing set-up.




Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 11]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000




5.2 Large organization with few global IPv4 addresses (a /24 or less)

5.2.1 Description

   - large organization 
   - multiple sites 
   - IPv4 address space used on the Intranet is from the private ranges 
   - not possible to migrate at once
   - introduction of IPv6 will be in islands in IPv4 ocean
   - NAT between organization network and commodity Internet

5.2.2 Possible transition mechanism(s)

5.2.2.1 Internal communication

   In essence this is the same situation is in the previous case, but
   now all hosts use private address space for internal communication
   over IPv4.

   - Dual Stack/Tunneling
   - 6over4 if a multicast environment is available
   - Translation is only necessary if islands of IPv6 only devices are 
     created within the organization

5.2.2.2 External communication

   In case the provider does not supply IPv6 connectivity.

   For connectivity with other IPv6 domains:

   - Configured or automatic (6TO4) tunnels originating on dual stack 
     routers that have at least one globally unique IPv4 address

   For connectivity with the IPv4 world:

   - Use the existing NAT box
   - Use DSTM to temporarily assign a globally unique IP address to the
     host.  If IPv6 only devices are introduced in the organization a 
     translator mechanism should be added for these devices to talk to 
     the IPv4 world
   - Implement NAT-PT (or similar)


5.3 Office or home network with ONE global ipv4 address

5.3.1 Description

   Small amount of hosts One network segment One IPv4 address typically



Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 12]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000



   assigned to NAT capable device.

5.3.2 Possible transition mechanism(s)

   Upgrade to Dual Stack those devices that need communicate with the
   outside world.  No need to assign IPv4 addresses on these.

5.3.2.1 Internal communication

   - IPv6 
   - IPv4 using private address space

5.3.2.2 External communication

   For connectivity to IPv6 world:

   - IPv6 if upstream provider is IPv6 capable 
   - Dynamic tunnels (6TO4) from egress router 
   - Configured tunnel to IPv6 capable provider

   For connectivity to IPv4 world:

   - NAT-PT


5.4 New network with brand new services


5.4.1 Description

         IPv6 only network whcih is constructed as new network
         with assigned IPv6 address space.

         In case the upstream provider is IPv6 capable.
         - IPv6 dedicated line
         - no IPv4 address

         In case the upstream provider is not IPv6 capable.
         - One IPv4 address and Configured/Automatic tunnels
         - Dual stack egress router

5.4.2 Possible transition mechanism(s)

5.4.2.1 Internal communication

         - IPv6 global address
         - IPv6 capable DNS

5.4.2.2 External communication

         In case the provider doesn't supply services for IPv6 only
         site such as
         - Dual stack DNS
         - NAT-PT ( for connectivity to IPv4 world )

         the site require

         - One IPv4 address
         - Dual stack DNS
         - NAT-PT (or similar one).


         In case the provider supply services for IPv6 only site.

         - Use the services in upstream provider for connectivity
           to IPv4 world


5.5 ISP case

5.5.1 Description

The primary function of an ISP is to offer transit services between its
customers, Intranets, Home Networks, individuals and the rest of the
Internet. ISPs also offer a number of other services like VPNs, services
like DNS and DHCP, content hosting etc etc.

The details of how an ISP migrates to IPv6 are obviously impossible to
specify in a document such as this one because of the variety of ISP
configurations, services, topologies and administration/business constrains
and relationships. It might be useful, however, to generally split ISPs in
two kinds.
a.      Backbone ISP  - meaning an ISP that owns a TLA prefix.
b.      Small ISP - meaning an ISP that does not own a TLA prefix

Note that the above breakdown is in practice nested in that the "small ISP"
may be provider for an even smaller ISP in which case it will also need some
of the mechanisms a "backbone ISP" may use etc etc.

5.5.2 Possible transition mechanism(s)

As a minimum ISPs should do the following 
*       Get IPv6 connectivity with the native IPv6 backbone. It would
clearly be desirable for native connectivity to the backbone, but tunnelled
(over IPv4) connectivity may satisfy initial demand. By doing this an ISP
satisfies its primary function which is transit services. This, however, is
clearly only the starting point, see "External Communication" for details.
*       Provide to their customers access to the above connectivity. Again
native transit of customer's traffic is the end goal but a number of steps
can be before this is possible.


5.5.2.1 Internal communication

Internally the ISP will most likely use native IPv6 and/or tunnels to
interconnect its IPv6 enabled routers.

5.5.2.2 External communication
External communication has two sides in the ISP case. One involves
connectivity to other ISPs and backbone networks and the other is about
connecting to customers. 

a. Connectivity to backbone and other ISPs
This type of connectivity will depend on the actual size of the ISP. 
Large ISP (that can have TLA address blocks) will almost certainly have
native connectivity to the IPv6 backbone and multiple peerings with other
big ISPs. The details of these peerings will be determined in the same way
that IPv4 peerings are.

Smaller ISPs (with no TLAs), that will be much larger in number than the big
ISPs, have to follow different logic. A small ISP will need to first to
connect to one or more large ISPs or Internet Exchanges in order to get
address space and connectivity to the IPv6 backbone. The type of this
connections would again be preferably native and possibly tunnelled.
Additionally a small ISP may choose to peer with other smaller ISPs in order
to increase its connectivity. 

b.      Connectivity to Customers

For the IPv6 connectivity to be useful to the customers the ISP needs to
set-up a mechanism for the connectivity to be accessible. A number of ways
to do this are available. For example:

*       Offer direct connectivity with the IPv6 backbone, using native
connections or as a non-desirable alternative configured tunnels
*       This is suitable for large customers or smaller ISPs
*       Provide a "virtual" Internet Access service using Tunnel Broker 
*       This is suitable for residential customers and possibly small
networks
*       Provide a 6to4 gateway to native IPv6 backbone
*       This is for customers that want to deploy IPv6 independently but
still need access to native IPv6 backbone
*       Provide Translation services (SIIT or NAT-PT) 
*       This is suitable for customers that want to deploy IPv6 only
technology but still want to preserve connectivity with the IPv4 Internet.

In practice a combination of the above is likely to be provided. The exact
combination will depend on customer demand and the ISP's preferences.
One thing that should always be kept in mind is that the end goal is for all
the above mechanisms to be phased out as IPv6 gets more and more deployed.
Therefore deployment of such mechanisms should be done in such way that it
does not hinders native IPv6 deployment inside the ISP.  



5.6 Internet Exchange

   [needs to be worked out ...]

5.6.1 Description

   [needs to be worked out ...]

5.6.2 Steps to be taken

   [needs to be worked out ...]

5.6.2 Possible transition mechanism(s)

   [needs to be worked out ...]

5.6.2.1 Internal communication

   [needs to be worked out ...]

5.6.2.2 External communication

   [needs to be worked out ...]















Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 14]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000



6 Case studies, examples.

   Below are some worked out examples for situations that might occur
   in real live environments.  Please note that the provided solutions
   are only meant as global directions and should not be considered as
   the final or even the best solution for the given situation.

6.1 Isolated IPv6 host in an IPv4 Domain

6.1.1 Introduction

   A Corporate Customer requires connection to a new bank system.  An
   IPv6 host in the customer's site is needed to connect to the bank's
   IPv6 only site.  The bank decided to implement IPv6 only, to benefit
   from its enhanced functionality e.g. standardised security.  The bank
   system is a specialised system and therefore only requires
   communication with customer sites.  The bank's border router (R2) is
   a dual router but nodes within the Bank's network are IPv6 only.

   [A diagram showing the current situation goes here]

6.1.2 Migration Requirements

   - IPv6 host needs to communicate with all other nodes within the
     customer network.
   - Continually maintain IPv6 functionality, therefore no use of
     translators should be permitted, need to maintain security and
     authentication procedures.
   - No changes should be made to the Bank's network.

6.1.3 Suitability of the Transition Categories for this Scenario

   IPv4 AND IPv6 MECHANISMS One of these mechanisms will be required to
   allow the node within the customer site to communicate with IPv6 and
   IPv4 nodes.

   TUNNELING AND ENCAPSULATION MECHANISMS Tunneling will be required to
   allow IPv6 packets to traverse the IPv4 network.

   TRANSLATORS Translators have been ruled out due to breaking end to
   end connectivity.

6.1.4 Suitability of these Transition Mechanisms for this Scenario

   DUAL STACK
   Dual stack will need to be deployed in the node installed in the 
   customer's premises.  To allow for some sort of routing through the 
   IPv4 network, the border router (R1) may also need to be installed 
   with both IPv4 and IPv6.



Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 15]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000




   DUAL STACK WITH CONFIGURED TUNNELS
   The IPv4/IPv6 host could be configured to tunnel all IPv6 packets to 
   the default IPv4/IPv6 router.  The packets would be encapsulated with
   in IPv4 so that they could be routed to the router through IPv4 
   infrastructure.  The problem is how does the host configure its IPv6
   address can neighbour solicitations be transferred to the router 
   through configured tunneling.  If you are configuring a tunnel to the
   router R1 you might as well just tunnel all the way to the Bank's 
   Router R2 and leave R1 as a normal IPv4 router.

   DUAL STACK WITH AIIH
   No need to use AIIH mechanism as only one host is connecting.

   DUAL STACK WITH DTI
   Not relevant as packets will mostly be traversing IPv4 networks.

   DUAL STACK WITH 6OVER4
   6over4 could be used if the network supports multicast routing.  As
   6over4 only works within a domain the IPv4 router (R1) would need to
   support IPv6 and also to have a 6over4 interface configured.  The 
   host could then communicate to router R1 using IPv4 multicast 
   packets.  The rest of the communication path would have to be carried
   out by another mechanism such as configured tunneling or 6to4.

   6TO4
   This could be implemented at the routers R1 and R2 using their
   unique IPv4 addresses as an NLA ID to create a unique IPv6 address.

6.1.5 Solution 1

   For this solution the IPv4 Network does Support Multicasting.

   Mechanisms Suggested in Solution

   - Dual Stack 
   - 6over4 
   - 6to4 or configured tunneling.

   ROUTER 
   The 6over4 mechanism will require the IPv4 network border router (R1)
   to be installed with IPv6 and a 6over4 interface.  Note this router 
   and the host does not need to be on the same segment, if in fact they
   were then there would be no requirement for 6over4.  The router and 
   the host are expected to have some IPv4 infrastructure between them.
   A Configured tunnel will need to be set up between R1 and R2 so the 
   IPv6 packets can traverse the IPv4 Internet.  The routers R1 and R2 
   could use the 6to4 method but this would mean that the router R2 
   would also have to implement 6to4 which in this case is not permitted



Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 16]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000



   as one of the requirements is that `No changes should be made to the
   Bank's network'.

   HOST 
   The IPv4 host needs to firstly implement dual stack, keeping its 
   original IPv4 address and then implementing 6over4 to allow the host
   to use encapsulation of IPv6 packets within IPv4 multicast packets.
   As this can only be used within an organisation, uses IPv4
   Organisation-Local Scope (239.192.0.0) the router (R1) needs to be
   configured to support IPv6 routing.  This host will find out its
   prefix by sending a router solicitation encapsulated within an IPv4
   multicast packet to router R1, the router will then return with a
   router advertisement using the same method of encapsulation within
   an IPv4 multicast packet.

   [A diagram showing the solution goes here]

6.1.6 Solution 2

   For this solution the IPv4 Network does not support Multicasting.

   Mechanisms Suggested in Solution

   - Dual Stack
   - Configured Tunneling

   HOST
   The host firstly needs to be implemented with the dual Stack
   mechanism.  As the host is not going to be able to automatically be
   allocated a globally unique IPv6 address this will need to be input
   manually using the prefix of the router (R2).  _Not sure if this can
   be done or is acceptable it could also find out its address by
   sending a router advertisement encapsulated within an IPv4 packet to
   the router R2_.  Secondly the host has to be manually configured with
   a tunnel from host to the Bank's Router (R2).  Once this is complete
   the Host will be able to communicate with the end node retaining the
   original functionality of the IPv6 packet.

   SECURITY IMPLEMENTATION FOR BOTH SOLUTIONS
   Both solutions will require some sort of Security implementation 
   whether the use of MD5 as an authentication algorithm or DES-CBC as 
   an encryption algorithm depends entirely on what the bank system 
   uses.

   Implementers should be aware that, in addition to possible attacks
   against IPv6, security attacks against IPv4 must also be
   considered.  Use of IP security at both IPv4 and IPv6 levels should
   nevertheless be avoided, for efficiency reasons. For example, if
   IPv6 is running encrypted, encryption of IPv4 would be redundant



Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 17]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000



   except if traffic analysis is felt to be a threat. If IPv6 is
   running authenticated, the authentication of IPv4 will add little.
   Conversely, IPv4 security will not protect IPv6 traffic once it
   leaves the IPv6-over- IPv4 domain. Therefore, implementing IPv6
   security is required even if IPv4 security is available [6over4].

   Although the above was written for 6over4, it is also particularly
   relevant to all tunneling mechanisms used.


6.2 Small/Medium Organization using a NAT

6.2.1 Introduction

   There are 9 offices, each office is linked using a point-to-point
   connection as shown in the diagram. Each site contains a DHCP, DNS
   and Mail server and routers are used between offices (as opposed to
   half bridges) to minimise traffic. Each router uses the RIP routing
   protocol.

   The network currently uses a private address space of 192.168/16
   prefix with each site using a /24 prefix as shown below:

   [Diagram No of users and addressing in each office goes here]

   HEAD OFFICE
   The Head Offices in London has a DNS server and a NAT at the border 
   to convert the non-globally unique IP addresses to globally unique IP
   addresses, this is used for security purposes as well as allowing its
   own internal addressing structure.  All external traffic and traffic
   that is destined for external sources is sent through the NAT.  This
   external traffic is minimal with a large percentage of this being 
   SMTP traffic.  Additionally the Head Office has a firewall which is 
   configured to route all incoming SMTP traffic from the ISP's servers
   IP address to the internal mail router which is a Linux machine 
   running SENDMAIL.  The internal mail router then looks at the domain 
   name in the message header and directly sends it to the relevant Mail
   server in each of the offices.  On this same machine runs the Proxy 
   Daemon Squid and NAT.  An Intranet Server runs on a separate Linux 
   machine using Apache.

   The NAT in the Billingsgate Office (Head Office) is used for external
   communication and is assigned one IPv4 address (194.14.1.1).  All 
   external communication will pass through this device.

   [Diagram showing the layout and communication links between the]
   [                   offices goes here                          ]





Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 18]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000



6.2.2 Assumptions

   Assume all testing and coding has been carried out on applications
   to allow them to run on IPv6 only hosts.  If any applications cannot
   be run on IPv6 hosts this is detailed in Scenario 4 (IPv4 dependent
   applications) and therefore is not covered in this scenario.

6.2.3 Migration Requirements

   - To maintain a translator at the network border for ease of
     maintenance.
   - To allow for communication with IPv4 only hosts at all times during
     the transition.
   - Eventually eliminate all IPv4 traffic within the network.

   Suitability of the Transition Categories for this Scenario.

   IPV4 OR IPV6 MECHANISMS
   One of these mechanisms will be required to allow nodes to 
   communicate with both IPv4 only nodes and IPv6 only nodes.

   TUNNELING AND ENCAPSULATION MECHANISMS 
   The Internet is predominantly IPv4 so communication from one site to 
   another will require the use of tunneling and encapsulation.

   TRANSLATORS
   A translator could be used to replace the NAT at the border of the 
   network.  This would work as communication outside the private 
   network is only to one particular end-point the ISP's server, so IPv4
   to IPv6 translation could occur.

6.2.4 Suitability of these Transition Mechanisms for this Scenario

   DUAL STACK AND NAT
   The dual stack mechanism if implemented in the correct order could be
   used on its own for communication within the private network but this
   would not allow communication with external nodes due to non-globally
   unique addressing.  IPv6 addressing could be used for communication 
   with other nodes in the network and IPv4 addressing for communication
   with the NAT.  This mechanism will not suffer from scalability issues
   in this scenario, there are enough IPv4 addresses to support dual 
   hosts as the address space is private.  Manageability of two 
   different IP addresses for each node is an issue, which will 
   complicate administration.

   DUAL STACK WITH CONFIGURED TUNNELS 
   To infer that you need configured tunnels means that you are likely 
   to have some IPv4 infrastructure between IPv6 router or between a 
   host and a router.  In this scenario, upgrading all routers before 



Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 19]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000



   hosts will be easier than configuring tunnels between hosts and 
   routers and routers to routers.  This mechanism could be used in a 
   situation where regional offices, e.g. Birmingham and Edinburgh have 
   upgraded to IPv6 and the Head Office still using IPv4.  A tunnel 
   would need to be configured from Birmingham to Edinburgh, 
   encapsulating the IPv6 packet within IPv4 so that it can be routed at
   the Head Office.  Configured tunneling is more likely to be used in 
   large establishments or communication over a WAN where there is a 
   large IPv4 infrastructure.

   DUAL STACK WITH AUTOMATIC TUNNELS
   If used would allow hosts to be updated before routers.  Each host 
   would need to be configured to use IPv4-Compatible IPv6 addresses, 
   tunneling would then occur between end-points.  This network is only 
   small with only a few routers, all routers and routing are internal 
   to the organisation and as such would be easier to upgrade than have 
   the added problems of routing "flat" addresses and performance 
   degradation of encapsulating most IPv6 packets within IPv4 packet.

   DUAL STACK WITH AIIH 
   One of the main reasons in using the AIIH mechanism is if there are 
   not enough IPv4 addresses for each Dual Stack node on the network. 
   In this scenario they are using a private address space and therefore
   are not limited (within reason) to a number of IPv4 addresses.

   DUAL STACK WITH DTI
   Requires that all routers would need to support IPv6.  If this is the
   case then if you have the Dual stack and IPv6 routing through the 
   private network why use DTI? This mechanism would be used as part of 
   a complex solution for larger organisations with direct external 
   connections to the Internet and especially in the later stages of 
   transitioning.  I don't think its benefits could be of use in this 
   scenario.

   DUAL STACK AND TRANSLATOR
   A NAT is already used at the border of the network which suits their 
   needs.  All nodes in the organisation can be upgraded to dual stack 
   and the NAT be upgraded to convert IPv6 to IPv4 addresses.  This
   would allow all nodes in the network to be able to communicate using
   only IPv6 and the translator used for converting IPv6 headers to 
   IPv4.

   TRANSLATOR
   Could be used on its own to replace the NAT already installed meaning
   that the internal structure of the network could remain the same 
   without any alterations within the private network.  Could be used in
   the later stages once migration has been completed and most sites are
   using IPv6.




Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 20]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000



   6OVER4
   The internal network does not use multicasting so this mechanism is 
   not relevant for this scenario.

   DUAL STACK, 6TO4 AND TRANSLATOR
   Could be used to give the Translator a unique IPv6 address by using 
   the unique IPv4 address for the translator and using it as an NLA.  
   This would allow each node internal to the organisation to have a 
   unique IPv6 address.

6.2.5 Solution 1

   Reasoning behind the solution

   Currently uses private address space so there is no problem with
   limited IPv4 addresses.  The easiest approach in transitioning would
   be to use dual stack on all hosts.  This solution does not require
   the complex methods of encapsulation.

   Mechanisms Suggested in Solution

   - Dual Stack
   - Translator
   - 6to4 (Option)

6.2.5.1 Stage 1: Head Office

   Starting with the Head Office in London as most traffic will be
   routed through here, it is essential that this is the first to be
   upgraded to IPv6 to allow for communication to allow routing from
   regional sites.

   The order of Implementation within the Head Office can be followed
   from that in Scenario 2, Solution 1 but has been detailed again
   below:

   DEFAULT ROUTER (R1)
   Connects with all other offices.  A software upgrade will be required
   to allow this to operate as a dual router.  The router will treat 
   IPv6 as an independent protocol so therefore RIPv2 will need to be 
   activated and configured for IPv6.

   DHCP SERVER 
   Depending on whether this server is necessary is dependent on whether
   stateful auto-configuration is required.  If required will need to be
   upgraded to dual stack to allow allocation of IPv4 addresses out of 
   the private address space and also stateful IPv6 addresses.





Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 21]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000



   DNS SERVER
   Upgraded to a dual stack, a requirement for hosts to look up a 
   destination node using DNS to find out if v4 or v6 address is to be 
   used.

   PROXY SERVER/TRANSLATOR
   Will need to be bilingual. This is the conversion point for the 
   network and will be translating between IPv6 and IPv4 and vice versa.
   The firewall will need no new configuration as the data sent to and 
   from will be IPv4 format, until ISP migrates to IPv6.

   SERVERS
   Once the above have been converted then the Mail Server and any File 
   Servers will need IPv6 installed.  Again the Mail server may require 
   some extra configuration.

   WORKSTATION
   Now all the dependencies have been configured all workstations will 
   need to be upgraded to support IPv6.  This can be in any order and 
   there is no time limit.

6.2.5.2 Stage 2: London Offices

   Once the head office has been upgraded, the regional offices in
   London can be upgraded.  These can be carried out in whichever order
   desired. The following implementation rule shown in stage 1 must
   apply to each site:

   - Default Router
   - DHCP Server 
   - DNS Server 
   - Other Servers e.g. Mail Server etc.
   - Workstations

6.2.5.3 Stage 3: Regional Offices

   Once the London sites have been upgraded the regional sites can be
   upgraded.  The order is as follows:  
   Birmingham Manchester Glasgow Edinburgh

   The order doesn't have to be followed but it should be noted that if
   Glasgow is upgraded before Manchester and Birmingham then tunnels
   will have to be configured from Glasgow's Router to the Head Office
   Router.  Implementation in each office should be followed in
   accordance with Stage 1 and Stage 2.

6.2.5.4 Stage 4: Final Stage

   Once all nodes within the organisation have been upgraded to IPv6,



Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 22]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000



   the IPv4 component in each node can be deactivated to allow for just
   IPv6 traffic on the network.  Deactivation will obviously have to be
   done in reverse order to the implementation i.e. disable IPv4 on the
   workstations first and routers last.  The translator at the border
   will convert all IPv6 headers into IPv4 headers and vice versa.
   Normally it is difficult for translators to convert from IPv4 to
   IPv6 e.g. when external to internal communication is initiated.  Only
   one source in this case will be externally initiating communication
   and this will be the ISP server when sending SMTP traffic.  The
   translator (will have to be an application translator) at the border
   of the network can detect and forward SMTP traffic to the correct
   node internally.

   6TO4 OPTION
   The 6to4 mechanism could be used in conjunction with the translator. 
   The one unique IP address associated with the translator could be 
   assigned to the NLA field creating a globally unique IPv6 prefix.  
   This would allow all nodes within the organisation to have a globally
   unique IPv6 address and allow the NAT to receive either IPv6 or IPv4 
   packets.

6.2.6 Solution 2

   Mechanisms Suggested in Solution

   - Translator

   If there was absolutely no need for the implementation of IPv6
   within the organisation or if all IPv4 applications required
   intensive configuration to convert for IPv6 support there is another
   solution.  In this case the NAT could just be upgraded to a
   translator supporting external IPv6 traffic and leaving the current
   internal infrastructure the same.  This adds to the problem of how
   IPv4 nodes can work out how to send to an IPv6 address external to
   the organisation.  As all external traffic would be sent to the ISP
   address, the translator could be configured to send all external
   traffic to this one IPv6 address.  The nodes could be configured
   manually to send any external data to a certain IPv4 address, which
   could be configured by routers to send on to the translator.  The
   translator would need to know that this IPv4 address should be
   converted to the IPv6 address of the ISP server.  This would be
   quite complex and it would be far easier, for long term
   administration and maintenance, to migrate the network to IPv6.

6.3 Introducing IPv6 in an ISP environment

   The network of an ISP consists of at least three main areas: the
   core network, the connections to other IPSs and the customer access
   network.  The next two sections will discuss how an ISP can introduce



Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 23]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000



   IPv6 in those areas.

   For each area a couple of steps must be taken first:

   - Request IPv6 address space as described in section 2.1. 
   - Register the IPv6 site, routing and delegations as described in
     section 2.2. 
   - Setup DNS as described in section 2.3.

6.3.1 Introducing IPv6 in the core network

   It is not really necessary to introduce IPv6 into the core of the
   network.  An ISP may decide to tunnel IPv6 over its existing IPv4
   infrastructure.  But if the ISP decides to introduce IPv6 into the
   core, this can be done in several ways.

   An ISP might decide to install separate dual stack or IPv6-only
   routers in the core.  These will be interconnected by dedicated
   lines (ATM PVCs, leased lines, etc.) or (if the routers are dual
   stack) by IPv6 in IPv4 tunnels over the existing IPv4 core
   infrastructure.  Routing can be setup such that IPv4 packets are
   routed through the old IPv4 infrastructure and IPv6 packets are
   routed through the new IPv6 infrastructure.

   When dual stack routers are stable enough to be used in the core,
   things become simpler.  The ISP can configure the core routers as
   dual stack routers which will route both IPv4 and IPv6 packets.

   Next a connection to the global IPv6 network should be made.  This
   can be done by a direct IPv6 connection or by some tunneling
   mechanism.  If the core of the network supports IPv6 and the other
   ISP also supports IPv6 a direct link can be used to transport IPv6
   packets.

   When there is no direct IPv6 connection tunneling mechanisms must be
   used to reach the global IPv6 network.  Automatic tunneling can be
   done with for example [6TO4].

   An ISP might decide to setup one or more routers at the edge of its
   network to act as 6to4 gateways.  This enables other IPv6 islands to
   reach the ISP by 6to4 tunneling.  An alternative to the use of
   dynamic tunnels is the use of static ones as is the case on the
   6Bone.

6.3.3 Introducing IPv6 in the customer access network

   The customer access network consists of dial up and leased lines
   connected to an access router.  There are at least two possibilities
   to introduce IPv6.  The first possibility is to upgrade access



Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 24]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000



   routers to dual stack routers.  Both IPv4 and IPv6 customers connect
   to these dual stack routers.

   Another possibility is to install separate IPv6 or dual stack
   routers.  IPv4-only customers connect to the old IPv4-only access
   routers.  IPv6 customers connect to the new access routers.

   These IPv6 access routers must be connected to the global IPv6
   network.  If the core does not support IPv6, one of the transition
   mechanisms from section 3 must be used.  Automatic tunneling can be
   done with for example [6TO4].  An alternative to the use of dynamic
   tunnels is the use of statically configured ones.  When the core
   network does support IPv6 the access routers can be connected to the
   nearest IPv6 core router (either by IPv4/IPv6 link, dedicated link
   or tunneling over IPv4).

   When the customer is an IPv6-only site, the ISP might decide to
   provide some transition mechanisms to help the customer reach
   IPv4-only nodes.  To do this the ISP can install e.g. NAT-PT (see
   section 5.3).

6.4 Internet Exchange

   Based on address space distribution we can distinguish two models
   for the setup of an IPv6 Internet Exchange (IE).

   1. The more or less traditional model that is most common in the
      IPv4 world.  In this case each ISP connecting to the IE arranges
      its own IPv6 address space.  In peering arrangements between ISPs
      the prefix for this address space is exchanged.

   2. An addressing model where the IE acts as an address space
      provider.  In this case the IE obtains a TLA and can assign NLAs
      from this TLA address space to connected ISPs.  In order to
      obtain global connectivity for the Internet Exchange TLA, the IE
      needs to arrange for global transit through one or more global
      transit providers (TLA ISPs) which are connected to the IE.
      Implicitly, this means that the IE arranges transit for all
      connected ISPs that use the address space assigned to the IE.
      This requires quite a different business model for an IE than in
      model 1.

   Models 1 and 2 described above require the following steps to be
   taken by the IE operator and/or the connected ISPs:

6.4.1 Model 1

   - IE operator requests an NLA
     Obtain globally unique address space.  This can be an NLA from a



Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 25]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000



     transit provider (TLA provider) that offers connectivity for the
     IE infrastructure.  A global prefix is preferred as next hop
     attribute in BGP4 [BGP4-IPV6].

   - Addressing infrastructure on IE
     From the obtained address space addresses are assigned to the
     interfaces of the routers connecting to the IE infrastructure.

   - Update the IPv6 registry
     The sites, allocations and route objects should be registered as
     described in section 2.

   - BGP announcements
     ISPs connecting to the IE advertise to their peers their own
     address space which is independent of the IE.  This address space
     can either be a TLA or an NLA.

6.4.3 Model 2

   - IE operator requests a (sub-)TLA
     The IE requests a (sub-)TLA from its regional IR.  Customers on
     the Internet Exchange get a next level NLA from this (sub-)TLA.

   - Addressing infrastructure on IE
     From the obtained address space addresses are assigned to the
     interfaces of the routers connecting to the IE infrastructure.

   - Update the IPv6 registry
     The sites, allocations and route objects should be registered as
     described in section 2.

   - IE operator contracts global transit ISPs (TLA ISPs)
     The IE should contract several TLA ISPs that will provide
     connectivity to the global IPv6 network.  Such a TLA ISP must
     agree to transit traffic from all customers connected to the IE.

   - BGP announcements
     The transit providers for the IE address space announce the
     (sub-)TLA from the IE to the global IPv6 network.  To the IE
     customers they announce all prefixes that can be reached by them
     and for which they have a contract with the IE.  Customers (NLA
     ISPs) get a next level NLA from the IE.  The NLA ISPs announce
     their NLA to the TLA ISPs.  They also announce their NLA to other
     NLA ISPs of the IE if there is a peering agreement between them.








Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 26]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000



7. Security considerations
 
   There are no specific security issues introduced by this document.
   For the specific security issues with the different translations 
   and migration tools that are discussed in section 3 of this document
   the reader is referred to the referenced documents.


References

[6BONE]	       http://www.6bone.net/

[6TO4]	       B. Carpenter, K Moore, "Connection of IPv6 Domains via 
               IPv4 Clouds without Explicit Tunnels", 
               draft-ietf-ngtrans-6to4-03.txt (work in progress).

[6PAPA]        R. Fink,
               "6BONE Pre-Qualification for Address Prefix Allocation (6PAPA)",
               draft-ietf-ngtrans-6bone-6papa-01.txt (work in progress)

[AIIH]         Jim Bound, "Assignment of IPv4 Global Addresses to IPv6
               Hosts (AIIH)", draft-ietf-ngtrans-assgn-ipv4-addrs-01.txt
               (work in progress).

[BROKER]       A. Durand, P. Fasano, I. Guardini, D. Lento, "IPv6 
               Tunnel Broker", draft-ietf-ngtrans-broker-00.txt
               (work in progress).

[DHCPv6]       J. Bound,  C. Perkins, "Dynamic Host Configuration 
               Protocol for IPv6", draft-ietf-dhc-dhcpv6-14.txt
               (work in progress).

[DHCPv6-EXT]   C. Perkins, J. Bound, "Extensions for the Dynamic Host 
               Configuration Protocol for IPv6", 
               draft-ietf-dhc-v6exts-11.txt (work in progress).

[DNAME]        Matt Crawford, "Non-Terminal DNS Name Redirection",
               draft-ietf-dnsind-dname-03.txt (work in progress).

[DNSLOOKUP]    M. Crawford, C. Huitema, S. Thomson, "DNS Extensions to 
               Support IP Version 6", 
               draft-ietf-ipngwg-dns-lookups-05.txt (work in progress).

[DSTM]         J. Bound, L. Toutain, H. Affifi, "Dual Stack Transition 
               Mechanism (DSTM)", draft-ietf-ngtrans-dstm-01.txt
               (work in progress).



Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 27]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000






[IRALLOC]      Regional IRs, "Provisional IPv6 assignment and allocation
               policy document (Draft 6; 27 May 1999)",
               ipv6policy-draft-090699.txt (work in progress).

[RFC1034]      P. Mockapetris, "Domain names - concepts and facilities",
               RFC 1034, November 1987.

[RFC1035]      P. Mockapetris, "Domain names - implementation and
               specification", RFC 1035, November 1987.

[RFC1886]      S. Thomson and C. Huitema, "DNS Extensions to support IP
               version 6", RFC 1886, December 1995.

[RFC1918]      Y. Rekhter, B. Moskowitz, D. Karrenberg, G.J. de Groot 
               and E. Lear, "Address Allocation for Private Internets",
               RFC 1918, February 1996.

[RFC1928]      M. Leech, M. Ganis, Y. Lee, R. Kuris, D. Koblas and
               L. Jones, "SOCKS Protocol Version 5", RFC 1928,
               March 1996.

[RFC1933]      R. Gilligan and E. Nordmark, "Transition Mechanisms for 
               IPv6 Hosts and Routers", RFC 1933, April 1996.

[RFC2080]      G. Malkin, R. Minnear, "RIPng for IPv6", RFC 2080,
               January 1997.

[RFC2081]      G. Malkin, "RIPng Protocol Applicability Statement", 
               RFC 2081, January 1997.

[RFC2185]      R. Callon, D. Haskin, "Routing Aspects of IPv6
               Transition", RFC 2185, September 1997.

[RFC2283]      T. Bates, R. Chandra, D.Katz, Y. Rekhter, "Multiprotocol
               Extensions for BGP-4", RFC 2283, February 1998.

[RFC2373]      R. Hinden, S. Deering, "IP Version 6 Addressing
               Architecture", RFC 2373, July 1998.




Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 28]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000



[RFC2374]      R. Hinden, M. O'Dell, S. Deering, "An IPv6 Aggregatable
               Global Unicast Address Format", RFC 2374, July 1998.

[RFC2529]      B. Carpenter, C. Jung, "Transmission of IPv6 over IPv4 
               Domains without Explicit Tunnels", RFC2529, March 1999.

[RFC2545]      P. Marques, F. Dupont, "Use of BGP-4 Multiprotocol 
               Extensions for IPv6 Inter-Domain Routing", RFC2545, 
               March 1999.

[RFC2546]      A. Durand, B. Buclin, "6Bone Routing Practice",
               RFC 2546, March 1999.

[RFC2673]      Matt Crawford, "Binary Labels in the Domain Name System",
               RFC 2673, August 1999. 

[RFC2740]      R. Coltun, D. Ferguson, J. Moy, "OSPF for IPv6",
               RFC 2740, December 1999.

[RFC2765]      E. Nordmark, "Stateless IP/ICMP Translator", 
               RFC 2765, xxxx

[RFC2766]      G. Tsirtsis, P. Srisuresh,
               "Network Address Translation - Protocol Translation (NAT-PT)",
               RFC 2766, February 2000.


[RFC2767]      K. Tsuchiya, H. Higuchi, Y. Atarashi, "Dual Stack Hosts
               using the Bump-in-the-Stack technique", 
               RFC 2767, February 2000.

[RFC2772]      R. Rockell, R. Fink, "6Bone Backbone Routing Guidelines"
               RFC 2772, February 2000.

[SOCKS-EXT]    H. Kitamura, "SOCKSv5 Protocol Extensions for IPv6/IPv4 
               Communication Environment",
               draft-kitamura-socks-ipv6-01.txt (work in progress).

[SOCKS-GATE]   H. Kitamura, A. Jinzaki, S. Kobayashi, "A SOCKS-based 
               IPv6/IPv4 Gateway Mechanism",
               draft-ietf-ngtrans-socks-gateway-02.txt 
               (work in progress). 
 






Authors' Addresses

   -> This section needs update.


   Wim Biemolt                        Marijke Kaat
   SURFnet ExpertiseCentrum bv        SURFnet ExpertiseCentrum bv
   P.O. Box 19115                     P.O. Box 19115
   3501 DC  Utrecht                   3501 DC  Utrecht
   The Netherlands                    The Netherlands
   Phone: +31 30 230 5305             Phone: +31 30 230 5305
   Fax: +31 30 230 5329               Fax: +31 30 230 5329
   Email: Wim.Biemolt@sec.nl          Email: Marijke.Kaat@sec.nl




Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 29]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000



   Ronald van der Pol                 Henk Steenman
   SURFnet bv                         AT&T, ICoE
   P.O. Box 19035                     Laarderhoogtweg 25
   3501 DA  Utrecht                   1101 EB Amsterdam
   The Netherlands                    The Netherlands
   Phone: +31 30 230 5305             Phone: +31 20 409 7656
   Fax: +31 30 230 5329               Fax: +31 20 453 1574
   Email: Ronald.vanderPol@surfnet.nl Email: Henk.Steenman@icoe.att.com

   Tim Larder
   Cisco Systems Ltd.
   3, The Square,
   Stockley Park,
   Uxbridge,
   UB11 1BN,
   United Kingdom.
   Phone +44 (0)20 8756 8846
   email tlarder@cisco.com



Appendix A. IPv6 Address Issues


A.1 IPv6 Address Assignments
   
   Most of the transition mechanisms require dual stack systems and 
   thus globally routable IPv6 addresses as well as globally routable 
   IPv4 addresses.  Although sometimes private IPv4 addresses 
   [RFC1918] will suffice.  But to allow communication between IPv4 
   and IPv6 hosts over the Internet at least one globally unique IPv4 
   address is always needed.  Globally unique IPv4 addresses can be 
   obtained from one of the Regional Internet Registries (IR), Local 
   Internet Registries (LIR) or an Internet Service Provider (ISP).
   
   Without special registration a site can deploy IPv6 site local 
   addresses which are similar to IPv4 private addresses [RFC1918]. 
   However, site local addresses do not allow for communication over 
   the Internet.  For this you need to apply for globally routable 
   IPv6 addresses.  Most sites will get a /48 prefix with 16 bits 
   for subnetting and 64 bits for interface ID addressing.  This
   means that 65536 subnets can be defined and in each subnet 
   almost 20 trillion hosts can be numbered.

   0                                48       64                  127
   +---------------------------------+--------+--------------------+
   |              prefix             | subnet |   Interface ID     |
   +---------------------------------+--------+--------------------+
   
   At present, there is an experimental network called the "6bone" 
   which is operated based on IPv6.  For this network, a part of the



Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 30]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000



   aggregatable address space is assigned, the so-called Pseudo TLA 
   (pTLA) 3ffe::/16.  Provider pTLAs are assigned by the 6bone [6BONE].
   NLAs are assigned in turn by those organisations which have received
   pTLA assignments from the 6bone.

A.1.1 Obtaining IPv6 Address Space

   IPv6 addresses can be obtained from the same organisations as the
   ones who register IPv4 addresses.  Basically regional IRs delegate
   a part of the IPv6 address space to local IRs who further delegate
   parts of the address space to their customers.  The smallest
   assignment that can be made to a customer is a /48 prefix.  A 
   difference between IPv4 and IPv6 allocations is that one of the 
   main objectives of IPv6 allocation is route aggregation, i.e. to 
   minimize the number of prefixes that need to be advertised in the 
   default-free core of the Internet.
   
   The regional IRs use a slow start mechanism [IRALLOC] to allocate 
   TLAs to ISPs. A special prequalification procedure [6PAPA]
   can be used by ISP participating in the 6bone.

   ISPs can be divided into two categories: those ISPs 
   that can get a (sub-)TLA from their regional Internet Registry (IR) 
   and those ISPs that will not get a (sub-)TLA.  In this document the
   first category is referred to as "TLA ISPs" and the second category
   is referred to as "NLA ISPs", because they will get an NLA from their
   upstream provider(s).  

   TLA ISPs will get a sub-TLA first and can apply for a full TLA later.
   This sub-TLA is a /29 prefix.  The TLA ISP will allocate /48 prefixes
   to end customer sites and /(29+n) prefixes to NLA ISPs, in which "n" 
   (0<=n<=19) is the number of bits used to identify NLA ISPs [RFC2374].
 


   +--+----------+---------+---------+--------+--------------------+
   | 3|    13    |   13    |  19     |   16   |       64 bits      |
   +--+----------+---------+---------+--------+--------------------+
   |FP|   TLA    | sub-TLA |  NLA    |  SLA   |   Interface ID     |
   |  |   ID     |         |  ID     |  ID    |                    |
   +--+----------+---------+---------+--------+--------------------+
   |<--- TLA ISP prefix -->|<--->|<------ bits for NLA ISP -------->
                              |
                              |
                  NLA ISP identifier (n bits)
   

   An NLA ISP will be allocated a prefix between /29 and /48.  It will 
   use the remaining bits in the NLA ID to identify its customers.  
   These customers will get a /48.





Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 31]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000



   +--+----------+---------+---------+--------+--------------------+
   | 3|    13    |   13    |  19     |   16   |       64 bits      |
   +--+----------+---------+---------+--------+--------------------+
   |FP|   TLA    | sub-TLA |  NLA    |  SLA   |   Interface ID     |
   |  |   ID     |         |  ID     |  ID    |                    |
   +--+----------+---------+---------+--------+--------------------+
   |<------ NLA ISP prefix ----->|<->|<------ bits for sites ------>
                                   |
                                   |
                end customer site identifier (19-n bits)


    An example of IPv6 address usage can be found in appendix A.

A.2 IPv6 Registration Issues
   
   In the current IPv4 world address space allocations are registered 
   in the various databases managed by the regional IRs.  Autonomous
   System (AS) information and routing policies are registered in the 
   distributed Internet Routing Registry database (IRR).  The IRs, LIRs
   and ISPs are supposed to register address space allocations and 
   assignments, contact persons, AS numbers, routing policies and other 
   useful data for network management in the various databases.

   A special IPv6 registration database has been setup for the 6bone 
   community, on the whois server named "whois.6bone.net".  This is a 
   special version of the RIPE database software and it is referred to 
   as the "6bone database".  This database has special objects, the
   "inet6num:" object for assigned IPv6 prefixes, and the "ipv6-site:" 
   object which is used to register specific information about a site
   connected to the 6bone, such as the configured tunnels and the 
   origin AS.  In the ipv6-site objects the IPV6 applications that are 
   supported on that specific site can be found.  The database can be 
   queried by using a modified whois client or the web-based "whois" 
   service at http://www.6bone.net/whois.html.  At this time only the 
   6bone database supports the special IPv6 objects.  Currently, there 
   are no database objects to register IPv6 routing policies.  

   When the regional IRs will start allocating (sub-)TLAs the allocated
   and assigned IPv6 prefixes, routing policies etc. will have to be
   registered.  At this moment it is unclear how exactly IPv6 
   registrations will be done.

A.3 Example of IPv6 address usage

   Sites will get a /48.  An example of how to use such a /48 is given 
   below.  In this example the site is allocated 3FFE:1234:5678::/48.





Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 32]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000



                     3FFE:1234:5678::/48
                              |
                              |
                     I1 +-----+-----+ I2  
                +-------+    R1     +-------------------+
                |       +---------+-+                   |
                |                 | I3                  |
        +-------+-------+         +----+          +-----+----+
        |               |              |          |    R2    |
        |               |              |          +----------+  
   +----+----+     +----+----+    +----+----+      ||||||||||
   |   R3    |     |   R4    |    |   R5    |         links
   +---------+     +---------+    +---------+
    | | | | |        |  |  |         |   |
      links           links          links

   R[1-5] are routers and I[1-3] are the interfaces of R1.  Suppose the
   expected number of hosts on the links is:

        router         immediate        year 1        year 2
          R2              34              50            70
          R3              19              20            25
          R4               9              10            15
          R5               3               5            10

   A number plan could be like the one shown in the table below.  On R1
   the following prefixes will be used on the interfaces:

        I1        3FFE:1234:5678:2000::/50
        I2        3FFE:1234:5678:0000::/49
        I3        3FFE:1234:5678:2300::/50

   Initially, R2 will get 256 /64s, R3 will get 48 /64s, R4 will get 32 
   /64s and R5 will get 16 /64s.

        3FFE:1234:5678:0000::/50
        ------------------------
        3FFE:1234:5678:0000::/49        I2
        3FFE:1234:5678:1000::/49        free
        3FFE:1234:5678:2000::/49        I1 + I3
        3FFE:1234:5678:3000::/49        free
        .....                           ...
        3FFE:1234:5678:F000::/49        free
        3FFE:1234:5678:0000::/49
        ------------------------
        3FFE:1234:5678:0000::/64        interfaces of R2
        .....                           ...
        3FFE:1234:5678:00FF::/64        interfaces of R2
        3FFE:1234:5678:0100::/64        reserved for R2



Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 33]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000



        .....                           ...
        3FFE:1234:5678:02FF::/64        reserved for R2
        3FFE:1234:5678:0300::/64        free
        .....                           ...

        3FFE:1234:5678:2000::/49
        ------------------------
        3FFE:1234:5678:2000::/50        I1
        3FFE:1234:5678:2100::/50        reserved for I1
        3FFE:1234:5678:2200::/50        reserved for I1
        3FFE:1234:5678:2300::/50        I3
        3FFE:1234:5678:2400::/50        reserved for I3
        3FFE:1234:5678:2500::/50        reserved for I3
        3FFE:1234:5678:2600::/50        free
        .....                           ...
        3FFE:1234:5678:2F00::/50        free


        3FFE:1234:5678:2000::/50
        ------------------------
        3FFE:1234:5678:2000::/64        interfaces of R3
        .....                           ...
        3FFE:1234:5678:202F::/64        interfaces of R3
        3FFE:1234:5678:2030::/64        reserved for R3
        .....                           ...
        3FFE:1234:5678:204F::/64        reserved for R3

        3FFE:1234:5678:2050::/64        interfaces of R4
        .....                           ...
        3FFE:1234:5678:206F::/64        interfaces of R4
        3FFE:1234:5678:2070::/64        reserved for R4
        .....                           ...
        3FFE:1234:5678:209F::/64        reserved for R4
        3FFE:1234:5678:20A0::/64        free
        .....                           ...
        3FFE:1234:5678:20FF::/64        free


        3FFE:1234:5678:2300::/50
        ------------------------
        3FFE:1234:5678:2300::/64        interfaces of R5
        .....                           ...
        3FFE:1234:5678:230F::/64        interfaces of R5
        3FFE:1234:5678:2310::/64        reserved for R5
        .....                           ...
        3FFE:1234:5678:231F::/64        reserved for R5
        3FFE:1234:5678:2320::/64        free
        .....                           ...
        3FFE:1234:5678:23FF::/64        free



Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 34]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000






Appendix B. IPv6 and DNS

B.1 Forward mapping
   
   A host's 128 bit IPv6 address can be stored with an AAAA record.  
   For example: 

   $ORIGIN ipv6.surfnet.nl.
   ...
   zesbot         IN   AAAA   3FFE:0604:0000:0001:02C0:4FFF:FEC6:9CC7

   This is similar to the use of the A record in IPv4, for example:

   $ORIGIN ipv6.surfnet.nl.
   ...
   zesbot         IN   A      192.87.110.60

   Note that both A and AAAA records for a given zone are stored in 
   the same DNS data file.
   
   If a node has more than one IPv6 address it must have more than one
   AAAA record. For example: 
   
   $ORIGIN ipv6.surfnet.nl.
   ...
   amsterdam9     IN   AAAA   3FFE:0600:8000:0000::0001
                  IN   AAAA   3FFE:0600:8000:0000::0005
                  IN   AAAA   3FFE:0600:8000:0000::0009
                  IN   AAAA   3FFE:0600:8000:0000::000D
   
   Currently a new record type, A6, is being defined to map a domain 
   name to an IPv6 address, containing a reference to a "prefix" 
   [DNSLOOKUP].  The aim of the A6 record is to facilitate network 
   renumbering and multihoming.  Domains employing the A6 record for 
   IPv6 addresses can have automatically generated AAAA records to ease
   transition.  After the A6 records are widely deployed it is expected
   that the AAAA records are no longer needed.
   
B.2 Reverse mapping
   
   IPv4 uses the "in-addr.arpa" domain for the reverse mapping.  An
   IPv4 address is represented as a name in the in-addr.arpa domain by 
   a sequence of bytes, written as decimal digits, separated by dots
   with the suffix ".in-addr.arpa".  The sequence of bytes is encoded in
   reverse order, i.e.  the low-order bytes is encoded first, followed 
   by the next low-order bytes and so on.  For example the IPv4 address



Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman    Expires April 2000  [page 35]



Internet Draft             Guide to IPv6 Transition             Mar 2000



   192.87.110.60 is represented as a name in the in-addr.arpa domain as:

   60.110.87.192.in-addr.arpa.

   This name is stored in a DNS data file as follows:

   $ORIGIN 110.87.192.in-addr.arpa.
   ...
   60               IN   PTR   zesbot.ipv6.surfnet.nl. 

   For IPv6 addresses the special domain "ip6.int" is defined to look 
   up a record given an IPv6 address.  The process works exactly the 
   same as with IPv4.  Except that an IPv6 address is represented by
   nibbles, written as hexadecimal digits, separated by dots.  For
   example the IPv6 address 3FFE:0604:0000:0001:02C0:4FFF:FEC6:9CC7 
   is represented as a name in the ip6.int domain as:

7.c.c.9.6.c.e.f.f.f.f.4.0.c.2.0.1.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.4.0.6.0.e.f.f.3.ip6.int.

   This name is stored in the a DNS data file as follows (assuming
   a /64 prefix):

   $ORIGIN 1.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.4.0.6.0.e.f.f.3.ip6.int.
   ...
   7.c.c.9.6.c.e.f.f.f.f.4.0.c.2.0   IN   PTR   zesbot.ipv6.surfnet.nl.

   Note that the IPv4 and IPv6 reverse mappings are stored in different
   DNS data files.
   
B.3 Implementations
   
   Most DNS implementations will be able to deal with the reverse
   mapping as used with IPv6 addresses.  However AAAA record is only
   implemented in recent DNS implementations and support for
   A6 record [DNSLOOKUP] or binary labels [RFC2673] is just coming.

   Note that although these DNS servers implement extensions to support 
   the use of IPv6 addresses they are not necessarily IPv6 applications
   themselves, some use IPv4 transport.
   For IPv6 only nodes, an IPv6 resolver and an IPv6 DNS server are crucial.











Biemolt, Kaat, Larder, vd Pol, Steenman,       Expires April 2000  [page 36]


