
                                                              A. Zmolek 
   Internet Draft                                            Avaya Inc. 
   Document: draft-zmolek-enum-pointer-00.txt                           
   Expires: August 2002                               February 20, 2002 
 
 
                      ENUM Service Resolution Pointer 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance 
   with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
    
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   Current notions of service field tags in ENUM NAPTR records would 
   frame the service exposure problem as a tradeoff between the privacy 
   and heft involved in revealing detailed service information on the 
   one hand or the arbitrary constraint of such information on the 
   other. This draft suggests an alternative approach that keeps NAPTR 
   record size small, places service exposure policy and presence 
   capabilities in the hands of the ENUM registrant where it belongs, 
   and minimizes impact to the ENUM registrar and their respective DNS 
   architecture. 
 
 
Table of Contents 
    
   Status of this Memo................................................1 
   Abstract...........................................................1 
   1. Introduction....................................................2 
   2. ENUM Exposure of Services: NAPTR Records and Service Field Tags.2 
   3. Shortcomings of ENUM Service Exposure...........................2 
   4. An ENUM Service Resolution Pointer..............................3 
   5. Benefits of a Service Resolution Pointer........................4 
     
   Zmolek                Expires August 2002                        1 
   INTERNET-DRAFT  ENUM Service Resolution Pointer      February 2002 
    
    
   6. Standardization of "Service Resolution" Services................4 
   7. Security Considerations.........................................5 
   References.........................................................6 
   Author's Address...................................................6 
 
 
1. Introduction 
    
   ENUM has mainly been focused on the mechanisms for representing 
   E.164 numbers within DNS, delegation and administration of the 
   resulting database records, etc. Until recently, the scope and 
   nature of end-user service exposure was assumed to be relatively 
   small and simple. 
    
   Unfortunately, with the addition of service field tags that reveal 
   codec capabilities and transcoding, service exposure is no longer 
   small or simple. Too much detail results in more complexity, less 
   privacy, and undermines the basic intent of ENUM. One way to address 
   this issue is to constrain the range of services that can be exposed 
   via ENUM, but it's not clear this can be done effectively without 
   unreasonably limiting ENUM applicability. 
    
   This draft suggests another option: an ENUM service field tag giving 
   a URI pointer for a "service resolution" service. This would allow 
   the end user to apply presence, privacy, and access control if 
   desired. In addition, this draft identifies potential areas of 
   further standardization around such services. 
    
    
2. ENUM Exposure of Services: NAPTR Records and Service Field Tags 
    
   ENUM exposes services as service URIs in NAPTR records. This usage 
   is discussed in RFC-2916 [ENUM]. When a request is made to the ENUM 
   service via DNS, the reply is a NAPTR record containing one or more 
   service fields with associated URI and preference information. From 
   Example 3.2.1 in RFC-2916: 
    
   $ORIGIN 4.3.2.1.6.7.9.8.6.4.e164.arpa. 
      IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "sip+E2U"    "!^.*$!sip:info@tele2.se!"     . 
      IN NAPTR 102 10 "u" "mailto+E2U" "!^.*$!mailto:info@tele2.se!"  . 
    
      This describes that the domain 4.3.2.1.6.7.9.8.6.4.e164.arpa is 
      preferably contacted by SIP, and secondly by SMTP. 
    
      In both cases, the next step in the resolution process is to use  
      The resolution mechanism for each of the protocols, (SIP and  
      SMTP) to know what node to contact for each. 
    
 
3. Shortcomings of ENUM Service Exposure 
    
     
   Zmolek                Expires August 2002                        2 
   INTERNET-DRAFT  ENUM Service Resolution Pointer      February 2002 
    
    
   Several problems exist within the current ENUM service exposure 
   model. First, the service capabilities of the E.164 number are 
   assumed to be static. This may be a reasonable assumption at the 
   moment, but the emerging concept of presence-based routing 
   undermines it. And simple PBX or Centrex services like call 
   forwarding already challenge this assumption. In either case, the 
   fact that an E.164 number will no longer be strongly bound to a 
   single or specific endpoint means that valid service capabilities 
   will have to be limited or derived dynamically from an authoritative 
   presence system for that E.164 number. 
    
   Secondly, detailed service capability exposure needed for certain 
   fax, message interchange, and media transcoding services increases 
   NAPTR record size, forcing DNS to run over TCP as UDP packet size 
   maximums are reached. This is a significant problem, as it may force 
   clients to use a special DNS resolver and adds substantial delay to 
   the ENUM resolution process, rendering it less useful overall. 
    
   And most importantly, ENUM has no reasonable way of directly 
   applying privacy and access control. ENUM was intended to be a 
   public service and as such it does not attempt to limit access to 
   service capability information. Unfortunately, the proliferation of 
   such information has substantial privacy implications. With the 
   advent of complex service field tags, profiling techniques can 
   provide yet more information to a malicious user.  
    
   In order to address these shortcomings of ENUM service exposure, 
   service resolution for dynamic services will need to take place 
   outside of the DNS system. Even if DNS had methods for access 
   control, the nature of DNS caching and lifetime of records would 
   pose problems for dynamic service resolution. Moreover, managing 
   multiple models for policy, identity, and other associated rules 
   would be problematic for ENUM service providers who require reliable 
   but fairly rigid mass-market architectures. 
    
    
4. An ENUM Service Resolution Pointer 
    
   To link to a "service resolution" service, an appropriate service 
   tag and URI pointer is needed. This draft will not advocate a 
   specific service field tag, since it should be derived from a 
   specific, well-defined service. Nor will this draft advocate a 
   particular service, since more than one service may become useful as 
   presence and other "service resolution" services proliferate. 
   Nevertheless, for purposes of example, this draft will use 
   "pres+E2U" as a representative service tag for an as-yet-undefined 
   presence service. 
    
   So if we assume the existence of a well-defined presence service 
   using a "pres:" URI, then the author's ENUM NAPTR record might 
   contain the following:  
    
     
   Zmolek                Expires August 2002                        3 
   INTERNET-DRAFT  ENUM Service Resolution Pointer      February 2002 
    
    
   $ORIGIN 1.0.0.4.4.4.4.0.2.7.1.e164.arpa. 
      IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "pres+E2U" "!^.*$!pres:zmolek@avaya.com!"  . 
    
   This would signal to the querying element that service availability 
   for this E.164 number is handled by my presence service via a 
   specific URI, namely "pres:zmolek@avaya.com". The next step depends 
   on the protocol indicated by the URI. The "pres" protocol and its 
   implementation in this presence service will address issues of query 
   structure, access control, and the like. 
 
   While it can be argued that the "sip+E2U" service tag is a already 
   sufficient as a service resolution pointer because it can point to 
   other SIP services, the reality is that SIP-based service can only 
   act as a service resolver for services that are already well-defined 
   within SIP. With the possible exception of POTS service, SIP 
   presence services are not currently designed to point to services 
   offered via non-SIP signaling protocols. 
    
    
5. Benefits of a Service Resolution Pointer 
    
   First and most importantly, a service resolution pointer places 
   control over service exposure into the hands of the ENUM registrant 
   where it belongs. Of course, the registrant may still choose to 
   expose services directly through ENUM. But for many potential 
   registrants, control over service exposure is a prerequisite for 
   participation in ENUM registration in the first place. 
    
   For ENUM service providers, having a service resolution pointer 
   opens the door to additional value-added services while addressing 
   the rising tide of privacy and security concerns surrounding ENUM.  
   ENUM registrants may choose to have presence, policy, and privacy 
   services provided by their ENUM registrar.  
    
   Key to the value of the service resolution pointer is that no 
   modification of the ENUM standard is required. As far as ENUM is 
   concerned, the "service resolution" service is, in fact, a valid 
   E.164-associated service like any other. 
 
    
6. Standardization of "Service Resolution" Services 
    
   Naturally, the utility of a service resolution pointer is limited if 
   the service itself isn't standardized. Detailed specification of 
   such a service is likely beyond the scope of the ENUM working group 
   and will not be discussed in this draft. Nevertheless, the need 
   exists for standardized queries, data formatting, and associated 
   protocols and interfaces associated with one or more such services.  
    
   It is this author's assertion that existing work has not 
   sufficiently addressed the need for a well-defined, general-purpose 
   presence service--e.g. one that is not tightly bound to either the 
   PSTN carrier or IM service provider model, nor bound to a specific 
     
   Zmolek                Expires August 2002                        4 
   INTERNET-DRAFT  ENUM Service Resolution Pointer      February 2002 
    
    
   signaling protocol.  Those with interest in creating such a general-
   purpose presence service specification are encouraged to contact the 
   author. 
 
    
7. Security Considerations 
 
   In general, this proposed approach provides opportunities for 
   improving ENUM security without weakening the underlying security of 
   ENUM services. Use of a service resolution pointer in NAPTR records 
   can improve confidentiality and allow for request authentication and 
   authorization if desired. Given that a "service resolution" service 
   tag is treated under ENUM just as any other exposed service, the 
   same basic security considerations apply.  
     
   Zmolek                Expires August 2002                        5 
   INTERNET-DRAFT  ENUM Service Resolution Pointer      February 2002 
    
    
    
References 
    
   [ENUM] Falstrom, P., "E.164 number and DNS", RFC 2916, September, 
          2000  
    
    
    
Author's Address 
    
   Andrew Zmolek 
   Avaya, Inc. 
   8740 Lucent Blvd. 403E273             
   Highlands Ranch, CO  80129   
   United States 
    
   Phone/Fax:  +1 720 444 4001 
   Email:      zmolek@avaya.com 
    
     
   Zmolek                Expires August 2002                        6 