
                                                          Yakov Rekhter
                                                         Cisco  Systems
                                                          Dilip Kandlur
                                 T.J. Watson Research Center, IBM Corp.
                                                          November 1995


Address Prefix Region and its application to Switched Data Link Subnetworks
                      <draft-ietf-rolc-apr-01.txt>



Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
   and its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet Drafts.

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months.  Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
   other documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to use Internet
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as a "working
   draft" or "work in progress."

   Please check the 1id-abstracts.txt listing contained in the
   internet-drafts Shadow Directories on nic.ddn.mil, nnsc.nsf.net,
   nic.nordu.net, ftp.nisc.sri.com, or munnari.oz.au to learn the
   current status of any Internet Draft.


Abstract


   The IP architecture assumes that each Data Link subnetwork is labeled
   with a single IP subnet number. A pair of hosts with the same subnet
   number communicate directly  (with no routers); a pair of hosts with
   different subnet numbers always communicate through one or more
   routers. As indicated in RFC1620, these assumptions may be too
   restrictive for large data networks, and specifically for networks
   based on switched virtual circuit (SVC) based technologies (e.g. ATM,
   Frame Relay, X.25), as these assumptions impose constraints on
   communication among hosts and routers through a network, which in
   turn may preclude full utilization of the capabilities provided by
   the underlying SVC-based Data Link subnetwork.  This document
   describes extensions to the IP architecture that relaxes these
   constraints, thus enabling the full utilization of the services
   provided by SVC-based Data Link subnetworks.


1  Background


   The following briefly recaptures the concept of the IP Subnet.  The



Expiration Date May 1996                                        [Page 1]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             November 1995


   topology is assumed to be composed of links (Data Link subnetworks)
   interconnected via routers.  An IP address of a host with an
   interface attached to a particular link is a tuple <subnet address
   prefix, host number>, where host number is unique within the subnet
   address prefix.  When a host needs to send an IP packet to a
   destination, the host needs to determine whether the destination
   address identifies an interface that is connected to one of the links
   the host is attached to ("local" decision), or not ("remote"
   decision).  The outcome of the "local/remote" decision is based on
   (a) the source address, (b) the destination address, and (c) the
   subnet mask associated with the source address.  If the outcome is
   "local", then the host resolves IP address to Link Layer address
   (e.g. by using ARP), and then sends the packet directly to that
   destination (using the Link layer services).  If the outcome is
   "remote", then the host uses one of its first-hop routers (thus
   relying on the services provided by IP routing).

   To summarize, two of the important attributes of the IP subnet model
   are:

      hosts with a common subnet address prefix are assumed to be
      attached to a common link (subnetwork), and thus communicate with
      each other directly, without any routers - "local";

      hosts with different subnet address prefixes are assumed to be
      attached to different links (subnetworks), and thus communicate
      with each other only through routers - "remote".


   A typical example of applying the IP subnet architecture to an SVC-
   based Data Link subnetwork is "Classical IP and ARP over ATM"
   (RFC1577).  RFC1577 provides support for ATM deployment that follows
   the traditional IP subnet model and introduces the notion of a
   Logical IP Subnetwork (LIS).  The consequence of this model is that a
   host is required to setup an ATM SVC to any host within its LIS; for
   destinations outside its LIS the host must forward packets through a
   router.  It is important to stress that this "local/remote" decision
   is based solely on the information carried by the source and
   destination addresses and the subnet mask associated with the source
   address.


2  Motivations


   The diversity of TCP/IP applications results in a wide range of
   traffic characteristics.  Some applications last for a very short
   time and generate only a small number of packets between a pair of
   communicating hosts (e.g. ping, DNS). Other applications have a short
   lifetime, but generate a relatively large volume of packets (e.g.
   FTP). There are also applications that have a relatively long
   lifetime, but generate relatively few packets (e.g.  Telnet).
   Finally, we anticipate the emergence of applications that have a
   relatively long lifetime and generate a large volume of packets (e.g.



Expiration Date May 1996                                        [Page 2]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             November 1995


   video-conferencing).

   SVC-based Data Link subnetworks offer certain unique capabilities
   that are not present in other (non-SVC) subnetworks (e.g. Ethernet,
   Token Ring).  The ability to dynamically establish and tear-down SVCs
   between communicating entities attached to an SVC-based Data Link
   subnetwork enables the dynamic dedication and redistribution of
   certain communication resources (e.g. bandwidth) among the entities.
   This dedication and redistribution of resources could be accomplished
   by relying solely on the mechanism(s) provided by the Data Link
   layer.

   The unique capabilities provided by SVC-based Data Link subnetworks
   do not come "for free".  The mechanisms that provide dedication and
   redistribution of resources have certain overhead (e.g. the time
   needed to establish an SVC, resources associated with maintaining a
   state for an SVC). There may also be a monetary cost associated with
   establishing and maintaining an SVC. Therefore, it is very important
   to be cognizant of such an overhead and to carefully balance the
   benefits provided by the mechanisms against the overhead introduced
   by such mechanisms.

   One of the key issues for using SVC-based Data Link subnetworks in
   the TCP/IP environment is the issue of switched virtual circuit (SVC)
   management.  This includes SVC establishment and tear-down, class of
   service specification, and SVC sharing.  At one end of the spectrum
   one could require SVC establishment between communicating entities
   (on a common Data Link subnetwork) for any application. At the other
   end of the spectrum, one could require communicating entities to
   always go through a router, regardless of the application.  Given the
   diversity of TCP/IP applications, either extreme is likely to yield a
   suboptimal solution with respect to the ability to efficiently
   exploit capabilities provided by the underlying Data Link layer.

   The traditional IP subnet model is too restrictive for flexible and
   adaptive use of SVC-based Data Link subnetworks  - the use of a
   subnetwork is driven by information completely unrelated to the
   characteristics of individual applications.  To illustrate the
   problem consider "Classical IP and ARP over ATM" (RFC1577).  RFC1577
   provides support for ATM deployment that follows the traditional IP
   subnet model, and introduces the notion of a Logical IP Subnetwork
   (LIS).  The consequence of this model is that a host is required to
   setup an SVC to any host within its LIS, and it must forward packets
   to destinations outside its LIS through a router.  This
   "local/remote" decision is based solely on the information carried in
   the source and destination addresses and the subnet mask associated
   with the source address, and has no relation to the nature of the
   applications that generated these packets.


3  QoS/Traffic Driven "Local/Remote" Decision


   To exploit the capabilities provided by SVC-based Data Link



Expiration Date May 1996                                        [Page 3]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             November 1995


   subnetworks we propose to allow SVC management to be controlled by
   applications (through an appropriate API), and more specifically by
   the QoS and/or traffic requirements of the applications.  It is
   apparent that while the service requirements of some IP applications
   could justify the establishment of a dedicated SVC (e.g.
   applications that require high bandwidth and/or network resource
   reservations),  other applications could be served with a shared
   connection.  To reduce the overhead associated with the establishment
   and maintenance of SVCs, as well as to improve performance of short-
   lived applications, we propose that communication among the
   applications in the second category may rely on the router-based
   infrastructure (for example, one could hardly imagine establishing an
   SVC just to perform a single DNS query).  The connection (an SVC)
   from a host to its first-hop router would then serve as a shared
   connection for many applications running on the host.  This should
   apply to any pair of hosts connected to a common SVC- based Data Link
   subnetwork, irrespective of the hosts' IP addresses.  Prudent use of
   the router-based infrastructure reduces unnecessary load on the SVC-
   based infrastructure, and at the same time will eliminate the
   overhead (e.g., delay and/or cost) associated with SVC establishment,
   thus benefiting both the network and the applications.

   We propose certain modifications to the existing IP model in order to
   support both applications with QoS requirements that could justify a
   dedicated SVC, and applications that would rely on the router-based
   infrastructure.  While in the conventional ("classical") IP
   environment the "local/remote" decision is based on the information
   provided by the IP addresses, we propose that in the SVC-based Data
   Link environment this decision should be driven by the applications
   (through an appropriate API), and specifically by their QoS and/or
   traffic requirements and/or cost factors.  For example, for a pair of
   hosts, A and B, both on a common switched Data Link subnetwork, an
   application running on a host A should be able to specify whether it
   desires a direct SVC (direct connectivity) to its peer on a host B
   ("local" decision), and in this case an SVC will be established (if
   possible) between A and B; in other cases (the default behavior) A
   should be able to deliver packets to B through one or more IP routers
   ("remote" decision). The default behavior also covers the case where
   an application may desire a direct SVC (direct connectivity), but
   such connectivity is unavailable (e.g.  hosts are on different Data
   Link subnetworks).

   The ability of a host to establish an SVC to a peer  on a common
   switched Data Link subnetwork is predicated on its knowledge  of the
   Link Layer address of the peer. This document assumes the existence
   of mechanism(s) that can provide the host with this information. Some
   of the possible alternatives are NHRP, ARP, or static configuration;
   other alternatives are not precluded.  The ability to acquire the
   Link Layer address of the peer should not be viewed as an indication
   that the host and the peer can establish an SVC - the two may be on
   different Data Link subnetworks, or may be on a common Data Link
   subnetwork that is partitioned.  If a host can not establish an SVC,
   the host may default (depending on the application) to sending data
   through routers.



Expiration Date May 1996                                        [Page 4]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             November 1995


   One important implication of this proposal is that in contrast with
   the conventional IP environment, the "local/remote" decision may no
   longer be time invariant. While at one moment a pair of hosts (e.g. A
   and B) may have an SVC between them (e.g. when there is a video-
   conference running between the hosts) and thus will be viewed as
   "local" to each other, at some later point in time communication
   between exactly the same pair of hosts (e.g. A and B) will be done
   through one or more routers (after the video-conference ends, and
   someone would decide to run ping) and thus will viewed as "remote".

   In addition to being time dependent, the "local/remote" decision may
   yield both "local" and "remote" outcome simultaneously. This is
   because a set of hosts may concurrently run multiple applications,
   where some of these applications could justify an SVC establishment
   (thus resulting in a "local" outcome), while others will rely on
   router-based infrastructure (thus resulting in a "remote" outcome).

   In the case when applications direct a "local" outcome, depending on
   the nature of the applications, a pair of hosts should be able to
   either multiplex packets from several applications over a single SVC,
   or establish dedicated SVCs on a per application basis or both.  In
   the case where an SVC is shared among several applications care must
   be taken to ensure fair sharing of the resources provided by the SVC.
   For example, while it may be acceptable to share a single SVC for
   multiple FTP sessions between a pair of hosts, sharing an SVC for an
   FTP session and a video-conference is likely to be more problematic.

   To summarize, the "local/remote" decision may not be time invariant,
   may depend on factors other than the addresses of the source and the
   destination, and may involve either shared or dedicated SVCs.


4  Address Prefix Region (APR)


   To provide flexible and adaptive use of SVC-based Data Link
   subnetworks we propose to replace the concept of a Logical IP Subnet
   (LIS) with the concept of an Address Prefix Region (APR).

   An Address Prefix Region (APR) is a set of routers and hosts that
   meet all of the following properties:


      An APR must be fully contained within a single Data Link
      subnetwork, but a single Data Link subnetwork may include one or
      more APRs.

      Every element in the set (either a host or a router) can establish
      direct communication (an SVC) with every other element in the set.

      IP addresses of the hosts in the set are assigned in such a way
      that they can be aggregated into a single IP address prefix; each
      element in the set knows the prefix.




Expiration Date May 1996                                        [Page 5]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             November 1995


      All routers in the set advertise direct reachability to all the
      hosts in the set - any router in the set is one (1) IP hop away
      from any host in the set.


   From the point of view of address assignment an APR is identical to a
   LIS.  The major difference between the two is the impact on the
   "local/remote" decision.  Since formation of an APR should have no
   impact on the outcome of the "local/remote" decision made by the
   hosts within the APR, it allows the decoupling of the "local/remote"
   decision from the information provided by the IP addresses.

   For the purpose of IP unicast forwarding the role of the APR is to
   act as a mechanism to associate a set of hosts with one or more
   routers that these hosts could use to establish connectivity
   (reachability) with (a) destinations that are not on a common Data
   Link subnetwork, or (b) destinations for applications that don't
   justify an SVC. An APR would identify for a given set of hosts the
   set of routers that these hosts can use as their first/last hop
   (first-hop/last-hop routers).  At the same time, a host within a
   given APR is not restricted to use only the routers within its APR as
   its first-hop/last-hop routers.  The host could use any router,
   whether in the same or in a different APR as the host, as its first-
   hop/last-hop router, provided that the router is on the same Data
   Link subnetwork as the host. Procedures by which a host could find
   such routers are outside the scope of this document.

   For the purpose of IP layer broadcasts an APR provides a mechanism
   that is identical to the subnet directed broadcast. An IP packet is
   destined to all the elements of an APR if the destination address in
   the packet is equal to the IP address prefix of the APR. We shall
   refer to such a broadcast as an APR Directed Broadcast.

   An APR may have more than one router for redundancy.  To select among
   several routers a host may use information provided by the Data Link
   layer (SVC teardown) as an indication of a "dead" router.  Likewise,
   for a given router an APR would identify the set of hosts for which
   the router should serve as the last hop router.


   The APR could be used to implement administrative constraints on
   connectivity at the network (IP) layer.

   Finally, the APR may also be used to facilitate association of
   elements within an APR with various network layer servers (e.g. ARP
   Server, Multicast Server, etc...). Details of such an association are
   outside the scope of this document.


4.1 Host Modifications


   For an application whose QoS and/or traffic requirements could
   benefit from a direct SVC (direct connectivity), the host should



Expiration Date May 1996                                        [Page 6]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             November 1995


   attempt to establish an SVC, irrespective of the source and
   destination addresses.  If such a connection can not be established,
   the host should forward data through a router that is reachable (at
   the Data Link layer) from the host (e.g. such a router may be one of
   the routers of the APR the host is in, or may be some other router on
   the same Data Link subnetwork as the host). For all other
   applications the host may forward data through one of the routers of
   the APR (as defined in this document) the host is in.



4.2 Router Modifications


   When a router associated with a given APR (as defined in this
   document) receives an IP packet from a host in the APR that is
   destined to another host in the same APR, the router should forward
   the packet (if possible), and refrain from sending an ICMP Redirect
   message to the originating host.


5 Conclusions


   Different approaches to SVC-based Data Link subnetworks used by
   TCP/IP yield substantially different results with respect to the
   ability of TCP/IP applications to efficiently exploit the
   functionality provided by such subnetworks.  For example, in the case
   of ATM both LAN Emulation [LANE] and "classical" IP over ATM
   [RFC1577] localize host changes below the IP layer, and therefore may
   be good first steps in the ATM deployment.  However, these approaches
   are likely to be inadequate for the full utilization of the
   functionality that ATM is expected to provide.

   It appears that any model that does not allow SVC management under
   control of applications, and specifically their QoS and/or traffic
   requirements is likely to curtail efficient use of SVC-based Data
   Link subnetworks.  Enabling direct connectivity for applications that
   could benefit from the functionality provided by SVC-based Data Link
   subnetworks, while relying on routers for other applications, could
   facilitate exploration of the capabilities provided by the
   subnetworks.

   While this document does not define any specific coupling between
   various QoS, traffic characteristics and other parameters, and SVC
   management, it is important to stress that efforts towards
   standardization of various QoS, traffic characteristics, and other
   parameters than an application could use (through an appropriate API)
   to influence SVC management are essential for flexible and adaptive
   use of SVC-based Data Link subnetworks.

   Essential to the deployment of the proposed approach is to develop
   migration strategies that would provide graceful transition based on
   small incremental changes from the current environment to the



Expiration Date May 1996                                        [Page 7]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             November 1995


   environment proposed in this document.

   The proposed model utilizes the SVC-based infrastructure for the
   applications that could benefit from the capabilities supported
   within such an infrastructure, and creates a router-based overlay for
   all other applications. As such it provides a balanced mix of
   router-based and switch-based infrastructures, where the balance
   could be determined by the applications requirements.

   The approach proposed in this document combines switch-based
   infrastructure with router-based overlay and uses each for that which
   it is best suited: switch-based infrastructure for applications that
   can justify an SVC establishment; router-based overlay for all other
   applications.

   The concept of APR proposed in this document could be also applicable
   in a non-SVC based environment.


6 Security Considerations


   Security issues are not discussed in this document.


7 Acknowledgements


   The authors would like to thank Joel Halpern (NewBridge), Allison
   Mankin (ISI), Tony Li (cisco Systems), Andrew Smith (BayNetworks),
   and Curtis Villamizar (ANS) for their review and comments.


Appendix:  Transition for ATM-based subnetworks


   Given that the LIS model outlined in RFC1577 is now being implemented
   by several vendors, it is instructive to consider how the
   architecture proposed in this document could be phased into the
   environment that supports RFC1577 in a backward compatible fashion.

   The APR model implies that packets among hosts within a common APR
   may traverse through a router associated with the APR.  Typically,
   such forwarding would result in the generation of ICMP Redirect
   messages from the router to the source.  As a first step, the new
   host may be configured to quietly ignore these messages.  It should
   also be possible to eliminate Redirect messages by specifying
   multiple subnets per interface of a router, so that while every host
   would have a subnet in common with the router, no two hosts attached
   to the router will be on a common subnet. This approach may not scale
   to large APRs, as it requires the router to be configured with as
   many subnets as there are hosts in the APR.  A better long-term
   solution is to configure the router to suppress the generation of
   ICMP Redirect messages.



Expiration Date May 1996                                        [Page 8]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             November 1995


   Another dimension to be considered is that of a phased migration of
   applications within a host.  As mentioned before, the RFC1577 LIS
   concept can benefit existing applications communicating within an APR
   since it provides them with direct SVCs.  A host could start with
   this default behavior and provide direct SVCs to destinations outside
   the APR only upon application (QoS) request.  At a suitable time,
   when more applications become ATM aware and can explicitly request
   SVCs, the host can transition to the APR behavior.




References


   [LANE] "LAN Emulation over ATM specification- version 1", ATM Forum,
   Feb.95.

   [Postel 81] Postel, J., Sunshine, C., Cohen, D., "The ARPA Internet
   Protocol", Computer Networks, 5, pp. 261-271, 1983.

   [RFC792]  Postel, J., "Internet Control Message Protocol- DARPA
   Internet Program Protocol Specification", STD 5, RFC 792, ISI,
   September 1981.

   [RFC1122]  Braden, R., Editor, "Requirements for Internet Hosts -
   Communication Layers", STD 3, RFC 1122, USC/ISI, October 1989.

   [RFC1577] Laubach, M., "Classical IP and ARP over ATM", January 1994.

   [RFC1620] Braden, B., Postel, J., Rekhter, Y., Internet Architecture
   Extensions for Shared Media", May 1994.

   [RFC1755] Perez, M., Liaw, F., Grossman, D., Mankin, A., Hoffman, E.,
   Malis, A., "ATM Signalling Support for IP over ATM", January 1995.


14  Authors' Address


   Yakov Rekhter
   Cisco Systems
   170 West Tasman Drive,
   San Jose, CA 95134-1706
   Phone:  (914) 528-0090
   email:  yakov@cisco.com

   Dilip Kandlur
   T.J. Watson Research Center IBM Corporation
   P.O. Box 704
   Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
   Phone:  (914) 784-7722
   email:  kandlur@watson.ibm.com




Expiration Date May 1996                                        [Page 9]





INTERNET DRAFT                                             November 1995



























































Expiration Date May 1996                                       [Page 10]



