



Network Working Group                                            W. Ding
Internet-Draft                                      Southeast University
Intended status: Informational                              4 March 2022
Expires: 5 September 2022


             Framework For Internet Basic Behavior Metrics
                      draft-ding-ibbm-framework-00

Abstract

   This document provides a definition of Internet Basic Behavior
   Measurement(IBBM) based on the Internet architecture and describes in
   detail the specifications to be followed for the metrics and
   measurement activities under IBBM, which are given in the form of
   elements.  The main purpose of this document is to standardize the
   accurate meaning and expression of metrics obtained based on Internet
   behavioral measurement activities, to improve the worth of the
   measurement results.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 5 September 2022.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




Ding                    Expires 5 September 2022                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Framework for IBBM                 March 2022


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Criteria For Internet Basic Behavior Metrics  . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Metric Subject  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.1.  Basic Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.2.  Network Components  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.3.  Representation of Subjects  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       4.3.1.  Basic Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       4.3.2.  Network Components  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Metric Topic  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.1.  Routing Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.2.  Topology Measurement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.3.  Performance Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
       5.3.1.  IP Performance Measurement  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
       5.3.2.  Network Device Performance Measurement  . . . . . . .   7
       5.3.3.  Service Performance Measurement . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.4.  Domain Name Resolution Measurement  . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     5.5.  Traffic Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   6.  Metric Entity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     6.1.  Classes of Metric Entities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     6.2.  Description of Metric Entity Classes  . . . . . . . . . .   9
       6.2.1.  Data Types  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       6.2.2.  Formal Description  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   7.  Elements of A Metric  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   8.  Internet Basic Behavior Measurement Activity  . . . . . . . .  14
     8.1.  Attributes of Measurement Activity  . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     8.2.  Measurement Result  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   9.  Metric Fusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   10. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   11. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   12. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18








Ding                    Expires 5 September 2022                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Framework for IBBM                 March 2022


1.  Introduction

   This document constructs an extensible framework to regulate the
   metrics and measurement activities in the field of Internet Basic
   Behavior Measurement, to support comprehensive, effective, and
   standardized management and monitoring of the Internet.  More
   specific intentions are reflected in the following aspects:

   1)  Utilizing unified metrics to support characterization of various
       network activities and standardized description of the running
       states of the Internet from the perspective of basic behavior.
       The characterizations of network activities help managers to
       control the operation of the network and supports locating
       existing or possible anomalies and threat activities in the
       networks.  The standardized description of the running state of
       the Internet can support the preservation of the running tracks
       and prediction of the overall or partial running states of the
       Internet.

   2)  Supporting the sharing and analysis for various intents of
       measurement results through the standardization of measurement
       activities and the description of metrics, thereby improving the
       use efficiency of measurement results and expanding its use
       scope.

   3)  This document is more inclined to support engineering, practice,
       and application in the field of Internet Basic Behavior
       measurement, and provide analytical data for scientific research
       in this field

   4)  This document is more inclined to support accurate description
       and normative expression of the measurement results of Internet
       Basic Behavior and does not involve the discussion of measurement
       methods, measurement accuracy, application intention, etc.

2.  Terminology

   The following list gives definitions that need to be clarified in the
   development of this framework.

   Internet Basic Behavior Measurement
      A process of quantifying the characteristics and laws of the
      subjects in Internet architecture when networks are running.  In
      principle, measurements taken in simulated network environments
      are not Internet Basic Behavior Measurements.

   Internet Basic Behavior Metric




Ding                    Expires 5 September 2022                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Framework for IBBM                 March 2022


      The meaning and manifestation of results of Internet Basic
      Behavior measurements (hereinafter referred to as "Metric").

      Describing the elements of basic Internet behavior metrics is the
      main purpose of this document, and the relevant content will be
      given in Sections 4-7.

   Internet Basic Behavior Measurement Activity
      A series of operations performed to measure specific Internet
      Basic Behavior Metrics (hereinafter referred to as "Measurement
      Activity").  The Internet Basic Behavior Measurement Activity
      consists of two phases:

      (i) Acquisition of Internet Basic Behavior Measurement Source
      Data.  It refers to obtaining traffic and operating data from the
      Internet, including original or time-stamped packet (header)
      sequences, flow records, flow tables, routing tables and MIBs,
      etc., hereinafter referred to as "Measurement Source Data";

      (ii)Modeling analysis.  Modeling analysis is the mapping from
      Measurement Source Data objects to Metric instances.  The scheme
      used to do this mapping is called the "Analysis Model".

   Because a Metric instance could be obtained from different types of
   Measurement Source Data and by different Analysis Models, the details
   of methods of obtaining Measurement Source Data and modeling analysis
   will not be discussed in this document.  Other elements of
   Measurement Activities will be detailedly described in Section 8.
   The description and requirements of measurement activities can ensure
   the operability of Metrics and the storability of measurement
   results.

3.  Criteria For Internet Basic Behavior Metrics

   Metrics MUST be useful for the safe operation and management of the
   Internet.

   This document does not provide any Metric but provides a framework
   for defining and describing what a Metric SHOULD be like.  Metrics
   MAY be developed individually or in groups by the proposers as
   specifications conforming to this framework (hereinafter referred to
   as "Metric Specification").  In each Metric Specification, the
   following items SHOULD be explained:

   *  The purpose and significance of setting up this metric.  The
      purpose and value of the Metric in Internet management, security
      control, and other aspects SHOULD be described.




Ding                    Expires 5 September 2022                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Framework for IBBM                 March 2022


   *  The specific content of Metric's elements listed in Section 7.

   *  A Measurement Activity case including Measurement Source Data
      objects and Analysis Model adopted, conforming to the format
      specified in Section 8.  Because all Metrics MUST be measurable,
      that is, the proposer of the metric SHOULD ensure that at least
      one Measurement Source Data and Analysis Model can support the
      measurement of the Metric.

   *  Other supplementary contents which are not included in the above
      three items MUST be explained.

4.  Metric Subject

   As the measurement is oriented to Internet Basic Behavior, Metrics
   SHOULD have clear behavior Subjects.  Subjects SHOULD have clear
   meanings in the Internet architecture and can work continuously and
   stably in the long term.  Based on the existing Internet
   architecture, this document divides all Subjects into two categories:
   the basic protocols and the network components that support the
   operation of the Internet.  The details are given below.

4.1.  Basic Protocols

   The basic protocols that MAY be used as the Metric subjects include:

   *  Routing protocols

      All interdomain routing protocols and intradomain routing
      protocols with RFC standards that are used on the Internet,
      including BGP, etc.

   *  Network-layer protocols

      IP and ICMP.

   *  Transport-layer protocols

      TCP, UDP, and other RFC-specified transport-layer protocols that
      can be carried by IP packets.

   *  DNS protocol

   It SHOULD be further noted that all link-layer protocols and all
   application-layer protocols that do not belong to the above protocols
   SHOULD NOT be regarded as the subjects of Internet Basic Behavior
   Metrics because they could be easily changed and replaced.




Ding                    Expires 5 September 2022                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Framework for IBBM                 March 2022


4.2.  Network Components

   The network components that MAY be used as Metric subjects include
   the following categories:

   *  Device

      Including Network Device and End System Device;

   *  Link

      Channels that connect devices;

   *  Network

      Collections of devices and links that can communicate with each
      other using private IP addresses;

   *  Service

      Application-oriented software system that runs over the Internet;

   *  AS

      Groups of routers, links, and networks with the same AS number
      under the control of one administrator.

4.3.  Representation of Subjects

   To formally represent subjects, this section provides each subject a
   unique name for identification and description.

4.3.1.  Basic Protocols

   Basic protocols are abbreviated by the protocols' names, such as TCP,
   UDP, IP, ICMP, BGP, DNS, etc.

4.3.2.  Network Components

   The network components are represented by the subjects' names or
   abbreviations:

   *  Device:"NetDevice" or "EndDevice"

   *  Link:"Link"

   *  Network:"Network"




Ding                    Expires 5 September 2022                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Framework for IBBM                 March 2022


   *  Service:"Service"

   *  AS:"AS"

5.  Metric Topic

   To facilitate management and use, Metrics could be separated into
   several topics by semantics, including routing measurement, topology
   measurement, performance measurement, domain name resolution
   measurement, traffic measurement, and other measurement topics.  The
   scope of Metric Topics MAY be expanded as needed.  The meanings and
   scope of the existing topics are described as follows:

5.1.  Routing Measurement

   Metrics oriented to routing information, routing protocols, and
   routers' attributes that are running on the Internet fall within this
   topic.

5.2.  Topology Measurement

   Metrics oriented to connectivity between devices, networks, and ASes
   on the Internet fall within this topic.

5.3.  Performance Measurement

   This topic includes three typical directions:

5.3.1.  IP Performance Measurement

   Metrics that measure the performance of IP networks in the actual
   operation of the Internet during data transmission are IP Performance
   Metrics.

5.3.2.  Network Device Performance Measurement

   Metrics that measure the individual performance of devices on the
   Internet in operation and data transmission are network device
   performance Metrics.

5.3.3.  Service Performance Measurement

   Metrics of the time required by the server software running on the
   Internet to complete specific service tasks are service performance
   Metrics.






Ding                    Expires 5 September 2022                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             Framework for IBBM                 March 2022


5.4.  Domain Name Resolution Measurement

   Metrics of service attributes and capabilities for DNS servers on the
   Internet fall within this topic.

5.5.  Traffic Measurement

   Traffic refers to the sequence of IP packets obtained from the
   running network without active injection of test traffic.  The
   specification of the process of acquiring, compressing, and storing
   traffic is outside the scope of this document.  Metrics based on
   traffic acquisition fall within the topic of traffic measurement.  In
   principle, all Metrics under this topic SHOULD only be obtained based
   on passive measurement methods, however, some special metrics, such
   as DNS response time for resolving IP addresses, end-to-end packet
   loss, etc., may also be obtained based on traffic, but they are not
   part of the topic of traffic measurement.

6.  Metric Entity

   Metric entities are elements of the Internet architecture that can
   carry the results of measurements.  Measurement Activities MAY be
   carried out for different entity objects under the fixed entity
   types.  Standardizing the description of metric entities facilitates
   the storage, use, and fusion of measurement results.

6.1.  Classes of Metric Entities

   Any metric entity that carries the Internet Basic Behavior
   Measurement is a stable and uniquely identifiable existence on the
   Internet.  Metric Entities include but are not limited to the
   following seven categories:

   *  End System (EndSystemClass)

      Devices that have reachable routing IP addresses on the Internet
      and are connected to the network as end hosts, such as servers,
      clients, IoT devices, etc.  When used as entity objects that carry
      Metrics, they SHALL be classified into this metric entity class
      and are directly identified by IP addresses.

   *  IP Prefix (IPPrefixClass)

      The network parts of the IP addresses when using CIDR, which are
      identified in the form of "IP address/prefix-length".

   *  Connection Point (ConnPointClass)




Ding                    Expires 5 September 2022                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             Framework for IBBM                 March 2022


      The endpoints of transport layer connections on the Internet,
      which are identified in the form of "IP address: port".  The value
      of port is an integer falling in 0..65535, which indicates the
      "port" field in TCP and UDP header.

   *  Network Device (NetDeviceClass)

      Devices used to forward IP packets on the Internet, including
      routers, switches, and access devices.  We use a structure with 8
      fields to identify a network device - vendor identification,
      vendor type, AS number, equipment type, longitude, latitude, MAC,
      and spare information.  We suggest using the vendor number (OID)
      in the MIB to represent the producer identification, and the
      equipment type SHOULD be one of Router | Switch | AccessPoint |
      Others.  For routers and switches, MAC and spare information are
      optional.  If the first six fields cannot distinguish two devices,
      the optional fields could be used to support this distinction.
      For AP devices, longitude, latitude, and spare information are
      optional.

   *  Autonomous System (ASClass)

      As described in Section 4.2, we suggest identifying autonomous
      systems by the corresponding AS numbers.

   *  Link (LinkClass)

      A link refers to a single link-layer connection between two
      network devices or between an end system and a network device.  A
      link is identified by an IP address pair.

   *  Path (PathClass)

      A path is a sequence of links that connect end to end.  It is
      identified by the sequence of IP addresses.

6.2.  Description of Metric Entity Classes

   This section provides a JSON-based description of the seven entity
   types defined in the previous section.

6.2.1.  Data Types

   The data types used in the description include:

      string - indicates a string of finite length;

      string63 - indicates string with no more than 63 characters;



Ding                    Expires 5 September 2022                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             Framework for IBBM                 March 2022


      unsigneddInt - indicates integer ranging from 0 to 2^32-1;

      unsignedShort - indicates integer ranging from 0 to 2^16-1;

      float - indicates floating number;

      bool - indicates boolean value;

      inetAddress - indicates Ipv4 or ipv6 address.  An ipv4 address is
      represented as a string in dotted-decimal notation.  An ipv6
      address is represented as a string in standard notation
      (hexadecimal numbers connected with ":").

      prefixLength - indicates the prefix length of an ipv4 or ipv6
      address.  For the ipv4 address prefix, it is an integer ranging
      from 0 to 32.  For the ipv6 address prefix, it is an integer
      ranging from 0 to 128.

6.2.2.  Formal Description

   In the following JSON-based description, "(data type | entity type)"
   denotes the value of this data type or entity type, "[data type |
   entity type]" denotes an array of this data type or entity type.
   Refer to 6.2.1 for data type description and 6.1 for entity type
   description.

   *  End System

        "EndSystemClass": {
          "IP": (inetAddress)
        }

   *  IP Prefix

        "IPPrefixClass":{
          "Prefix":(inetAddress),
          "Prefix Length": (prefixLength)
        }

   *  Connection Point

        "ConnPointClass":{
          "IP": (inetAddress),
          "Port": (unsignedShort)
        }

   *  Network Device




Ding                    Expires 5 September 2022               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             Framework for IBBM                 March 2022


        "NetDeviceClass":{
          "Vendor ID": (unsignedInt),
          "#Vender ID":"0 indicates unknown",
          "Vender Type": (string),
          "#Vender Type":""" indicates unknown",
          "ASN": (unsignedInt),
          "#ASN":"0 indicates unknown"
          "Type":
            "Router"|"Switch"|"AccessPoint"|"Others",
          "Longitude": (float),
          "#Longitude":"0.0 indicates unknown",
          "Latitude": (float),
          "#Latitude":"0.0 indicates unknown",
          "MAC": (string),
          "#MAC":""" indicates unknown"
          "Spare Information": (unsignedInt),
          "#Spare Information":"0 indicates unknown"
        }

   *  Autonomous System

        "ASClass":{
          "ASN":(unsignedInt)
        }

   *  Link

        "LinkClass":{
          "IPa": (inetAddress),"
          "IPb" :(inetAddress),
          "Direction": (bool),
          "#Direction":
            " "ture/false" indicates that IPa to
            IPb is bidirectional/unidirectional"
        }

   *  Path

        "PathClass": {
          "Links": [inetAddress],
          "#Links":"A series of IP Address, such as [ip1,ip2,ip3,...]",
          "Direction":(bool),
          "#Direction":"0 indicates unidirectional(ip1->ip2->ip3->...),
                        1 indicates bidirectional"
        }






Ding                    Expires 5 September 2022               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft             Framework for IBBM                 March 2022


   When a new entity type of Internet Basic Behavior metrics is added,
   its name, description, and formal description SHOULD be given in the
   above form at the same time.

7.  Elements of A Metric

   Metric Specifications under the framework MUST clarify the following
   elements:

   (i)     Name

           "Name" is the identifier of a Metric that MUST be unique in
           the context of all relevant Internet Basic Behavior
           Measurement fields.  It is suggested to use English words
           connected with "_" that reflect the core semantics of the
           metric.  If the topic to which the Metric belongs has special
           naming requirements for the Metrics under the subject's
           independent framework, the naming of this Metric SHOULD
           comply with its requirements.

   (ii)    Representation

           "Representation" describes the data structure of the
           quantitative results of a metric.  It includes the types of
           number, string, network address, set and undirected graph,
           etc.  It is RECOMMEDED that the proposer of the metric SHOULD
           describe them in JSON.

   (iii)   Topic

           "Topic" SHOULD be specified as one of "Routing Measurement",
           "Topology Measurement", "DNS Measurement", "Traffic
           Measurement" or "Performance Measurement" (See Section 5 for
           details).

   (iv)    Subject

           "Subject" is a non-empty set of metric subjects(See section 4
           for details).

   (v)     Entity

           "Entity" is a structure of entity types that hosts this
           metric (See Section 6 for details).  JSON is the RECOMMENDED
           format for this structure's description.  The entity types in
           a structure can be the same or different.

   (vi)    Semantics



Ding                    Expires 5 September 2022               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft             Framework for IBBM                 March 2022


           "Semantics" is the meaning of the metric containing the
           description of each element in the data structure given by
           the "Representation" element.  It MAY be a descriptive
           definition or a model representation based on mathematical
           symbols.  The description of metric semantics MUST be basic,
           normative, and unambiguous no matter what method is adopted.
           For items whose value range includes numerical values, the
           metric unit to be used MUST also be given, which MUST be in
           international metric units.

   (vii)   Attribute

           "Attribute" consists of two sub-elements: a) Basic attribute.
           According to the semantics and characteristics of the metric,
           the value SHOULD be one of structural|
           characteristic|sample|other.  A Metric composed of one or
           more entity objects of different entity types (see Section 6
           for entity types) and contains a relatively stable specific
           structural relationship among entity objects is called a
           structural metric, such as networks' topologies; a metric
           that describes the inherent characteristics of an entity
           object is called a characteristic metric, such as the
           capacity of a link.  A characteristic metric is relatively
           stable so could also be called a static metric; the metric
           based on a specific Measurement Source Data and analyzed by
           the Analysis Model is called a sample Metric; Metrics that
           can not be described by the above attributes are uniformly
           called other metrics.  The proposer of such metrics SHOULD
           try to give appropriate explanations and descriptions of
           other metrics. b) Fusible attribute.  Fusible attribute
           refers to whether the measurement result of this metric could
           perform the fusion activities.  For the definition and
           related content of the fusion activity, see Section 9.

   (viii)  Parameter

           "Parameter" is a set of parameters (name & type) that MUST be
           used during the measurement, which MAY be empty.  For
           example, the agreement on unit time&#65292; the bandwidth
           usage threshold when congestion occurs, etc.  The semantics
           of these parameters SHOULD be reflected in the metric's
           "Semantics" element.  The parameter set is RECOMMEDED to be
           given in JSON.

   (ix)    Others






Ding                    Expires 5 September 2022               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft             Framework for IBBM                 March 2022


           The metric's description information that is not included in
           the above elements but MUST be explained.  This element would
           be empty if there is no need.

8.  Internet Basic Behavior Measurement Activity

   Measurement Activities MUST only be carried out for Metrics that have
   completed Metric Specifications.  A Measurement Activity SHOULD be
   described as an 8-tuple [Measurement Activity's Name, Metric's Name,
   Metric's Parameter, measurement method, measurement point, entity
   object, Measurement Source Data, measurement results].  The front 7
   items are the attributes of the Measurement Activity, that is, each
   Measurement Activity instance MUST have a unique identification, and
   only be oriented to one Metric at the same measurement point, using
   the same measurement method and under the conditions with the same
   parameters; the measurement result is a collection of triples like
   [measurement time, entity object, measurement value].

8.1.  Attributes of Measurement Activity

   (i)    Measurement Activity Name

          It refers to the identifier of the Measurement Activity, which
          uniquely identifies the Measurement Activity.  A measure
          activity name is ADVISED to be expanded based on the name or
          number that can uniquely identify the organizations or
          individuals that perform the measurement.  The organizations
          or individuals who perform the Measurement Activity SHALL be
          responsible for the measurement results and have the
          obligation to further explain the measurement results when
          necessary.

   (ii)   Metric

          It refers to the name of the Metric targeted by this
          Measurement Activity(see Section 7 for details).

   (iii)  Metric Parameter

          It refers to the specific value of each parameter described in
          the "Parameter" element of the Metric Specification in this
          Measurement Activity.  The "Parameter" element is referred to
          Article 8 in Section 7.

   (iv)   Measurement Method






Ding                    Expires 5 September 2022               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft             Framework for IBBM                 March 2022


          It refers to the description of the Analysis Model used in
          this Measurement Activity, that is, the algorithm or model
          used in the process of mapping a Measurement Source Data
          object into a Metric value, which is described in natural
          language or pseudocode.  The Analysis Model is defined in
          section 2.

   (v)    Measurement Point

          It refers to the network location where the Measurement Source
          Data is obtained.

   (vi)   Entity Object

          It refers to a sequence of network entity objects that carry
          the Metric.  The type of all entity objects in the sequence
          MUST be consistent with the description of the Metric element
          "Entity" in the corresponding Metric Specification.  If the
          measurement is performed for different entity objects, the
          value of this attribute is null and will be marked in
          "Measurement Results".

   (vii)  Measurement Source Data

          It refers to a description of the Measurement Source Data used
          in this Measurement Activity and acquired at the measurement
          point, which follows the definition in section 2, along with
          the parameters associated with these Measurement Source Data
          (e.g., the sampling rate for passively collecting traffic).

8.2.  Measurement Result

   When the "entity object" attribute of the Measurement Activity is
   non-null, the measurement result of the Measurement Activity is a
   sequence of 2-tuples [measurement time, measurement value],
   otherwise, the measurement result is a sequence of triples
   [measurement time, measurement value, entity object].  A more
   specific explanation is as follows:

   *  The value type of the measurement value MUST be consistent with
      the "Representation" element in the Metric Specification for which
      the measurement is performed.  See Section 7 for the
      "Representation" element.








Ding                    Expires 5 September 2022               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft             Framework for IBBM                 March 2022


   *  The measurement time is the time to obtain the " measurement
      value", expressed in a 2-tuple [start time, duration].  If the
      duration is zero, the measurement time is instantaneous;
      Otherwise, it's a period.  The RECOMMENDED default time unit is
      second.  Otherwise, it SHOULD be specified.  In general, the
      measurement time is obtained based on the Measurement Source Data.

   *  Entity objects: as described in Article 6 in Section 8.1.

9.  Metric Fusion

   The procedure of processing the measurement results or fusion results
   through combination, statistics, etc. is called metric fusion, such
   as the combination of topology graphs, the mean or median of the
   sample metrics, etc.  Metric fusion is carried out by metric fusion
   activities towards completed Measurement Activities or fusion
   activities.  Metric fusion activities are described as a 6-tuple:
   [fusion activity name, Metric, description, fusion object, fusion
   model, fusion result].  The detailed description is as follows:

   (i)    Fusion Activity Name

          It refers to an identifier of the fusion activity.  It is used
          to uniquely identify the fusion activity.  It is ADVISED to be
          expanded based on the name or number that uniquely identifies
          the organizations or individuals performing this fusion
          activity and distinguished from the Measurement Activity name
          through a standard suffix.  The organizations or individuals
          that carry out this fusion activity are responsible for the
          result of this fusion and have the obligation to further
          explain the results of the fusion as needed.

   (ii)   Metric

          It refers to the Metric for which the fusion activity is
          oriented, as described in Article 1) in Section 7.  In
          particular, sub-element b) of the "Attribute" elements of the
          Metric in the fusion activity SHOULD be marked as " Fusible".

   (iii)  Description

          It refers to a general description of the intention of this
          fusion activity and other matters that need to be explained.

   (iv)   Fusion Object






Ding                    Expires 5 September 2022               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft             Framework for IBBM                 March 2022


          The measurement results and fusion results of the collection
          of completed measurement activities and fusion activities are
          the fusion objects of this fusion activity.  It SHOULD be
          noted that all the results of measurement activities and
          fusion activities that are fusion objects MUST have the same
          metric.  In general, the measurement results have the same
          structure.

   (v)    Fusion Model

          It refers to the description of the Analysis Model (or
          algorithm) used in this fusion activity.

   (vi)   Fusion Result

          It is as same as measurement result.

10.  Security Considerations

   TBD

11.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.

12.  Informative References

   [RFC2330]  Paxson, V., Almes, G., Mahdavi, J., and M. Mathis,
              "Framework for IP Performance Metrics", RFC 2330,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2330, May 1998,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2330>.

   [RFC2544]  Bradner, S. and J. McQuaid, "Benchmarking Methodology for
              Network Interconnect Devices", RFC 2544,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2544, March 1999,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2544>.

   [RFC2678]  Mahdavi, J. and V. Paxson, "IPPM Metrics for Measuring
              Connectivity", RFC 2678, DOI 10.17487/RFC2678, September
              1999, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2678>.

   [RFC3148]  Mathis, M. and M. Allman, "A Framework for Defining
              Empirical Bulk Transfer Capacity Metrics", RFC 3148,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3148, July 2001,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3148>.






Ding                    Expires 5 September 2022               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft             Framework for IBBM                 March 2022


   [RFC3393]  Demichelis, C. and P. Chimento, "IP Packet Delay Variation
              Metric for IP Performance Metrics (IPPM)", RFC 3393,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3393, November 2002,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3393>.

   [RFC5136]  Chimento, P. and J. Ishac, "Defining Network Capacity",
              RFC 5136, DOI 10.17487/RFC5136, February 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5136>.

   [RFC5481]  Morton, A. and B. Claise, "Packet Delay Variation
              Applicability Statement", RFC 5481, DOI 10.17487/RFC5481,
              March 2009, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5481>.

   [RFC5560]  Uijterwaal, H., "A One-Way Packet Duplication Metric",
              RFC 5560, DOI 10.17487/RFC5560, May 2009,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5560>.

   [RFC5853]  Hautakorpi, J., Ed., Camarillo, G., Penfield, R.,
              Hawrylyshen, A., and M. Bhatia, "Requirements from Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP) Session Border Control (SBC)
              Deployments", RFC 5853, DOI 10.17487/RFC5853, April 2010,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5853>.

   [RFC6390]  Clark, A. and B. Claise, "Guidelines for Considering New
              Performance Metric Development", BCP 170, RFC 6390,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6390, October 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6390>.

   [RFC7679]  Almes, G., Kalidindi, S., Zekauskas, M., and A. Morton,
              Ed., "A One-Way Delay Metric for IP Performance Metrics
              (IPPM)", STD 81, RFC 7679, DOI 10.17487/RFC7679, January
              2016, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7679>.

   [RFC7680]  Almes, G., Kalidindi, S., Zekauskas, M., and A. Morton,
              Ed., "A One-Way Loss Metric for IP Performance Metrics
              (IPPM)", STD 82, RFC 7680, DOI 10.17487/RFC7680, January
              2016, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7680>.

Author's Address

   Wei Ding
   Southeast University
   Nanjing
   211189
   China
   Email: wding@njnet.edu.cn





Ding                    Expires 5 September 2022               [Page 18]
