


Network Working Group                                        D. Anderson
Internet-Draft                                                       AV8
Intended status: Best Current                             April 24, 2007
Practice
Expires: October 26, 2007


                       Reverse DNS Status Report
                draft-anderson-reverse-dns-status-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 26, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).













Anderson                Expires October 26, 2007                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Reverse DNS Status Report             April 2007


Abstract

   Translation of IP addresses to domain names is an optional feature of
   DNS.  Many sites implement it in someway, many others do not
   implement it at all.  Over time, some myths have developed regarding
   reverse DNS mapping.  The goal of this document is to to identify
   best practices, illuminate false assumptions and to report on the
   status of reverse DNS facilities so that DNS Administrators and
   operators can make informed decisions about the options for DNS
   reverse mapping.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.3.  Key Words  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.4.  Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Analysis of Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  Registry Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  Reverse Mapping Alternatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.3.  Use of Reverse Mapping for Security and Abuse Detection  .  8
     3.4.  Logging Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.5.  Domain Population Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     3.6.  Delegation Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   5.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 15




















Anderson                Expires October 26, 2007                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Reverse DNS Status Report             April 2007


1.  Introduction

1.1.  Overview

   The Domain Name System has a facility for providing mapping of IP
   addresses to host names.  A number of different practices have
   evolved for using reverse DNS mapping.  This facility has long been
   documented, but without detailed canons for those who wish to utilize
   such mappings.  DNS Administrators are free to use or not use the PTR
   facility in any way that is useful to their site.  This document does
   not seek to define or endorse a canonical reverse mapping scheme, but
   rather to identify facts, illuminate myths, recommend best practices,
   and to report on the status of reverse mapping facilities.

1.2.  Terminology

   In the following, the general term "reverse mapping" is used to refer
   to the capability of mapping IP addresses to host names, and "reverse
   tree" the portions of the DNS that provide the functionality.  The
   term "IN-ADDR" is used to specifically refer to the feature only as
   it applies to IPv4 use.  The domain IN-ADDR.ARPA is used to
   denominate the portion of the DNS that provides such IPv4-specific
   functionality.  "IP6" refers to the feature only as it applies to
   IPv6 use.  The domain "IP6.ARPA" denominates the portion of the DNS
   that provides the IPv6-specific functionality.  In what follows,
   except where the text explicitly refers specifically to IPv4 or IPv6
   features, the document can and should be applied to both address
   spaces.

1.3.  Key Words

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

1.4.  Motivation

   In recent years, some sites have increased utilization of reverse
   mapping even as other sites have stopped maintaining reverse mappings
   for their addresses.  This has created friction and controversy about
   the use of reverse mapping.  Several factors drive these diverging
   behaviors.

   The widespread practice of "virtual hosting" -- using one machine and
   IP address to host many different domains -- increases the number of
   machines that have multiple IP addresses and/or multiple domain
   names.  Some sites only enter reverse mappings for certain kinds of
   systems such as routers.  Some sites generate reverse mapping entries



Anderson                Expires October 26, 2007                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Reverse DNS Status Report             April 2007


   automatically using a script or program.  There are a variety of
   schemes for reverse mapping.  Since forward names and reverse
   mappings are frequently administered by different agencies or
   organizations, consistency is difficult to maintain and the structure
   is not amenable to cooperative secure update.  The large IPv6 address
   space exacerbates the difficulty of administering reverse mapping.
   For example, the reverse lookup domain name corresponding to the
   address

    4321:0:1:2:3:4:567:89ab

   would be

    b.a.9.8.7.6.5.0.4.0.0.0.3.0.0.0.2.0.0.0.1.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.1.2.3.4.IP6.
                                                                   ARPA.

   As this example from [RFC3596] makes clear, the IPv6 reverse DNS tree
   is much more tedious to administer and expensive to maintain than the
   IPv4 tree.  The greatly increased depth is expected to make queries
   slower, and more burdensome on servers.

   Many DNS Administrators regard the data in the reverse tree as an
   unnecessary expense and a potential information leak, and so object
   to populating reverse mappings.

   DNS Administrators have also attempted to use reverse mappings as a
   part of a security-prevention or abuse-prevention policy.
   Administrators have asserted that a certain style of reverse mapping
   must be maintained.  Facts have been obscured by advocacy and false
   assumptions.  Consequently, myths have developed regarding the notion
   of proper use of reverse DNS records, and what reverse mapping
   information reasonably means outside of the organization providing
   the data.

   Information about the status of reverse mapping facilities seems to
   be fragmented, missing, or not well understood in the operations
   community.  Many people may be unaware of the status of reverse
   mapping facilities and options available for consideration.

   In light of the above issues, a discussion of facts, false
   assumptions, and current status of reverse mapping facilities will be
   helpful so that DNS users, system administrators, and stakeholders
   can make informed and rational decisions.








Anderson                Expires October 26, 2007                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Reverse DNS Status Report             April 2007


2.  Background

   In the early days of the Domain Name System [RFC0883] a special
   domain was set aside for finding gateways and mapping IP addresses to
   domain names.  From the very beginning, cautions were stated:

   "Since the IN-ADDR special domain and the normal domain for a
   particular host or gateway will be in different zones, the
   possibility exists that that the data may be inconsistent.

   "Gateways will often have two names in separate domains, only one of
   which can be primary."

   These cautions were repeated in [RFC1035].  The guidelines on the use
   of the special domain IN-ADDR.ARPA are discussed in [RFC1034].  The
   introduction of Classless Interdomain Routing (CIDR) by [RFC1519] in
   1993 effectively obsoleted the use of IN-ADDR.ARPA to find gateways.
   CIDR also made delegation of reverse mapping zones more difficult.
   Very early in the development, problems were noted with the IN-
   ADDR.ARPA special domain method of reverse mapping.  Alternatives
   began to be explored in [RFC1788] in 1995.  In 1998, a scheme for
   classless delegation of IN-ADDR.ARPA was invented in [RFC2317].  For
   the IPv6 address space, IP6.ARPA was added and is described by
   [RFC3596].  Experimentation is proceeding in IPv6 on the Node
   Information (NI) ICMP query specified in [RFC4620].  It should be
   noted that serious discussions were held about obsoleting the special
   domain method of reverse mapping in IPv6, however, the IP6.ARPA
   special domain has been kept, at least for now.

   An exploration of the role of the U.S. Department of Commerce in the
   privatization of the management of the Internet and the role of ICANN
   in managing the Domain Name System is helpful, if not critical to
   understanding the status of the reverse mapping system.  This
   document will not explore these roles in detail, but will make
   references as necessary.

   Finally, the DNSSEC system has also changed the landscape regarding
   the authenticity of DNS queries.  However, DNSSEC is not yet widely
   deployed, and this document will only make reference to the
   improvements in authenticity.











Anderson                Expires October 26, 2007                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Reverse DNS Status Report             April 2007


3.  Analysis of Issues

3.1.  Registry Issues

   The mission of a Regional Internet Registry (RIR) is, generally, to
   manage the assignment and registration of IP Address resources, and
   to keep the records and documents which are necessary to perform that
   function.  A function assigned to the RIRs includes joint operation
   of the special reverse mapping domains.

   As the Internet was privatized, the assignment of blocks of IP
   Address space was delegated to (originally three) Regional Internet
   Registries.  The guidelines in [RFC2050] state that registries must
   maintain reverse mapping parent records for the blocks assigned to
   ISPs and for CIDR blocks smaller than /16, and for blocks that are
   not assigned to specific organizations.  Each RIR has its own policy
   for reverse-mapping maintenance; these policies may change from time
   to time, but typically follow RFC2050.

   Myth: "Registries require IP users to populate reverse mapping."

   Explanation: Some persons, in order to promote population of reverse
   mapping, have asserted that the Regional Registries require
   population of reverse mapping entries.  This myth is a play on words
   in RFC2050 and on the Registry policies that restate the RFC2050
   guideline.  Registries require only that certain specified users
   perform their own reverse mapping.  But the registries don't require
   that users must populate reverse mapping entries, only that the
   Registry will not perform delegations for them.

   Fact: Registries generally encourage, but do not require, customers
   to use reverse mapping.

   Fact: Registries may remove reverse mapping delegations on their own
   initiative if the delegated nameservers are lame.

   The U.S. Department of Commerce MOU with ICANN [1] and amendments do
   not explicitly require ICANN to perform reverse mapping service, nor
   does the MOU explicitly require any delegated Regional Internet
   Registries to perform reverse mapping service.  The MOU and
   amendments don't mention reverse mapping at all.  One or more
   registries have previously expressed interest in removing support for
   reverse mappings records.  The operations of the IN-ADDR.ARPA and
   IP6.ARPA special domains impose a growing technical, engineering-
   oriented, network-operational burden on what are otherwise entirely
   documentary, legal-oriented organizations.

   The technical problems faced by Regional Registries have been known



Anderson                Expires October 26, 2007                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Reverse DNS Status Report             April 2007


   for some time as [RFC1788] states in its introduction in 1995:

   "As application servers have appeared which require the Domain Name
   for user interaction and security logging, the IN-ADDR servers have
   been inundated with queries.  This produces long user visible pauses
   at the initiation of sessions."

   This load presents a performance problem for the Regional Registries
   that continues to grow in proportion to the size of the Internet.
   Delegated special domain servers also have a burden that depends on
   the number of users and presents a performance bottleneck.

3.2.  Reverse Mapping Alternatives

   Experimentation with alternatives for IPv4 began in 1995 with
   [RFC1788].  This RFC documents ICMP types 37 and 38, Domain Name
   Query and Domain Name Reply, respectively.  IPv6 experimentation
   continues with [RFC4620], which defines similar functions for Node
   Information queries using ICMPv6 types 139 and 140 for NI Query and
   NI Reply, respectively.

   These reverse mapping alternatives are attractive because they neatly
   solve the problem that many people use reverse mapping to perform:
   They identify the host computer using the IP address.  These
   alternatives are more scalable because each host handles its own
   responses to reverse mapping, rather than a few servers that must
   handle all the reverse mapping queries for a particular IP address
   block.  Putting this information on the host solves long-cited
   administration and consistency problems, present since RFC0883 first
   noted them.

   It is often a mistaken assumption that a host has one and only one IP
   address.  A single host computer may have many IP addresses, and
   there may even be complicated internal topology to those IP
   Addresses.  IP hosts are perfectly capable of a complicated internal
   topology similar to Netware or similar to internal network paths of
   NSC Hyperchannel routers.

   For example, one may have a single loopback address that is canonical
   for a host, with each network interface having a unique address.
   This structure, pioneered by Netware, enables Applications to connect
   to a single address, via routing information distributed by the
   physical network interfaces.  Virtual hosting systems may also have
   many IP addresses on internal loopback interfaces so that each
   virtual host site has only a single address, but the physical host
   can be multihomed.

   For another example, a scheme preferred for BGP setups, gives a



Anderson                Expires October 26, 2007                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Reverse DNS Status Report             April 2007


   router a loopback address for BGP peers.  A variant gives each BGP
   peer a unique address.  This structure improves management of BGP
   peers and also makes it harder for attackers to guess the BGP IP
   address because a traceroute would only identify the physical
   interfaces.  The accumulation of many IP Addresses on a single host
   or router means that identification via special reverse mapping
   mapping is difficult at best.  As noted since RFC0883, a router may
   have IP addresses from different organizations and zones.  A better
   solution is to have a means of querying the node for its name.

   There is also an architectural attraction to having this
   identification performed at the same level as other host control
   messages such as PING.  The questions "Are you up?" and "What is your
   name?" are naturually on the same level.

   Recommendation: Become familiar with the alternatives in RFC1788 and
   RFC4620.

3.3.  Use of Reverse Mapping for Security and Abuse Detection

   Threats against DNS have been documented in [RFC3833].  The threats
   described are sobering, and reveal that DNS is not suitable for trust
   purposes.

   Myth: Hosts with matching forward and reverse mappings are more
   trustworthy.

   Explanation: This idea has been promoted by certain anti-spam
   elements for many years.

   Fact: There is no justification for this conclusion.  When pressed
   for a reason, advocates say that one is entitled to make decisions
   without justification because they have "incomplete information".
   There is nothing about imcomplete information that justifies
   irrational or capricous decision making.  Every scientific experiment
   and every court case involves conclusions and decisions based on
   incomplete information.  There are legitimate methods of making
   decisions with incomplete information.  No scientific or judicial
   method involves an entitlement to act irrationally or capriciously.
   Legitimate methods do not depend on false assumptions, particularly
   those with security and trust implications.  We note the following
   facts:

      The lack of reverse mapping has no security implications at all.
      Not having reverse mapping does not imply one is untrustworthy.

      A non-matching reverse mapping carries no security or spam
      implications.  There is no requirement that forward and reverse



Anderson                Expires October 26, 2007                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Reverse DNS Status Report             April 2007


      mappings must match in order to be useful to the site creating the
      mappings.

      A matching forward/reverse entry may be forged by a number of
      methods.

      The user of an IP Address often has no connection to the reverse
      mapping entry for the IP Address other than being a customer of an
      ISP.  The fact of being a customer does not make the user
      trustworthy nor untruthworthy.  There is no relationship between
      whether the user is trustworthy, and whether the IP Address has
      reverse mapping.

      In the case that the IP user also has been delegated control of
      the reverse mapping, the user only has to forge the forward
      lookup, because they control the reverse lookup.

   There have been instances, sometimes well publicized, where trust
   decisions have been based on reverse mapping.  For example, ISPs have
   blocked email based on lack of reverse mapping; Banks have blocked
   customer access; etc.  Advocates of a certain type of population
   scheme when persuding others to use reverse mapping as a trust
   mechanism often cite such cases in order to bolster the notion that
   other people utilize reverse mappings for trust and security
   purposes.  What is omitted from their descriptions is the fact that
   such examples were often short-lived and ended ignomiously, and
   frequently caused disruption and embarrassment to the organizations
   that implemented them.

   There have also been more serious threats involved in the
   inappropriate use of DNS for trust decisions.  The Unix rsh and rexec
   commands look for names in a .rhosts file.  If the DNS mapping is
   forged, the programs will allow access.  These programs have long
   since been deprecated in favor of programs that use cryptographic
   authentication.

   Best Practice: Do not use DNS for trust or security decisions.

3.4.  Logging Issues

   Logging requires special attention.  Logging systems exist that only
   log reverse mapping entry to identify the remote connection.  Because
   an attacker may have control over their reverse mapping entry and
   their forward mapping entry, These DNS entries cannot be trusted to
   identify an attacker.  An IP Address should always be logged and used
   as the primary means of identification.  The reverse mapping and the
   forward mapping may be of interest, but one should be prepared for
   the case where these will be entirely useless.  Another consideration



Anderson                Expires October 26, 2007                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          Reverse DNS Status Report             April 2007


   is that the reverse mapping entry may be up to 255 bytes long.  Care
   should be taken that a DOS attack cannot be executed on the logging
   system by use of long domain names.

   Fact: Packets are exchanged depending on the source and destination
   IP Addresses.

   Best Practice: Logging systems should have the configurable
   capability to omit reverse mapping entries from the logs.

3.5.  Domain Population Issues

   The success of the IN-ADDR domain in its intended role has long been
   questioned.  As [RFC1788] notes:

   "The IN-ADDR domain of the DNS is specified [RFC-1035] to perform
   address to domain name resolution, and to facilitate queries to
   locate all gateways (routers) on a particular network in the
   Internet.

   "Neither function has been remarkably successful.  The IN-ADDR domain
   is not reliably populated."

   Not much has changed since this was written in 1995.  The IN-ADDR
   domain is still not used by many sites.  There are a variety of
   reasons cited as to why this is, and still more varieties of proposed
   solutions to this problem.  There are yet more myths about what could
   be done if the entire planet were to populate the reverse mapping
   trees.  Most such claims involve security or trust decisions that
   would be unjustified and untrustworthy even if the entire planet
   fully populated the reverse mapping in just the way demanded.

   However, It is apparent that many trivial mappings are possible: For
   example, one might translate any IP address into a name generated
   from the IP address itself.  For example, 192.0.2.1 might become x1-
   2-0-192.example.com where example.com is the domain of the ISP to
   which the IP Address was originally delegated.

   This yields no information that wasn't already available to the
   remote site that issued the reverse mapping query.  Indeed, some
   persons object to such automated mappings because they don't reveal
   anything about the IP address.  Others object to revealing
   information to outsiders.

   Suggestion: Use names that become something like characters rather
   than names that reflect the purpose.  So instead of naming a host
   system 'accounting', name it something that becomes meaningful to the
   people the use the system, yet meaningless to outsiders.  In the



Anderson                Expires October 26, 2007               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          Reverse DNS Status Report             April 2007


   event of problems, the system can be discussed by name without
   revealing unnecessary information about the purpose of the system

   One could completely automate both forward and reverse domains so
   that a query for an A record for x1-2-0-192.example.com would produce
   the address 192.0.2.1 while a PTR query produces the name.  No
   information at all is exchanged in such a transaction, and so it
   could be done locally, without DNS servers at all, if one were so
   inclined.  Or it could be done by a set of servers on the internet.
   Certainly, trust decisions should not be affected by such a zero
   information system.

3.6.  Delegation Issues

   A method of delegating CIDR blocks has been described in [RFC2317].
   Organizations have performed such RFC2317 delegations omitting the
   first and last IP addresses in the block, asserting that these IP
   addresses are unusable.  This assumption is only true if the block is
   used on a broadcast network, such as an ethernet.  However, there are
   many types of non-broadcast network media.  Examples include ATM and
   Frame Relay, and of course the host may have internal non-broadcast
   network topology, suitable for virtual hosting.  The delegated block
   might also be further subnetted and routed as /32 by the recipient.

   Best Practice: Delegate all addresses in block.  Do not assume that
   everyone uses ethernet.

























Anderson                Expires October 26, 2007               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          Reverse DNS Status Report             April 2007


4.  Security Considerations

   DNS PTR records are entirely optional, and MUST NOT be assumed to
   exist.  Software MUST NOT fail or incur delay as a result of the non-
   existance of PTR records.

   Unauthenticated DNS MUST NOT be relied on for security or trust
   decisions.  Even when DNSSEC is used to verify the authenticity of
   DNS records, matching reverse and forward records do not imply either
   improved security or trustworthiness over sites that either do not
   have reverse DNS or that do not have matching foward/reverse DNS.

   DNS records MUST NOT be used in logs instead of IP addresses.
   Logging only the PTR resource records instead of the IP address is
   vulnerable to attack, since attackers may control the name, and may
   also use long names that will either become truncated by the logging
   system, or require upto 255 bytes to store.  Logging both IP address
   and DNS PTR records may be helpful but one must also consider that
   the 255 byte per record space requirement does not become a DOS
   attack on the logging system.































Anderson                Expires October 26, 2007               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          Reverse DNS Status Report             April 2007


5.  Normative References

   [RFC0883]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names: Implementation
              specification", RFC 883, November 1983.

   [RFC1034]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and facilities",
              STD 13, RFC 1034, November 1987.

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
              specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [RFC1519]  Fuller, V., Li, T., Yu, J., and K. Varadhan, "Classless
              Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR): an Address Assignment and
              Aggregation Strategy", RFC 1519, September 1993.

   [RFC1788]  Simpson, W., "ICMP Domain Name Messages", RFC 1788,
              April 1995.

   [RFC2050]  Hubbard, K., Kosters, M., Conrad, D., Karrenberg, D., and
              J. Postel, "INTERNET REGISTRY IP ALLOCATION GUIDELINES",
              BCP 12, RFC 2050, November 1996.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2317]  Eidnes, H., de Groot, G., and P. Vixie, "Classless IN-
              ADDR.ARPA delegation", BCP 20, RFC 2317, March 1998.

   [RFC3596]  Thomson, S., Huitema, C., Ksinant, V., and M. Souissi,
              "DNS Extensions to Support IP Version 6", RFC 3596,
              October 2003.

   [RFC3833]  Atkins, D. and R. Austein, "Threat Analysis of the Domain
              Name System (DNS)", RFC 3833, August 2004.

   [RFC4620]  Crawford, M. and B. Haberman, "IPv6 Node Information
              Queries", RFC 4620, August 2006.

   [1]  <http://www.icann.org/general/agreements.htm>












Anderson                Expires October 26, 2007               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          Reverse DNS Status Report             April 2007


Author's Address

   Dean Anderson
   Av8 Internet, Inc
   P.O. Box 7286
   Nashua, NH  03060
   USA

   Phone: +1 617 256 5494
   Email: dean@av8.net









































Anderson                Expires October 26, 2007               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft          Reverse DNS Status Report             April 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Anderson                Expires October 26, 2007               [Page 15]

