A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        BCP 71
        RFC 3481

        Title:      TCP over Second (2.5G) and Third (3G) Generation
                    Wireless Networks
        Author(s):  H. Inamura, Ed., G. Montenegro, Ed., R. Ludwig,
                    A. Gurtov, F. Khafizov
        Status:     Best Current Practice
        Date:       February 2003
        Mailbox:    inamura@mml.yrp.nttdocomo.co.jp, gab@sun.com,
                    Reiner.Ludwig@Ericsson.com,
                    andrei.gurtov@sonera.com,
                    faridk@nortelnetworks.com
        Pages:      26
        Characters: 61528
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-pilc-2.5g3g-12.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3481.txt


This document describes a profile for optimizing TCP to adapt so that
it handles paths including second (2.5G) and third (3G) generation
wireless networks.  It describes the relevant characteristics of 2.5G
and 3G networks, and specific features of example deployments of such
networks.  It then recommends TCP algorithm choices for nodes known
to be starting or ending on such paths, and it also discusses open
issues.  The configuration options recommended in this document are
commonly found in modern TCP stacks, and are widely available
standards-track mechanisms that the community considers safe for use
on the general Internet.

This document is a product of the Performance Implications of Link
Characteristics Working Group of the IETF.

This document specifies an Internet Best Current Practices for the
Internet Community, and requests discussion and suggestions for
improvements.  Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
