

                   Audio/Video Transport                                                
                   Internet Draft                                            R. Kreuter 
                   Document: draft-ietf-avt-rtp-clearmode-01.txt             Siemens AG 
                   Expires: March 2004                                   September 2003 
                    
                    
                            RTP payload format for a 64 kbit/s transparent call 
                    
                    
                Status of this Memo 
                    
                   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
                   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.  
                    
                   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
                   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
                   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
                   Drafts. 
                    
                   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
                   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
                   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
                   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress". 
                    
                   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
                        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
                   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
                        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
                    
                    
                Abstract 
                    
                   This document describes how to carry 64 kbit/s data streams 
                   transparently in RTP packets, using a pseudo-codec called 
                   "Clearmode".  It also serves as registration for a related MIME type 
                   called "audio/clearmode". 
                   "Clearmode" is a basic feature of VoIP media gateways. 
                    
                    
                Conventions used in this document 
                    
                   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
                   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
                   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119. 
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    

                 
                 
                Kreuter                  Expires - March 2004                 [Page 1] 

                Internet-Draft      64kbit/s voice band data call      September 2003 
                 
                 
                Table of Contents 
                    
                   1. Introduction..................................................2 
                   2. 64 kbit/s data stream handling and RTP header parameters......2 
                   3. Registration of audio/clearmode...............................3 
                   4. Mapping to Session Descrition Protocol (SDP) parameters.......4 
                   5. Security Considerations.......................................5 
                   6. References....................................................5 
                   7. Author's Address..............................................6 
                   8. IPR Notice....................................................6 
                   9. Full Copyright Statement......................................7 
                    
                    
                1. Introduction 
                    
                   Voice over IP (VoIP) media gateways need to carry all data streams 
                   generated by analog or integrated services digital network (ISDN) 
                   terminals via an IP network. 
                    
                   ISDN wideband speech terminals do not rely on a voice data 
                   processing, like echo cancellation or dual tone multifrequency (DTMF) 
                   detection, within a VoIP media gateway.  And ISDN data terminals e.g. 
                   will produce data streams that are not compatible with a non-linear 
                   encoding as is used for voice. 
                    
                   For such applications, there exists a necessity for a transparent 
                   relay of 64 kbit/s data streams in real-time transport protocol (RTP) 
                   [6] packets.  This mode is often referred to as "clear-channel data" 
                   or "64 kbit/s unrestricted".  No encoder/decoder is needed in that 
                   case, but an unique RTP payload type is necessary and a related MIME 
                   type is to be registered for signaling purposes. 
                    
                   This payload format document describes a pseudo-codec called 
                   "Clearmode", for sample-oriented 64 kbit/s data streams with 8 bits 
                   per sample.  It is in accordance with RFC 2736 [3], which provides a 
                   guideline for the specification of new RTP payload formats. 
                    
                   Examples for the use of Clearmode in current VoIP media gateways are 
                   the transfer of "ISDN 7 kHz voice" and "ISDN data". 
                    
                   This document also serves as the MIME type registration according RFC 
                   2048 [5], which defines procedures for registration of new MIME types 
                   within the IETF tree. 
                    
                    
                2. 64 kbit/s data stream handling and RTP header parameters 
                    
                   Clearmode does not use any encoding or decoding. It just provides 
                   packetization. 
                 
                 
                Kreuter                  Expires - March 2004                 [Page 2] 

                Internet-Draft      64kbit/s voice band data call      September 2003 
                 
                 
                    
                   Clearmode assumes that the data to be handled is sample oriented with 
                   one octet (8bits) per sample.  There is no restriction on the number 
                   of samples per packet. 
                    
                   The payload packetization/depacketization for Clearmode is similar to 
                   the Pulse Code Modulation (PCMU or PCMA) handling described in RFC 
                   3551 [7].  Each Clearmode octet SHALL be octet-aligned in a RTP 
                   packet. 
                    
                   A sample rate of 8000 Hz is used. 
                   This calculates to a 64 kbit/s transmission rate per channel. 
                    
                   The Timestamp SHALL be set as described in the RTP specification [6]. 
                    
                   The marker bit is always zero.  Silence suppression is not applicable 
                   for Clearmode data streams. 
                    
                   The payload type is dynamically assigned by means outside the scope 
                   of this document. 
                    
                   This document specifies the use of RTP over unicast and multicast UDP 
                   as well as TCP.  (This does not preclude the use of this definition 
                   when RTP is carried by other lower-layer protocols.) 
                    
                    
                3. Registration of audio/clearmode 
                    
                   To: ietf-types@iana.org 
                    
                   Subject: Registration of MIME media type audio/clearmode 
                    
                   MIME media type name: audio 
                    
                   MIME subtype name: clearmode 
                    
                   Required parameters: none 
                    
                   Optional parameters: ptime, maxptime 
                    
                          "ptime" gives the length of time in milliseconds represented 
                          by the media in a packet, as described in RFC 2327 [9]. 
                    
                          "maxptime" represents the maximum amount of media which can be 
                          encapsulated in each packet, expressed as time in 
                          milliseconds, as described in [10]. 
                    
                   Encoding considerations: 

                 
                 
                Kreuter                  Expires - March 2004                 [Page 3] 

                Internet-Draft      64kbit/s voice band data call      September 2003 
                 
                 
                    
                          This type is defined for transfer via RTP [6]. 
                    
                   Security considerations: 
                    
                          Implementations using the profile defined in this 
                          specification are subject to the security considerations 
                          discussed in RFC 3550 and RFC 3551. 
                    
                   Interoperability considerations: none 
                    
                   Published specification: This document 
                    
                   Applications which use this media type: 
                    
                          Voice over IP Media Gateways, transferring "ISDN 64 kb/s data" 
                          or "ISDN 7 kHz voice" or other VoIP-related 64 kbit/s data 
                          streams via a RTP connection. 
                    
                   Additional information: none 
                    
                   Intended usage: COMMON 
                    
                   Author/Change controller: 
                    
                          This registration is part of the IETF registration tree. 
                    
                    
                4. Mapping to Session Descrition Protocol (SDP) parameters 
                    
                   Parameters are mapped to SDP [9] in a standard way. 
                    
                       o  The MIME type (audio) goes in SDP "m=" as the media name. 
                    
                       o  The MIME subtype (clearmode) goes in SDP "a=rtpmap" as the 
                          encoding name. 
                    
                       o  The optional parameters "ptime" and "maxptime" go in the SDP 
                          "a=ptime" and "a=maxptime" attributes, respectively. 
                    
                    
                   An example mapping is as follows: 
                    
                           audio/clearmode; ptime=10 
                    
                           m=audio 12345 RTP/AVP 97 
                           a=rtpmap:97 CLEARMODE/8000 
                           a=ptime:10 
                    
                 
                 
                Kreuter                  Expires - March 2004                 [Page 4] 

                Internet-Draft      64kbit/s voice band data call      September 2003 
                 
                 
                   Note that the payload format (encoding) names defined in the RTP 
                   Profile are commonly shown in upper case.  MIME subtypes are commonly 
                   shown in lower case.  These names are case-insensitive in both 
                   places. 
                    
                   Similarly, parameter names are case-insensitive both in MIME types 
                   and in the default mapping to the SDP a=fmtp attribute. 
                    
                    
                5. Security Considerations 
                    
                   Implementations using the profile defined in this specification are 
                   subject to the security considerations discussed in the RTP 
                   specification [6].  This profile does not specify any different 
                   security services.  The primary function of this profile is to add a 
                   transparent transport for a 64 kbit/s data stream. 
                    
                   Confidentiality of the media streams is achieved by encryption. 
                    
                   As with any IP-based protocol, in some circumstances a receiver may 
                   be overloaded simply by the receipt of too many packets, either 
                   desired or undesired.  Network-layer authentication MAY be used to 
                   discard packets from undesired sources, but the processing cost of 
                   the authentication itself may be too high.  Overload can also occur, 
                   if the sender chooses to use a smaller packetization period, than the 
                   receiver can process.  The ptime parameter can be used to negotiate 
                   an appropriate packetization during session setup. 
                    
                    
                6. References 
                    
                   Normative References 
                    
                   [1]  S. Bradner, "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
                        9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
                    
                   [2]  S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
                        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
                    
                   [3]  M. Handley and C. Perkins, "Guidelines for Writers of RTP 
                        Payload Format Specifications", RFC 2736, December 1999 
                    
                   [4]  N. Freed, N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions 
                        (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message Bodies ", RFC 2045, 
                        November 1996. 
                    
                   [5]  N. Freed, J. Klensin and J. Postel, "Multipurpose Internet Mail 
                        Extensions (MIME) Part Four: Registration Procedures", BCP 13, 
                        RFC 2048, November 1996. 
                 
                 
                Kreuter                  Expires - March 2004                 [Page 5] 

                Internet-Draft      64kbit/s voice band data call      September 2003 
                 
                 
                    
                   [6]  Schulzrinne, H., Casner, S., Frederick, R. and V. Jacobson, 
                        "RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time Applications", RFC 
                        3550, July 2003. 
                    
                   [7]  Schulzrinne, H. and S. Casner, "RTP Profile for Audio and Video 
                        Conferences with Minimal Control", RFC 3551, July 2003. 
                    
                   [8]  Casner, S. and P. Hoschka, "MIME Type Registration of RTP 
                        Payload Types", RFC 3555, July 2003. 
                    
                   [9]  M. Handley and V. Jacobson, "SDP: Session Description Protocol", 
                        RFC 2327, April 1998. 
                    
                   [10] M. Handley, V. Jacobson and C. Perkins, "SDP: Session 
                        Description Protocol", revision of 2327, work in progress. 
                    
                    
                7. Author's Address 
                    
                   Ruediger Kreuter 
                   Siemens AG 
                   81359 Munich, Germany 
                   Email: ruediger.kreuter@siemens.com 
                    
                    
                8. IPR Notice 
                    
                   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
                   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to 
                   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
                   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
                   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it 
                   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the 
                   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and 
                   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of 
                   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of 
                   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to 
                   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such 
                   proprietary rights by implementers or users of this specification can 
                   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat. 
                    
                   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
                   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
                   rights, which may cover technology that may be required to practice 
                   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
                   Director. 
                    
                    
                 
                 
                Kreuter                  Expires - March 2004                 [Page 6] 

                Internet-Draft      64kbit/s voice band data call      September 2003 
                 
                 
                9. Full Copyright Statement 
                    
                   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved. 
                    
                   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
                   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
                   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
                   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
                   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
                   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
                   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
                   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
                   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
                   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
                   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
                   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
                   English. 
                    
                   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
                   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
                    




























                 
                 
                Kreuter                  Expires - March 2004                 [Page 7] 
