INTERNET-DRAFT        Goals for Terminal Mode              23 June 2001

IETF fax WG                                      Toru Maeda, CANON Inc.
Internet draft                                             23 June 2001
                                                 Expires: December 2001
                                                   


                         Goals for Terminal Mode 
               <draft-ietf-fax-terminal-mode-goals-00.txt>

Status of this memo

  This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
  all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.

  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
  Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
  other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
  Drafts.

  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
  months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
  documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts
  as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
  progress".


     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.



  To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check
  the "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts
  Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net
  (Northern Europe), ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au
  (Pacific Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US
  West Coast).

Copyright Notice

  Copyright (C) The Internet Society 2000.  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

  This draft describes goals of Terminal Mode which was proposed 
in ITU-T SG16 meeting on November 2000 at Geneva.  The Terminal 
Mode supports the transfer of image data, capabilities exchange and 
confirmation for Store and Forward internet fax terminals having 
limited memory and small CPU power.  Terminal Mode also supports all 
features of Group 3 facsimile on the Internet using T.30 signals in 
capability exchange.  

Maeda                         Internet draft                    [Page 1]
INTERNET-DRAFT        Goals for Terminal Mode               23 June 2001
<draft-faxwg-terminal-mode-goals-00.txt>



  NOTE: This is an early, preliminary version of specification,
  indicating a possible way to achieve the protocol  for Terminal Mode 
  Internet fax.  The content is rough, and
  the intent at this time is to indicate the outline of a mechanism.
  Please address comments to major structural and semantic issues.



Discussion of this document

  Please send comments to:  <ietf-fax@imc.org>.

  To subscribe:  send a message with the body 'subscribe' to <ietf-
  fax-request@imc.org>.

  The mailing list archive is at:  <http://www.imc.org/ietf-fax/>.



Table of contents

1. Introduction.............................................3
2. Goals for Terminal Mode..................................3
3. Detail Discussion........................................4
4. Acknowledgements.........................................4
5. References................................. .............5
6. Authors' addresses...................... . ..............5
Full copyright statement....................................5
























Maeda                         Internet draft                    [Page 2]
INTERNET-DRAFT        Goals for Terminal Mode               23 June 2001
<draft-faxwg-terminal-mode-goals-00.txt>




1. Introduction
The specification defines the Terminal Mode carriage of
facsimile data over the Internet, and its functionality necessary
for achieving reliability, timeliness and capabilities negotiation for
Internet mail that is on a par with classic T.30 facsimile.

Terminal Mode is intend to implement features of all classic T.30
facsimile over Internet, providing a level of service that approximates
the level currently enjoyed by fax users, and providing all fax-specific
features that will be implemented in an embedded fax device software
working on G3 fax based system with limited memory size and CPU
performance.  These fax specific features to be supported are Polling,
Subaddress, Password, senders ID, Internet Selective Polling address,
Internet Routing address and Double Side Printing, which will be easy
to develop gateway function between G3 fax and Terminal Mode Internet
fax.


Also new features are designed such as (1) legal support by fax header or
cover page with sender's ID and Time&date, (2) end to end SMTP session
and (3) One SMTP session for capability exchange/image
transmission/confirmation.



2. Goals for Terminal Mode
Those are goals for Terminal Mode.

Easy to Implement
Interworking with G3 fax, IFAX Simple Mode and EIFAX
Features shared with G3 fax

Proof of delivery/receipt
Capability Exchange
Timely Delivery

Data Format Support
Cover Page and Fax Header
Date and Time Information
Legal Issue
Legal Identity Exchange
Quality of output

Addressing Support

Use of Existing Infrastructure
Reliably in the global Internet

Security 


Maeda                         Internet draft                    [Page 3]
INTERNET-DRAFT        Goals for Terminal Mode               23 June 2001
<draft-faxwg-terminal-mode-goals-00.txt>



3. Detail Discussion
3.1  legal support
Terminal Mode MUST support the legal requirement same as required
in classic fax by fax header or cover page with sender's ID and
Time&date.


3.2  end-to-end SMTP session
Terminal Mode should support SMTP for transmit and receive.
ESMTP will be extended to support end-to-end connection between the
transmitter and the receiver in the Terminal Mode.

3.3  One SMTP session
Terminal Mode MUST support one end-to-end SMTP session for capability
exchange, image transmission and confirmation.

There were discussion about confirmation.
The direct E2E communication doesn't need DSN confirmation because
the sender knows the result of delivery confirmation when the 
communication finished. If the receiver can not accept the data, 
it will return to the sender error code such as 4xx or 5xx as e-mail 
server.

After sending 250 to the sender for success of reception and before
closing the SMTP session, the receiver will send an accurate 
confirmation in MDN.

After printing, IFAX can send an accurate confirmation including the 
result of printing.


3.4 Proof of delivery/receipt
"delivery confirmation" and "processing confirmation" should be 
requested in Terminal Mode.  DSN will not be required for "delivery 
confirmation" on end-to-end SMTP.


3.5 Fall back
When the transmitter can not connect SMTP to the receiver, the 
transmitter MAY send it by Simple Mode, EIFAX or FFPIM to the email 
server for the destination address, manually.



4. Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank the ITU-T old SG8 members and the  
ITU-T new SG16 members for their contributions.  The author also 
would like to thank Mr. Toyoda, Mr. Tamura and Mr. Wing who helped 
to extend my basic idea.



Maeda                         Internet draft                    [Page 4]
INTERNET-DRAFT        Goals for Terminal Mode               23 June 2001
<draft-faxwg-terminal-mode-goals-00.txt>


5. References

[1]  T.37 Procedure for the transfer of facsimile data via 
     store-and-forward on the Internet

[2]  T.37 Amendment 1 Full Mode



6. Authors' addresses

  Toru Maeda
  CANON Inc.
  3-30-2 Shimomaruko,
  Ohtaku,Tokyo
  Japan
  Telephone: +81 3 3758 2111
  Facsimile: +81 3 3575 8205
  E-mail:    maeda@crf.canon.fr




Full copyright statement

  Copyright (C) The Internet Society 2000.  All Rights Reserved.

  This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
  others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain
  it or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied,
  published and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction
  of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this
  paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative works.
  However, this document itself may not be modified in any way, such
  as by removing the copyright notice or references to the Internet
  Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed for the
  purpose of developing Internet standards in which case the
  procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process
  must be followed, or as required to translate it into languages
  other than English.

  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
  revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

  This document and the information contained herein is provided on
  an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
  ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
  IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
  THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
  WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



Maeda                         Internet draft                    [Page 5]



