


DKIM                                                             D. Otis
Internet-Draft                                         Trend Micro, NSSG
Expires: November 11, 2006                                  May 10, 2006


                   DKIM Signing Domain Reliance Level
                   draft-otis-dkim-reliance-level-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 11, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document describes a mechanism permitting the DKIM signing
   domain to indicate different levels of reliance be given to specific
   messages by the recipient.  This reliance indication is a security
   and safety enhancement when messages are selectively screened or
   annotated based upon generally trusted DKIM signing domains.  Using
   this reliance mechanism, the signing domain better protects
   recipients by indicating low reliance levels when messages are from
   poorly-vetted sources.  A low reliance level warns the recipient to
   increase the scrutiny given to such messages and also to



Otis                    Expires November 11, 2006               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                DKIM Reliance                     May 2006


   appropriately limit message annotations.  Without a means for a DKIM
   signing domain to partition the handling of their messages, their
   least vetted source may diminish the trust that might otherwise be
   established for their signed messages.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  Reliance Level Assertion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     6.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     6.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 8

































Otis                    Expires November 11, 2006               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                DKIM Reliance                     May 2006


1.  Introduction

   Restoring trust in email requires establishing rigorous practices
   that are not prone to exploitation.  These practices must also
   provide visible affirmations that are not easily circumvented.
   Visible affirmations can be automated folder selection, or
   annotations similar to message priority.  For DKIM [I-D.ietf-dkim-
   base], the signing domain can be affirmed when the domain of a
   verified signature is found within a list of trusted signing domains
   maintained by the recipient.  Even a minimal amount of annotation
   conveying the list's affirmation, such as selectively indicating a
   reliance level, offers significant proactive protection from
   prevalent spoofing attempts.  Even when the signing domain is not
   immediately visible, this protection is still achieved.

   When only the display-name is visible or when internationalization is
   employed, email-address recognition remains an area increasingly
   prone to exploitation.  Even expections that a significant email-
   address is apparent to the recipient can be confounded by valid
   emails where a purported originating email-address is not typically
   visible, or where this email-address is not within the signing
   domain, or where there is more than one purported originating email-
   address.  The normally displayed content of a message is simply not
   assured to provide a clear indication of the actual signing domain or
   even the originating email-address.

   Some advocate mechanisms that are based upon published use-profiles
   for email-addresses.  These email-address use-profile mechanisms are
   nevertheless easily exploited.  Protections based upon email-address
   use-profiles assume the recipient is able to recognize the email-
   address, and also recognize when requisite exceptions are being made.
   Use-profile protections still leave the recipient at risk when a
   deceptive email-address is mistakenly recognized as being from a
   trusted source.  Use-profile acquisition can also greatly increase
   the overall overhead and convey information that is not verified by
   the DKIM signature.

   Email-address use-profiles are of little value when a list of trusted
   DKIM signing domains is maintained by or available to the recipient.
   The DKIM signature is far better leveraged when affirmed by a trusted
   signing domain list.  A trusted signing domain list offers proactive
   protection by enabling safer message annotation and screening.  A
   trusted signing domain list strategy does not depend upon the
   recipient's visual acuity, or upon reactive block lists of similar-
   looking domains held by bad actors.  The trusted signing domain list
   could be compiled and maintained by the recipient or by a trusted
   community of users.  When first subscribing to services from a
   reputable entity and then receiving a message containing their pass-



Otis                    Expires November 11, 2006               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                DKIM Reliance                     May 2006


   phase, this method of introduction allows a recipient to safely add
   the signing domain to their list of trusted signing domains.

   Any signing entity may find that some messages being signed are from
   poorly-vetted sources.  An inability of the recipient to distinguish
   well-vetted sources substantially reduces the trust that the signing
   domain may desire to retain for these specific sources.  While
   signing domains could partition email-addresses into sub-domains in
   order to consolidate similarly vetted sources, this approach will
   likely confuse recipients with respect to what is to be trusted.

   The absence of a partitioning mechanism may actually induce a bad
   practice of using multiple domain names, which includes the use of
   sub-domains.  Partitioning by changing the right hand side of the
   email-address is currently the only method available to signing
   domains wishing to retain trust for a specific category of messages.
   The added complexity induced by an increase in domain names may
   enable an increase in exploitations.  Delegating trust differentially
   at the sub-domain is also disruptive with the need for email-address
   reassignment.  To avoid this outcome, the signing domain must be
   provided a means to partition the vetting of message sources within a
   common domain at the outset of DKIM deployment.

   Partitioning by way of email-address use-profiles requires two
   additional sequential transactions, a separate use-profile for both
   the right and left hand side of the email-address.  Email-address
   use-profiles of the left hand side, as a means to partition the
   domain, also represent a significant increase in the number of
   requisite transactions.  The Reliance Level parameter as described
   below avoids this inordinate overhead.

   A simple Reliance Level parameter, added to the DKIM signature and
   the key, provides the signing domain a means to partition their
   sources.  This partitioning reduces possible damage by being able to
   act as a warning for recipients.  The reliance level warning thereby
   retains greater trust for messages at a higher reliance level.  The
   application of this mechanism does not require additional overhead
   when assessing the message.  The reliance mechanism can directly and
   immediately affect message handling and annotation.  The Reliance
   Level parameter better ensures precautions are not inappropriately
   bypassed for specific messages, even for those from otherwise
   generally trusted domains.


2.  Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this



Otis                    Expires November 11, 2006               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                DKIM Reliance                     May 2006


   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


3.  Reliance Level Assertion

   The Reliance Level parameter allows the signing domain a means to
   partition internal sources into three categories.  When the Reliance
   Level parameter is optionally omitted at either the key or the
   signature, the Reliance Level defaults to Normal.  The Reliance Level
   indicated within the signature header field must not exceed the
   Reliance Level indicated within the key, or the signature SHOULD be
   considered invalid.  An indication of a Low Reliance Level warns the
   recipient to be cautious, whereas a High Reliance Level offers added
   assurances by the signing domain.

   The Reliance Level uses the "r=" tag in both the signature and key,
   where the value is represented as a plain-text signed decimal
   integer.  The Low Reliance Level has the negative value -1.  The
   Normal Reliance Level has a value of 0, and the High Reliance Level
   has a positive value of 1.  Values greater than 1 or less than -1 are
   undefined.  For message handling, these undefined values SHOULD be
   considered equivalent to a value of 1 or -1 respectively to permit
   future enhancements.

                 +-------+------------------------------+
                 | Level |          Description         |
                 +-------+------------------------------+
                 |  r=-1 | Low Reliance (poorly-vetted) |
                 |  r=0  |   Normal Reliance (default)  |
                 |  r=1  |  High Reliance (well-vetted) |
                 +-------+------------------------------+


4.  IANA Considerations

   The parameter prefix 'r=' used in both the DKIM signature and DKIM
   key will require registration by IANA.


5.  Security Considerations

   This document describes an option for adding a DKIM signing domain
   assertion.  The recipient is not expected to reliably recognize an
   email-address for many reasons, where the signing domain assertion
   improves upon the safe handling and annotation of DKIM signed
   messages.  In general, special handling is required before DKIM
   offers the recipient any added protection, as the DKIM signature
   itself is intentionally transparent.  This special handling may



Otis                    Expires November 11, 2006               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                DKIM Reliance                     May 2006


   include annotation or content screening.  When the recipient elects
   to trust the signing domain, the signing domain should also be able
   to directly offer their vetting assessments to better protect this
   trust.  Without the signing domain's assessment, recipients are
   unable to discern any differences in the signing domain's vetting of
   the message source and would need to handle all messages in the same
   manner.

   DKIM does not require that an email-address be within the signing
   domain.  Even when the DKIM signature references a specific email-
   address contained within the signing domain, there is no means to
   impart to the recipient the level of vetting that was achieved by the
   signing domain, without the reliance mechanism.  While the recipient
   may attempt to make separate assessments of the referenced email-
   address, such assessments may further burden the recipient and would
   be based upon information not verified by the DKIM signature.


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-dkim-base]
              Allman, E., "DomainKeys Identified Mail Signatures
              (DKIM)", draft-ietf-dkim-base-01 (work in progress),
              April 2006.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

6.2.  Informative References

   [RFC2821]  Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 2821,
              April 2001.

   [RFC2822]  Resnick, P., "Internet Message Format", RFC 2822,
              April 2001.

   [RFC4033]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "DNS Security Introduction and Requirements",
              RFC 4033, March 2005.










Otis                    Expires November 11, 2006               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                DKIM Reliance                     May 2006


Author's Address

   Douglas Otis
   Trend Micro, NSSG
   1737 North First Street, Suite 680
   San Jose, CA  95112
   USA

   Phone: +1.408.453.6277
   Email: doug_otis@trendmicro.com









































Otis                    Expires November 11, 2006               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                DKIM Reliance                     May 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Otis                    Expires November 11, 2006               [Page 8]

