IPTEL Working Group                                                J.Yu 
Internet Draft                                                  Nuestar 
Intended status: Standards track                             D. Hancock 
Expires: December 2007                                        CableLabs 
                                                           F. Andreasen 
                                                                  Cisco 
 
                                                           July 4, 2007 
                                   
                  DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI 
                        draft-yu-tel-dai-02 


Status of this Memo 
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".  
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.  
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 1, 2007. 
    
   Copyright Notice 
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).  
    
Abstract 
   This document defines a "dai" parameter for the "tel" Uniform 
   Resource Identifier (URI) to support the Dial Around Indicator (DAI).  
   The "dai" parameter is associated with the "cic" parameter, defined 
   in [RFC4694], and indicates how the carrier identified in the "cic" 
   parameter was selected.  This document also expands the use of the 
   "cic" parameter to support pre-subscribed and dialed long-distance 
   carrier requirements. 
 
 
 
Yu et al               Expires January 4, 2008                 [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        June 2007 
 
Conventions used in this document 
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119 [RFC2119]. 
    
Table of Contents 
 
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. Abbreviations..................................................3 
   3. Formal Syntax..................................................3 
   4. Normative Rules................................................4 
   5. Examples......................................................12 
   6. Security Considerations.......................................13 
   7. IANA Considerations...........................................13 
   8. References....................................................13 
 
1. Introduction 
   Before equal access was supported in the United States, only AT&T's 
   subscribers could dial "1" to reach AT&T when they made long distance 
   calls.  Other long distance carriers' subscribers needed to dial 
   extra digits to reach their long distance carriers.  For the fair 
   competition, the Federal Communication Commission in the U.S. 
   mandated the support for equal access that allowed any long distance 
   carrier's subscriber to follow the same dialing plan to reach his/her 
   pre-subscribed long distance carrier.  The regulatory bodies in many 
   other countries also have mandated equal access. 
   To allow a telephony subscriber to use a non-pre-subscribed long 
   distance carrier for some of their long distance calls, the U.S. has 
   implemented the dialing prefix "10XXX" that was later expanded to 
   "101XXXX" in the dialing plan.  The prefix allows the caller to use 
   "XXX" or "XXXX" to specify the long distance carrier to handle that 
   particular call.  This dialing prefix was also used to identify the 
   local toll carrier in the United States when equal access also 
   applied to the local toll calls. 
   One of the purposes of the DAI is to indicate to the long distance 
   carrier that receives a call from the local exchange carrier whether 
   the call came from a pre-subscribed customer or not.   Due to 
   operator-assisted calls, where the called party or a third party may 
   be charged for the call in some cases, the DAI is also used to 
   indicate to the receiving long distance carrier if it is the primary 
   or alternate preferred long distance carrier of the charged party.   
   The long distance carrier information, the Carrier Identification 
   Code (CIC), can be carried in the "cic" parameter [RFC4694], a 
   parameter of the "tel" Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) [RFC3966].  
   The "cic" parameter defined in [RFC4694] identifies the freephone 
   service provider that serves the freephone number.  As described in 
   [RFC4694], it can also be used to carry the CIC associated with the 
   carrier who is to handle a call to a geographic telephone number; 
   such usage is leveraged in this document.  When the carrier that is 
 
 
Yu et al                Expires Decemeber 2007                 [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        June 2007 
   assigned the CIC receives the call, the "dai" parameter defined in 
   this document indicates to that carrier how it was selected. 
    
2. Abbreviations 
   ANSI American National Standards Institute 
   BNF Backus-Naur Form 
   CIC Carrier Identification Code (also cic) 
   DAI Dial Around Indicator (also dai) 
   FCC Federal Communications Commission 
   ENUM Telephone Number Mapping 
   GSTN Global Switched Telephone Network 
   GW Gateway 
   IETF Internet Engineering Task Force 
   IP Internet Protocol 
   ISUP Integrated Services Digital Network User Part 
   SS7 Signaling System number 7 
   SW Switch 
   URI Uniform Resource Identifier 
 
3. Formal Syntax 
   The following syntax specification uses the Augmented Backus-Naur 
   Form (ABNF) as described in RFC 4234 [RFC4234] and defines the "dai" 
   parameter by extending the "parameter" production rule of the "tel" 
   URI defined in [RFC3966]. 
    
   Parameter =/ dai  
   dai = ";dai="  
                                     "no-ind"           / 
                                     "presub"           /  
                                     "presub-da"        /  
                                     "presub-daUnkwn"   /  
                                     "da"        /  
                                     "CIC-chrgPty"      / 
                                     "altCIC-chrgPty"   / 
                                     "verbal-clgPty"    / 
                                     "verbal-chrgPty"   / 
                                     "emergency"        / 
                                     "presubUnkwn-da"   /     
                                     "operator" 
                                
   The "dai" parameter can appear in the "tel" URI at most once.  The 
   "dai" parameter MUST NOT be present if the "cic" parameter is not 
   present.  When the "cic" parameter is present due to carrier 
   selection, the "dai" parameter MUST be present so that its presence 
   in the tel URI can differentiate the carrier selection case from the 
   freephone case.  Please see [RFC4694] for the syntax specification of 
   the "cic" parameter. 
    
    
   Below are the descriptions of the values of the "dai" parameter. 
 
 
Yu et al                Expires Decemeber 2007                 [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        June 2007 
    
   "no-ind": indicates that it is not known how the carrier identified 
   in the CIC was selected.  
    
   "presub": indicates that the CIC contains the caller's presubscribed 
   carrier.  
    
   "presub-da": indicates that the CIC contains the caller's dialed 
   carrier-identification-code; the selected carrier is the caller's 
   presubscribed carrier.  
    
   "presub-daUnkwn": indicates that the CIC may contain either a caller 
   dialed carrier-identification-code or the caller's presubscribed 
   carrier.  
    
   "da": indicates that the CIC contains the caller's dialed carrier-
   identification-code; the selected carrier is not the caller's 
   presubscribed carrier.  
    
   "CIC-chrgPty": indicates that the CIC contains the preferred carrier 
   of the charged party.  
    
   "altCIC-chrgPty": indicates that the CIC contains the alternate 
   carrier of the charged party.  
    
   "verbal-clgPty": indicates that the CIC contains the carrier 
   delivered verbally by the calling party.  
    
   "verbal-chrgPty": indicates that the CIC contains the carrier 
   delivered verbally by the charged party.  
    
   "emergency": indicates that the CIC is selected for emergency call 
   handling.  
    
   "presubUnkwn-da": indicates that the CIC contains the caller's dialed 
   carrier-identification-code; it is not known if the selected carrier 
   is the caller's presubscribed carrier.   
    
   "operator": indicates that the CIC contains a carrier selected by a 
   network operator. 
 
4. Normative Rules 
   This section discusses how a network node adds the "dai" parameter to 
   the "tel" URI or handles a received "tel" URI that contains the "dai" 
   parameter.  Since the "dai" parameter goes with the "cic" parameter, 
   the latter is included in some of the discussions below.  The phone 
   numbers of the caller and called party are geographic numbers in the 
   discussions. 
    

 
 
Yu et al                Expires Decemeber 2007                 [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        June 2007 
   When the call signaling message contains a "tel" URI that carries the 
   "cic" parameter, ENUM [RFC3761] could map the phone number in the 
   "tel" URI to other URI(s) such as SIP URI [RFC3261].  In that case, 
   the mapped URI instead of the parameters in the "tel" URI MAY be used 
   to route the call.  In this document it is assumed that ENUM is not 
   involved. 
 
4.1. Network Model 
   The network model in Figure 1 is used to help describing the rules 
   for sending and receiving the "dai" parameter. The discussion below 
   focuses on the handling of the "tel" URI in the signaling messages.  
   It is assumed that the signaling message will contain the "cic" and 
   "dai" parameters after it leaves "Network Node A" for a call 
   originated by the user or after it leaves "GSTN GW" when the call 
   comes from the PSTN. 
    
                +-------------------------------+  
                |                               |  
           +---------+     +---------+     +---------+      +---------+  
           | Network |     | Network |     | Network |      |  User   |  
           | Node C  |-----| Node B  |-----| Node A  |------| Device  |     
           +---------+     +---------+     +---------+      +---------+  
                |               |               |        
                |               |               |                   
                |               |          +---------+      +---------+  
                |               +----------|  GSTN   |      |  GSTN   |  
                +--------------------------|   GW    |------|   SW    |  
                                           +---------+      +---------+  
        
                          Figure 1.  Network Model 
    
   "User Device" generates the signaling message requesting a call 
   setup.   
    
   "Network Node A" represents those network nodes that receive the call 
   request and can analyze the type of call (e.g., local toll, long 
   distance or international based on the calling party number/address 
   and called party number) and determine or identify the carrier that 
   is to handle the call.  The latter can be based on the information 
   from the caller (e.g., "101XXXX"), the presubscribed carrier 
   information in the service profile of the caller, or via the 
   involvement of an operator that interacts with the calling party, 
   called party (e.g., for collect call) or a third party (e.g., when 
   the call is charged to a third party) for an operator-assisted call.  
   If configured by the network operator, Node A can apply a preferred 
   CIC for all calls where carrier selection is needed.   Note that 
   although Figure 1 shows Node A as a single entity, its 
   responsibilities can be shared amongst multiple Node As such that the 
   Node A that is connected to or communicates with the user device is 

 
 
Yu et al                Expires Decemeber 2007                 [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        June 2007 
   separate from the Node A that determines or identifies the carrier to 
   handle the call. 
    
   "Network Node B" represents those network nodes that are not 
   associated with the carrier identified in the "cic" parameter and 
   need to route the signaling message that contains the "cic" and "dai" 
   parameters towards the carrier identified in the "cic" parameter. 
    
   "Network Node C" represents those network nodes that receive the 
   signaling message from "Network Node B" and belongs to the carrier 
   identified in the "cic" parameter. 
    
   "GSTN GW" stands for "Global Switched Telephone Network (GSTN) 
   Gateway (GW)".  It interfaces between the Internet Protocol (IP) 
   domain and the GSTN domain for signaling protocols and the user 
   traffic.  The GSTN includes the wireline network, wireless network 
   and other circuit-switched network.  Signaling traffic and user 
   traffic could be handled by separate network nodes.   In this 
   document, both types of traffic are handled by "GSTN GW" to simplify 
   the discussion. 
    
   "GSTN Switch (SW)" is a circuit switch in the GSTN that is connected 
   with the GSTN GW.   
     
"User Device", "Network Node A", "Network Node B" and "Network Node 
C" are in the IP domain.  "Network Node A", "Network Node B" and 
"Network Node C" can route the calls to the GSTN via the GSTN GW. 
    
   The rules for various scenarios are described below. 
 
4.2. Adding the "dai" Parameter to the "tel" URI 
   This section discusses those cases where "Network Node A" receives a 
   call request from "User Device" and may need to add the "dai" 
   parameter to the "tel" URI.  If the "cic" Parameter is included and 
   "Network Node A" does not know how the carrier is selected or does 
   not want to reveal how the carrier is selected (if it is allowed to 
   do it), "Network Node A" MUST include the "dai" Parameter and set it 
   to "no-ind". 
 
4.2.1. CIC Information provided in call signaling from "User Device" 
   "User Device" can provide the CIC information via call signaling in 
   two ways.   
    
   a. Include the "cic" parameter in the "tel" URI to carry the selected 
   CIC.  It is outside the scope of this document as to how "User 
   Device" adds the "cic" parameter to the "tel" URI.  "User Device" 
   SHOULD NOT include the "dai" parameter in the "tel" URI.  When 
   included by the "User Device", "Network Node A" SHALL ignore the 
   "dai" parameter.   
    
 
 
Yu et al                Expires Decemeber 2007                 [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        June 2007 
   b. Include the selected CIC information in the dialed string (e.g., 
   "101XXXX" followed by a national number).  [String] specifies one way 
   to deliver the dialed string in the SIP protocol [RFC3261].  It is 
   outside the scope of this document as to how the dialed string is 
   carried in the signaling message and how "Network Node A" knows how 
   to identify the caller selected CIC information when applicable and 
   the called phone number from the received dialed string. 
    
   When receiving a call request containing the "cic" parameter or the 
   CIC information in the signaling message from "User Device" and an 
   operator is not involved in call handling, "Network Node A" MUST 
   follow the rules described below.  The cases where an operator is 
   involved in determining/selecting a carrier to handle the call are 
   addressed in 4.2.3 and 4.2.4 below. 
    
   - If the call is to be handled by the carrier "Network Node A" is 
   associated with (that is, the carrier network is the network within 
   which Node A resides), "Network Node A" MUST remove the "cic" 
   parameter, if present in the "tel" URI, and MUST NOT include the 
   "dai" parameter if it needs to forward the signaling message to 
   another network node. 
    
   - If "Network Node A" selects a carrier other than the caller's pre-
   subscribed carrier or the one specified by "User Device" to handle 
   the call (e.g., does not allow the caller to specify the carrier to 
   handle the call), "Network Node A" MUST set the "cic" parameter to 
   contain the CIC it selects and include the "cic" parameter, if not 
   yet present, in the "tel" URI.  "Network Node A" MUST include the 
   "dai" parameter in the "tel" URI and set it to "operator". 
    
   - If the "User Device" specified carrier is the same as the caller's 
   pre-subscribed carrier and "Network Node A" knows that the CIC 
   information is provided by "User Device", "Network Node A" MUST set 
   the "cic" parameter to contain the caller's pre-subscribed carrier's 
   CIC and include the parameter, if not yet present, in the "tel" URI.  
   "Network Node A" MUST set the "dai" parameter to "presub-da" and 
   include the parameter in the "tel" URI. 
    
   - If "Network Node A" is not sure whether the CIC information is 
   provided by "User Device" (e.g., a proxy server between "User Device" 
   and "Network Node A" is involved), it MUST set the "dai" parameter to 
   "presub-daUnkwn" in the process described above. 
    
   -  If the "User Device" specified carrier is different from the 
   caller's pre-subscribed carrier, "Network Node A" MUST set the "cic" 
   parameter to contain the "User Device" specified carrier and include 
   the parameter, if not yet present, in the "tel" URI.  "Network Node 
   A" MUST set the "dai" parameter to "da" and include the parameter in 
   the "tel" URI. 
    
 
 
Yu et al                Expires Decemeber 2007                 [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        June 2007 
   -  If the "User Device" specifies a carrier and "Network Node A" 
   cannot determine if the selected carrier is the caller's 
   presubscribed carrier, "Network Node A" MUST set the "cic" parameter 
   to contain the "User Device" specified carrier and include the 
   parameter, if not yet present, in the "tel" URI.  "Network Node A" 
   MUST set the "dai" parameter to "presubUnkwn-da" and include the 
   parameter in the "tel" URI. 
    
    
4.2.2. CIC Information not provided in call signaling from "User 
Device" 
   In this scenario, "User Device" did not provide any CIC information 
   in call signaling and an operator is not involved in call handling.  
   "Network Node A" MUST follow the rules described below.  The cases 
   where an operator is involved in determining/selecting a carrier to 
   handle the call are addressed in 4.2.3 and 4.2.4 below. 
    
   - If the call is to be handled by the carrier "Network Node A" is 
   associated with, "Network Node A" MUST NOT include the "cic" and 
   "dai" parameters in the "tel" URI if it needs to forward the 
   signaling message to another network node. 
    
   - If "Network Node A" selects a carrier that is different from the 
   caller's pre-subscribed carrier to handle the call, it MUST set the 
   "cic" parameter to contain the CIC it selects and include the 
   parameter in the "tel" URI.  "Network Node A" MUST include the "dai" 
   parameter in the "tel" URI and set it to "operator". 
     
   - If the caller has a pre-subscribed carrier that can handle the 
   call, "Network Node A" MUST set the "cic" parameter to contain the 
   caller's pre-subscribed carrier's CIC and include the parameter in 
   the "tel" URI.  "Network Node A" MUST set the "dai" parameter to 
   "presub" and include the parameter in the "tel" URI. 
    
    
4.2.3. Operator-assisted call handling, caller pays for the call 
   When an operator is involved in handling the call request from the 
   caller, "Network Node A" may or may not have the CIC information 
   available from the signaling message.   If the caller is to pay for 
   the call, the operator may interact with the caller to determine the 
   carrier to handle the call when applicable.  If the CIC information 
   is available from call signaling and the operator also interacts with 
   the caller to get the CIC information, the CIC provided by the 
   operator MUST be used.  How the caller indicates an operator-assisted 
   call and passes the CIC information in call signaling is outside the 
   scope of this document. 
    
   "Network Node A" through the assistance of an operator MUST follow 
   the rules described below.   
    
 
 
Yu et al                Expires Decemeber 2007                 [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        June 2007 
   - If the call is to be handled by the carrier "Network Node A" is 
   associated with, "Network Node A" MUST remove the "cic" parameter, if 
   present in the "tel" URI, and MUST NOT include the "dai" parameter if 
   it needs to forward the signaling message to another network node. 
    
   - If "Network Node A" selects a carrier other than the caller's pre-
   subscribed carrier or the one specified by "User Device" or indicated 
   by the caller during the interaction with the operator to handle the 
   call, "Network Node A" MUST set the "cic" parameter to contain the 
   CIC it selects and include the parameter, if not yet present, in the 
   "tel" URI.  "Network Node A" MUST include the "dai" parameter in the 
   "tel" URI and set it to "operator". 
    
   - If the carrier specified by "User Device" in call signaling or by 
   the caller via the interaction with the operator or selected by 
   "Network Node A" is the same as the caller's pre-subscribed carrier, 
   "Network Node A" MUST set the "cic" parameter to contain the caller's 
   pre-subscribed carrier's CIC and include the parameter, if not yet 
   present, in the "tel" URI.  "Network Node A" MUST set the "dai" 
   parameter to "presub-da" and include the parameter in the "tel" URI. 
    
   - If "Network Node A" is not sure whether the CIC information is 
   provided by "User Device" or the operator did not indicate if the CIC 
   information came from the caller, it MUST set the "dai" parameter to 
   "presub-daUnkwn" in the process described above. 
    
   -  If the carrier specified by "User Device" in call signaling or by 
   caller via the interaction with the operator is different from the 
   caller's pre-subscribed carrier, "Network Node A" MUST set the "cic" 
   parameter to contain the CIC of the selected carrier and include the 
   parameter, if not yet present, in the "tel" URI.  "Network Node A" 
   MUST set the "dai" parameter to "da" and include the parameter in the 
   "tel" URI. 
    
   -  If the operator receives verbal instructions from the caller to 
   use a specific carrier and it is not unknown if that carrier is the 
   caller's presubscribed carrier, "Network Node A" MUST set the "cic" 
   parameter to contain the CIC of the specified carrier and include the 
   parameter, if not yet present, in the "tel" URI.  "Network Node A" 
   MUST set the "dai" parameter to "verbal-clgPty" and include the 
   parameter in the "tel" URI. 
    
    
4.2.4. Operator-assisted call handling, caller does not pay for the 
call 
   There are cases where the call is charged to the called party or a 
   third party.   How the caller indicates an operator-assisted call and 
   passes the CIC information in call signaling is outside the scope of 
   this document. The caller will indicate to the operator that either 
   the called party or a third party is to pay for the call.   The 
 
 
Yu et al                Expires Decemeber 2007                 [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        June 2007 
   operator then checks with the charged party if he/she agrees to pay 
   for the call and may verbally get the CIC information from the 
   charged party or retrieve the primary and alternate preferred carrier 
   information from some databases.  It is assumed that the "tel" URI in 
   the call signaling from "User Device" does not contain the "cic" 
   parameter and/or "dai" parameter.  They are ignored if they are 
   present. 
    
   "Network Node A" through the assistance of an operator MUST follow 
   the rules described below.   
    
   - If the call is to be handled by the carrier "Network Node A" is 
   associated with, "Network Node A" MUST remove the "cic" parameter, if 
   present, and MUST NOT include the "dai" parameter in the "tel" URI. 
    
   - If "Network Node A" selects the carrier to handle the call, it MUST 
   set the "cic" parameter to contain the CIC it selects and include the 
   parameter in the "tel" URI.  "Network Node A" MUST include the "dai" 
   parameter in the "tel" URI and set it to "operator". 
    
   - If the charged party's primary preferred carrier is used for the 
   call handling, "Network Node A" MUST set the "cic" parameter to 
   contain that carrier's CIC and include the parameter in the "tel" 
   URI.  "Network Node A" MUST set the "dai" parameter to "CIC-chrgPty" 
   and include the parameter in the "tel" URI.  How "Network Node A" 
   knows that the selected carrier is the charged party's primary 
   preferred carrier is outside the scope of this document. 
    
   - If the charged party's alternate preferred carrier is used for the 
   call handling, "Network Node A" MUST set the "cic" parameter to 
   contain that carrier's CIC and include the parameter in the "tel" 
   URI.  "Network Node A" MUST set the "dai" parameter to "altCIC-
   chrgPty" and include the parameter in the "tel" URI.  How "Network 
   Node A" knows that the selected carrier is the charged party's 
   alternate preferred carrier is outside the scope of this document. 
    
   - If the operator receives verbal instructions from the charged party 
   to use a specific carrier and it is not unknown if that carrier is 
   the charged party's primary or alternate preferred carrier, "Network 
   Node A" MUST set the "cic" parameter to contain the CIC of the 
   specified carrier and include the parameter in the "tel" URI.  
   "Network Node A" MUST set the "dai" parameter to "verbal-chrgPty" and 
   include the parameter in the "tel" URI. 
    
   - If the caller contacts an operator for an emergency situation and a 
   carrier that "Network Node A" is not associated with needs to handle 
   the call, "Network Node A" MUST set the "cic" parameter to the CIC of 
   that carrier and include the parameter in the "tel" URI.  "Network 
   Node A" MUST set the "dai" parameter to "emergency" and include the 
   parameter in the "tel" URI. 
 
 
Yu et al                Expires Decemeber 2007                [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        June 2007 
    
4.2.5. Call signaling received from the GSTN SW by GSTN GW 
   The GSTN GW may receive the Signaling System number 7 (SS7) 
   Integrated Services Digital Network User Part (ISUP) signaling 
   message from the GSTN SW that contains the CIC information.  For 
   example, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) ISUP carries 
   the CIC information in the "Carrier Selection Information" parameter.  
   There is a one-to-one mapping between the ANSI ISUP "Carrier 
   Selection Information" parameter and the "dai" parameter. 
    
    
4.3. Handling the "tel" URI with the "cic", or "cic" and "dai" 
    
   This section discusses how "Network Node A", "Network Node B", 
   "Network Node C" or "GSTN GW" handles the signaling messages that 
   contain the "dai" and "cic" parameters in the "tel" URI. Scenarios 
   that do not involve the "dai" parameter in the "tel" URI are outside 
   the scope of this document. 
    
   A. Network Node A 
    
   After "Network Node A" has added the "dai" parameter and/or "cic" 
   parameter to the "tel" URI and is ready to route the call, it MUST 
   route the call based on the rules described in [RFC4694] to "Network 
   Node B", "Network Node C" or "GSTN GW".  "Network Node A" MAY record 
   the "dai" value in the call detail record. If the carrier that 
   Network A is associated with is the one to handle the call, Network 
   Node A removes the "cic" and/or "dai" if they are present before 
   routing the call.    
    
   B. Network Node B 
    
   Since "Network Node B" is not associated with the carrier identified 
   by the CIC in the "cic" parameter, it MUST route the call based on 
   the "cic" parameter as stated in [RFC4694] to another "Network Node 
   B", "Network Node C" or "GSTN GW".  "Network Node B" MAY record the 
   "dai" value in the call detail record.    
    
   C. Network Node C 
    
   Since "Network Node C" is associated with the carrier identified by 
   the CIC in the "cic" parameter, it removes the "cic" parameter and 
   the "dai" parameter, if present, before it determines how to handle 
   the call.   "Network Node C" MAY record the "dai" value in the call 
   detail record.   How "Network Node C" continues the call 
   routing/handling is outside the scope of this document. 
    
   D. GSTN GW 
    

 
 
Yu et al                Expires Decemeber 2007                [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        June 2007 
   If "GSTN GW" determines that the call is to be routed from the IP 
   domain to "GSTN SW", and SS7 ISUP is used in the GSTN, then the "GSTN 
   GW" MUST map the "dai" parameter to the corresponding ISUP parameter.   
   Note that when interworking with ANSI ISUP, the "dai" parameter is 
   mapped to the ISUP "Carrier Selection Information" parameter.  There 
   is a one-to-one mapping between the ANSI ISUP "Carrier Selection 
   Information" parameter and the "dai" parameter. When "GSTN GW" 
   receives a signaling message from "GSTN SW" that contains the carrier 
   selection information, it MUST set the "dai" parameter based on the 
   received carrier selection information.  The mapping between the 
   "dai" parameter and ISUP is outside the scope of this document.  
   "GSTN GW" MUST route the call based on the "cic" parameter as stated 
   in [RFC4694] to "Network Node A", "Network Node B" or "Network Node 
   C".  "GSTN GW" MAY record the "dai" value in the call detail record.       
    
   E. User Device 
    
   "User Device" is not expected to receive signaling messages that 
   contain the "dai" and/or "cic" parameters.  If the received signaling 
   messages contain the "tel" URI with the "dai" and/or "cic" 
   parameters, "User device" SHALL ignore the parameter(s). 
    
    
5. Examples 
    
   A. A caller whose pre-subscribed carrier has a CIC of "+1-6789" makes 
   an outbound call with the following "tel" URI: 
    
      tel:+1-202-533-1234 
    
   "Network Node A" adds the "dai" and "cic" parameters to the "tel" URI 
   as shown below.    
    
   tel:+1-202-533-1234;cic=+1-6789;dai=presub 
    
   B. A caller whose pre-subscribed carrier has a CIC of "+1-6789" makes 
   an outbound call to +1-202-533-1234 and specifies to use the CIC of 
   "+1-2345" in call signaling with the following "tel" URI: 
    
      tel:+1-202-533-1234;cic=+1-2345 
    
   "Network Node A" recognizes that the caller has selected a non-
   presubscribed carrier to handle the call.  "Network Node A" adds the 
   "dai" parameter to the "tel" URI as shown below.    
    
      tel:+1-202-533-1234;cic=+1-2345;dai=da 
    
   C. A caller makes a collect call to +1-202-533-1234 through an 
   operator.  The operator at "Network Node A" interacts with the called 
   party and gets a verbal approval to use the CIC of "+1-3456".  
 
 
Yu et al                Expires Decemeber 2007                [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        June 2007 
   "Network Node A" adds the "dai" and "cic" parameters to the "tel" URI 
   as shown below.  
    
      tel:+1-202-533-1234;cic=+1-3456;dai=verbal-chrgPty 
    
    
6. Security Considerations 
   In addition to those security implications discussed in [RFC3966], 
   there may be new security implications associated with the "dai" 
   parameter depending on the carrier who uses the information. 
    
   Changing the content of the "dai" parameter may cause a call to be 
   rejected by or cause some problems (e.g., collecting call charge) to 
   the carrier who handles the call.  For example, changing from 
   "presub" to "da" may cause the call to be rejected if the carrier 
   that is to handle the call only handles calls from its pre-subscribed 
   subscribers.  Changing "da" to "presub" may cause a call that would 
   be rejected to be processed by a carrier who later finds out it 
   cannot collect the call charge from the caller or has to pay more 
   than the call charge to collect the call charge from the caller via a 
   third party (e.g., local exchange carrier). 
    
   It is RECOMMENDED that protocols carrying the "tel" URI provide hop 
   by hop integrity for the URI including the parameters.  This allows 
   detection of any unauthorized changes to the contents of the "tel" 
   URI. 
    
   Please note that the information in the "dai" parameter may not be 
   authenticated; therefore, the use of the information by the recipient 
   of the "tel" URI is done at its own risk. 
    
7. IANA Considerations 
    
   The "dai" parameter defined in this document needs to be registered 
   with IANA as a new parameter for the "tel" URI [RFC3966]. 
    
   1. Parameter name - dai 
   Applicability - used to indicate how a carrier was chosen for 
   handling a call 
    Mandatory or optional - optional 
    Restrictions on syntax - see Section 5 
    Reference to a specification - defined in this document 
    
8. References 
    
8.1. Normative References 
    
   [RFC2119] S. Bradner, RFC 2119, "Key words for use in RFCs to 
   Indicate Requirement Levels", March 1997. 
    
 
 
Yu et al                Expires Decemeber 2007                [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        June 2007 
    
   [RFC3966] H. Schulzrinne, RFC 3966, "The tel URI for Telephone 
   Numbers", December 2004. 
    
   [RFC4234] D. Crocker and P. Overell, RFC 4234, "Augmented BNF for 
   Syntax Specifications: ABNF", October 2005. 
    
   [RFC4694] J. Yu, RFC 4694, "NP Parameters for the "tel" URI", October 
   2006. 
    
8.2. Informative References 
    
   [RFC3261] J. Rosenberg, et al., RFC 3261, "SIP: Session Initiation 
   Protocol", June 2002. 
    
   [RFC3761] P. Faltstrom and M. Mealling, RFC 3761, "The E.164 to 
   Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI) - Dynamic Delegation Discovery 
   System (DDDS) Application (ENUM)", April 2004. 
    
   [String] B. Rosen, draft-rosen-iptel-dialstring-05.txt, "Dialstring 
   parameter for the Session Initiation Protocol Uniform Resource 
   Identifier", June 2006 (Work in Progress). 
    
9. Change History 
   (Note to editor - please remove this section in final version.) 
    
9.1. Changes from version 01->02 
   - Section 3: clarified descriptions of "dai" parameter values 
   - Section 4.2.5, plus various other places: removed text that said 
     the "dai" parameter was not included in certain cases, since we 
     now use "no-ind" these cases.   
   - Section 4.3,  
        o Item A: added text specifying that if Node-A is the carrier 
          then it removes "cic" 
        o Item D: added procedures for inbound calls from GSTN 
    
    
Acknowledgments 
    
   The authors would like to thank Martin Dolly and Penn Pfautz for 
   their assistances in providing the relevant information on the DAI. 
    
Authors' Addresses 
    
   James Yu 
   NeuStar, Inc. 
   46000 Center Oak Plaza 
   Sterling, VA 20166 
   U.S.A. 
   Phone: +1-571-434-5572 
 
 
Yu et al                Expires Decemeber 2007                [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        June 2007 
   Email: james.yu@neustar.biz 
    
   David Hancock 
   CableLabs 
   858 Coal Creek Circle 
   Louisville, CO 80027-9750 
   U.S.A. 
   Phone: +1-303-661-3381 
   Email: d.hancock@cablelabs.com 
    
   Flemming Andreasen 
   Cisco Systems, Inc.  
   499 Thornall Street, 8th Floor 
   Edison, NJ 08837 
   U.S.A. 
   Email: fandreas@cisco.com 
    
   Intellectual Property 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
    
    
     
Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 
    
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 
 
 
Yu et al                Expires Decemeber 2007                [Page 15] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        June 2007 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS 
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
    
Acknowledgment 
    
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF 
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA). 
 



































 
 
Yu et al                Expires Decemeber 2007                [Page 16] 

