

Network Working Group                                                 
Internet Draft                                                        
Document: draft-luciani-ppvpn-vpn-discovery-00.txt                    
                                                                      
James Luciani                                             Matt Squire 
Crescent Networks                                   Hatteras Networks 
                                                                      
Marty Borden                                         Cedell Alexander 
Atrica                                                    Olen Stokes 
                                                     Extreme Networks 
Pierre Lin                                                            
Yipes                                                   Juha Heinanen 
                                                                Telia 
Loa Andersson                                                         
Utfors                                                    Ryan Brooks 
                                                  Time Warner Telecom 
                                                                      
                                                       September 2001 
 
 
                    Using DNS for VPN Discovery 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance 
   with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum 
   of six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- 
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work 
   in progress."  
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
 Abstract 
    
   Virtual private networks are becoming a common service offered by 
   service providers.  There are many technologies over which to 
   implement a VPN service from IPSec to GRE to MPLS.  One common 
   requirement of VPN methodologies is the need to discover all of 
   the sites, or at least all the provider equipment associated with 
   the sites, that are in the VPN.   DNS provides a simple and 
   commonly available means for site discovery that is independent 
   of any signaling protocol. 
    
1  Introduction 
    
  
                                                              [Page 1] 
                draft-luciani-ppvpn-VPN-discovery-00.txt  September 2001 
 
 
   Virtual networking services are being offered by more and more 
   Service providers. There are many flavors of VPNs available in 
   the market today, depending on the customer requirements and 
   provider abilities.  There is a variety of data encapsulation 
   protocols used to transport data between customer sites.  VPNs 
   may be offered as Layer 2 or Layer 3 services.  VPNs may be based 
   on an overlay model or a virtual router model.  Other variations 
   are possible.   
    
   A VPN consists of a set of customer sites interconnected by one 
   or more provider networks, providing the semblance of private 
   connectivity between the sites over either a private or public 
   backbone network.  The following terminology will be used 
   throughout. Customer edge equipment (CE) is located at each 
   customer site and potentially operated independently from the 
   service provider equipment, and may be operated by the customer.  
   The CE equipment is connected to provider edge equipment (PE) 
   that sits at the boundary of the provider network.  The PE 
   equipment surrounds a core provider equipment (P).  This is 
   depicted in Figure 1. 
 
    
         A---|------|       |-----|        |------|---A  
             |  PE  |-------|  P  |--------|  PE  |  
         A---|------|       |-----|        |------|---B  
                |                              |  
                |                              |  
                |       Service Provider       |  
                |       Backbone Network       |  
                |                              |  
                |          |------|            |  
                |----------|  PE  |------------|  
                           |------|  
                            | | |  
                            | | |  
                            A A B  
        
                   A: Company A Virtual Network  
                   B: Company B Virtual Network 
 
 
                 Figure 1. Virtual Network Model 
    
   Each PE supporting a particular VPN must be in a multi-access 
   network with all other PEs supporting that same VPN.   
    
   There is a concept called Pseudo Wires (PW), where L2 information 
   is carried in a point to point fashion transparently across a 
   network [pwe3].  Further the concept of a Transparent LAN Service 
   [TLS] also exists wherein an Ethernet virtual 802.1d bridge is 
   simulated for a given set of users.  It delivers a layer 2 
   broadcast domain that is fully capable of learning and forwarding 
   on Ethernet MAC addresses that is closed to a given set of users.  
  
                                                              [Page 2] 
                draft-luciani-ppvpn-VPN-discovery-00.txt   September 2001 
 
 
   All of these services would benefit from a common set of 
   mechanisms and functions in order to promote interoperability and 
   co-existence. In this document the term ôVPNö is used to cover 
   both L2 and L3 VPNs as well as the PWs and TLS. 
    
   Certain base functions are common to many of the technologies 
   used to build VPNs.  Two of those functions are Discovery and 
   Signaling: 
     *  Discovery.  An optional but incredibly beneficial function  
        is if PE device involved in a particular VPN can discover 
   the  
        other PE equipment in that VPN. 
     *  Signaling.  In many cases, a signaling protocol is required  
        between PE equipment so that particular data flows can be  
        identified and correlated with the VPN.   
    
   These functions can be and are implemented in many and various 
   ways.   
    
   To date, proposals for discovery have focused on piggy-backing 
   VPN information on BGP and IGP routing protocols.   This method 
   has the unfortunate effect of increasing the size of routing 
   tables within the set of affected provider domains, even for 
   those devices that are not involved in the VPN.  This increase in 
   size may be quite significant in some cases.   
    
   There are other disadvantages to linking discovery and signaling 
   to each other, and to an existing routing protocol.  Routing 
   changes or recalculations could interfere with the discovery and 
   signaling functions of VPNs.  When PE equipment is connected with 
   explicitly routed LSPs, for example, such interference is 
   completely unwarranted.  Likewise, VPN changes (adding or 
   deleting VPN support) have an impact on routing as this 
   information must be propagated across the network via the routing 
   protocol.    
    
   Signaling between PE equipment is required to identify which 
   tunnels are used for which VPNs, to correlate two unidirectional 
   tunnels together to form a bi-directional virtual link, and to 
   give some indication on how to mux/demux traffic from multiple 
   VPNs onto a single tunnel.  VPN signaling enhancements have been 
   proposed for LDP, RSVP-TE, CR-LDP, BGP, and OSPF.  
     
    
    
    
    
    
1.1 Specification of Requirements 
 
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL 
   NOT","SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" 
   in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119. 
  
                                                              [Page 3] 
                draft-luciani-ppvpn-VPN-discovery-00.txt  September 2001 
 
 
    
 
2  Using DNS for Discovery 
    
   It is highly desirable to use hierarchical identifiers to 
   identify VPN specific information.  Hierarchical identifiers 
   permit each organization to guide the use of its own identifier 
   space. 
   URLs satisfy a hierarchical naming scheme, and they have an 
   advantage over numeric schemes in that the identifier can often 
   be interpreted by the user (e.g., bobsVpn.serviceProvider.net 
   versus <AS 10, ID 64>). 
    
   DNS provides mechanisms to resolve a DNS name into a set of IP 
   addresses.  Normally, these addresses are interpreted as an 
   'anycast' identifier;, i.e., any of these services can be used to 
   provide connectivity to the named service. When using DNS for VPN 
   resolution, *all* of the addresses are used and are taken to 
   identify the set of PE equipment that supports the named VPN.  
   Thus, when a PE 10.1.1.1 resolves bobsVpn.serviceProvider.net 
   into {10.1.1.1, 10.2.1.1, 10.5.1.1}, that PE has the IP addresses 
   of the other PEs serving customer sites in 
   bobsVpn.serviceProvider.net.   It can then initiate signaling to 
   these other addresses in order to establish the bi-directional 
   tunnel for data transfers. 
    
    
3  Interactions with Signaling 
    
   Current signaling proposals use some variation of a VPN 
   identifier to indicate the VPN that will be used on that specific 
   data channel.  These VPN identifiers are of fixed length and 
   potentially with some semantic interpretation.   
    
   Although DNS discovery can be used without modifications to 
   signaling, configuration is reduced if the identifiers used in 
   signaling matches the identifier used in discovery.  Without 
   signaling enhancements, the VPN DNS name must be mapped to the 
   VPN identifier via manual configuration.  Note that this is still 
   preferable to no discovery at all as using DNS names still 
   provides a mechanism to add and delete customer sites to 
   particular VPNs.  The <vpn name, vpnid> mapping issue might also 
   be resolved by including the VPNID (route distinguisher) in the 
   name, e.g., 64.10.vpn.isp.fi. 
    
   Some guidelines when using DNS with an explicit signaling 
   protocol are: 
     1. Resolvers SHOULD refresh VPN DNS names resolved for VPN 
        purposes before their TTL expires. 
     2. A PE MUST use the its address as identified in the A record 
        of the DNS entry as its source address when signaling other 
        PE equipment in the VPN. 
  
                                                              [Page 4] 
               draft-luciani-ppvpn-VPN-discovery-00.txt   September 2001 
 
 
     3. If a PE receives a signaled request from a PE not currently 
        in the set of PE addresses associated with a VPN, the PE 
        SHOULD re-request the DNS information for the VPN DNS name.  
        If the requestor source IP address is still not in the list 
        of A records, the request SHOULD be rejected.  If the 
        requestor source IP address is in the list of A records, the 
        request SHOULD be accepted.   
     4. When a refresh or new query results in any A records to 
        which the local PE is not currently connected to for this 
        VPN, and which is not one of its own IP addresses, the local 
        PE equipment SHOULD initiate signaling to those newly 
        discovered addresses.  
     5. When a signaled request to a PE device that was listed in 
        the A records for a VPN DNS name is rejected by the 
        destination, the request should be retried using exponential 
        backoff.   
    
   As a potential modification to the above approach, it might be 
   preferable to design a new resource record type which is 
   explicitly designed to apply to the semantics of DNS based VPN 
   discovery.  This is for further study. 
    
   As a general note on doing name resolution across providers, 
   concerns about ownership of the namespace should be somewhat 
   allayed by the fact that even if a VPN spans multiple providers 
   and ASes, it tends to be "owned" by one of them. 
    
    
4  Examples 
    
   [MARTINI] provide mechanisms for forming a point-to-point L2 VPN 
   between two sites.  In the proposal, each side must be configured 
   with the address of the other endpoint of the tunnel, a VC ID, 
   and a group ID.  The VC ID and group ID have no semantics, they 
   are used simply to identify the two unidirectional components of 
   a logical bi-directional link. The group ID has additional 
   function in the wildcard removals of associations, but that 
   function is not applicable to this discussion. At the PE 
   equipment, a particular VPN (VLAN, DLCI, etc.) is associated with 
   the tunnel definition (endpoint, VC ID, group ID) via 
   configuration.   
    
   Unfortunately, the VC ID and group ID are not hierarchical, and 
   thus if when crossing administrative boundaries its conceivable 
   that matching numbers are not available in all domains.  Thus the 
   short flat VC ID space is very limited.  Coordination among the 
   domains managing the edge devices is required. 
    
   When generalizing [MARTINI] to a full mesh topology, the problem 
   of configuring the peers becomes more problematic as each peer 
   must be configured with the address of every other.  
   Additionally, the configuration of more PEs must be correlated in 
   the group and VC ID.   
  
                                                              [Page 5] 
                draft-luciani-ppvpn-VPN-discovery-00.txt  September 2001 
 
 
    
   It would be simpler if the PEs could simply be configured with 
   the VPN DNS name, the associated VPN (VLAN, DLCI, etc.), and the 
   group ID.  The peers could then be discovered via DNS resolution, 
   and the VPN DNS name could be used in signaling (instead of the 
   VC ID) to determine the data channels for this VPN.   
    
   Although this section discussed DNS based discovery based on the 
   [MARTINI] techniques, the discovery mechanism is generally 
   applicable to any environment where LDP, CR-LDP, or RSVP-TE is 
   used for signaling (rather than routing protocols as discussed in 
   earlier sections). 
    
    
5  Security Considerations 
    
   A Virtual private network, by its very nature implements a 
   policy, as agreed upon between the customer and provider, that 
   hides information about the customerÆs VPN from others.  It is 
   reasonable to assume that this policy would require restricting 
   anyone other than the customer from deriving that customerÆs 
   sites using mechanisms of the provider.  An even more important 
   security requirement is that a customer not be able to manipulate 
   the site information about another customer.  (It is possible 
   that the provider may wish to allow customers to manipulate their 
   own site information, although this would likely be done through 
   an indirect method.) 
    
   DNS itself provides many security extensions that could be used 
   to protect the identity of the PE equipment in a particular VPN.  
   DNS also provides a dynamic update ability that could conceivably 
   be used to provide PE equipment with the ability to register 
   itself with the DNS server upon configuration into a particular 
   VPN.  These possibilities are recognized but not investigated 
   within this draft.   
    
    
6  Issues  
    
   We list some issues that are not resolved or discussed in this 
   draft that will be considered in future revisions of the draft. 
   o Solutions for security requirements must be given. 
   o Since DNS provides required information only upon demand, a 
      mechanism must be developed so that PEs will update their 
      endpoint information when necessary. This might be as simple 
      as a timeout and query again type of mechanism. 
   o Specific recommendations for TLV formats for LDP, RSVP-TE, and 
      CR-LDP and inter-working with current Martini proposal. 
    
    
7  References
  
                                                              [Page 6] 
               draft-luciani-ppvpn-VPN-discovery-00.txt   September 2001 
 
 
 
   [RFC2026] Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- 
      Revision 3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   [MARTINI] Martini, Luca, et al., "Transport of Layer 2 Frames 
      Over MPLS", draft-martini-l2circuit-trans-mpls-05.txt, Work in 
      Progress. 
    
   [TLS] Lasserre, Marc, et al., " Transparent VLAN Services over 
      MPLS", draft-lasserre-tls-mpls-00.txt, Work in Progress. 
    
   [PWE3] Xiao, XiPeng, et al.,"Requirements for Pseudo-Wre 
      Emulation Edge-to-Edge (PWE3)",draft-ietf-pwe3-requirements-
      01.txt, Work in Progress. 
 
    
8  Acknowledgments 
    
    
 
9  Author's Addresses 
    
   Matt Squire 
   Hatteras Networks 
   639 Davis Drive 
   Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 
   Email: msquire@hatterasnetworks.com 
    
   James V. Luciani 
   Crescent Networks 
   900 Chelmsford 
   Lowell, MA 01851 
   Email: jluciani@crescentnetworks.com 
    
   Marty Borden 
   Atrica, Inc. 
   Email: mborden@acm.org 
    
   Cedell Alexander 
   Olen Stokes 
   Extreme Networks 
   Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 
   Email: calexander@extremenetworks.com, ostokes@extremenetworks.com 
    
   Pierre Lin 
   Yipes Communications, Inc. 
    
   Juha Heinanen 
   Telia Finland 
   Email: jh@telia.fi 
    
   Loa Andersson 
   Utfors Research, Architecture and Future Lab (URAX) 
  
                                                              [Page 7] 
                draft-luciani-ppvpn-VPN-discovery-00.txt   September 2001 
 
 
   Utfors AB 
   R…sundav„gen 12 
   Box 525, 169 29 Solna, Sweden 
   Office: +46 8 5270 2000 
   Email: loa.andersson@utfors.se 
    
   Ryan K. Brooks 
   Time Warner Telecom, Inc. 
   3235 Intertech Drive 
   Brookfield, WI 53045 
   Email: ryan@twtelecom.net 
  
                                                              [Page 8] 
