


Network Working Group                                           M. Young
Internet-Draft                                            Afilias Canada
Intended status: Informational                          October 22, 2007
Expires: April 22, 2008


           Extensible Supply-chain Discovery Service Concepts
                      draft-young-esds-concepts-02

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 22, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).














Young                    Expires April 22, 2008                 [Page 1]


Internet-Draft                ESDS Concepts                 October 2007


Abstract

   This document is intended to seed discussion about the Extensible
   Supply-chain Discovery Service (ESDS), an application layer protocol
   for the distributed sharing and discovery of notification events
   between associated partners within a supply chain.  Specified
   initially as a web service interface, the protocol defines event
   tracking and tracing operations as well as core object management
   operations.  This document obsoletes "Extensible Supply-chain
   Discovery Service Concepts draft-young-esds-concepts-02".

   Comments are solicited and should be addressed to the mailing list at
   esds@ietf.org and/or the author(s).


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.   Background  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.2.   Public Networks and Tree-Walking Concerns . . . . . . . .  4
     1.2.1. Security and Privacy Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5  
     1.3.   Conventions Used In This Document . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.  Protocol Objects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.1.  SupplyChain  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.2.  Partner  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.3.  User . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.4.  Role . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.5.  Event  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     6.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 10















Young                    Expires April 22, 2008                 [Page 2]


Internet-Draft                ESDS Concepts                 October 2007


1.  Introduction

   This document describes the concepts related to the application layer
   protocol called the Extensible Supply-chain Discovery Service (ESDS).
   The ESDS captures and queries historical events related to specific
   objects with attached object identifiers, such as those programmed
   into RFID (radio frequency identifier) tags.  The interface enables
   disparate applications to track and trace shared life cycle views of
   object identifiers across a supply chain.  Additionally, the ESDS
   provides referral services in a loosely coupled mechanism with
   granular security that enables selective visibility.

   An object identifier represents an object (or a group of objects)
   that exists or has previously existed within a supply chain.  Each
   object identifier has a life cycle defined by a set of events and
   associated services for those events.  Each event includes a
   timestamp that enables a historical view of events over time.  These
   events are posted by supply chain partners to the ESDS with set
   security policies, enabling other selected partners to view the
   posted events.  There are two event storage types, persistent and
   transient.  Transient event storage implies publish and subscribe or
   "push" mechanisms to deliver events to supply chain partners.
   Persistent event storage allows both publish and subscribe or "push"
   mechanisms as well as request/response lookup queries either standing
   or on demand.  Each event contains a minimal amount of related
   business information and an optional set of service endpoints
   reference pointers.  The service endpoint reference pointers contain
   uniform resource locators.  In the case that a posting supply chain
   partner has additional detail data available about the associated
   event, these URLs resolve to the supply chain partner's detail
   provisioning system.

   The ESDS is agnostic to both the object identifier type and string
   syntax, thus supporting a wide base of identifier representations.
   An example of an object identifier could be an RFID EPC (Electronic
   Product Code) in EPCglobal TDS (Tag Data Standard) URI notation TDS
   1.3 [TDS 1.3].

   For details and examples of the operation interface of the ESDS
   protocol, see Extensible Supply-chain Discovery Service Schema
   [draft-thompson-esds-commands].  Extensible Supply-chain Discovery
   Service Schema [draft-thompson-esds-schema] details the schema for
   the ESDS, which is specified in Web Service Description Language
   (WSDL) and XML Schema (XSD).







Young                    Expires April 22, 2008                 [Page 3]


Internet-Draft                ESDS Concepts                 October 2007


1.1.  Background

   Supply chain communication traffic over the Internet is in common use
   for B2B (business to business).  Data exchange has traditionally
   taken the form of flat file data exchange, XML, and other proprietary
   forms across existing mechanisms, such as SFTP and SMTP.  This method
   of exchange requires bilateral agreements and networking arrangements
   amongst all partners of a given supply chain.  In this model,
   information sharing begins with the supply chain partner who provides
   lists of the objects (shipping manifest) that the other partners can
   expect to exchange within the supply chain.  While this one way
   method is effective in very static supply chain relationships, its
   main drawback lies in dynamic routing and, therefore, exception
   handling.  For example, if an object arrived at supply chain partner
   C without prior notification from supply chain partner B or A, the
   product remains unidentified and not routable.

   With the advent of RFID tags as a catalyst, a desire to reverse-
   lookup the object information is evolving.  Products are being tagged
   with RFID tags, traditional barcodes, and other types of proprietary
   object identifiers.  The exchange of information now begins with the
   object and leads back to the supply chain partner.  As the object is
   scanned at various key gates in the supply chain, a referral service
   must be available to match the object's identifier to either a
   relevant supply chain partner or a list of relevant supply chain
   partners and the available data services these partners may offer to
   a requestor.  This enables supply chains to route flexibly and handle
   exceptions.

1.2.  Public Networks and Tree-Walking Concerns

   Currently another standards body, EPCglobal, has issued a related
   standard referred to as ONS (Object Naming Service, 1.0).  ONS is
   effectively an extended version of DNS that does not benefit from 
   the IETF review process and, by design, necessitates increased tree-
   walking.  ONS specifies a reverse mapping of the EPCglobal "SGTIN" 
   as a domain and allows for a reference (i.e. URL) to a 
   manufacturer?s relevant back-end system (using a Naptr record).  
   The SGTIN identifier is comprised of a EPC Manager Number,
   an Object Class, and a Serial Number. The ONS lookup excludes the 
   Serial Number portion of the SGTIN.  However, the ONS specification 
   has already been extended in industry pilot projects to include the 
   Serial Number, as this enables item level lookups for tagged objects
   in the supply chain.  Using serial level lookups, ONS could be used 
   to indicate point to point referrals through the passage of a 
   relevant identifier throughout the supply chain.  This
   would require successive updates to the hierarchal ONS to indicate
   incremental supply chain partner referrals, reducing the
   effectiveness of caching.  Alternatively the ONS could provide a
   single, static point of referral to the first or initiating supply


Young                    Expires April 22, 2008                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                ESDS Concepts                 October 2007


   chain partner.  However, even a relatively static entry, which only
   refers to the point of origin within the supply chain, would drive
   the number of public zone entries to extremely large numbers.  One
   common suggestion to manage this problem is that multiple alternate
   ONS roots can be managed for separate and unrelated supply chains
   and/or regions, However, since there is nothing to prevent ONS from
   operating in the existing Internet root hierarchy, even alternate
   ONS providers can opt to drive traffic to the existing Internet root
   servers, rather than operate their own ONS roots.  Already there has
   been a pilot ONS implementation under the .aero zone
   (sgtin.id.ons.autoid.aero) where this can be observed.
   
   ESDS seeks to prevent this problem by keeping most of the network
   traffic off the Internet root hierarchy.  It provides a relatively
   flat, authenticated lookup system that is incrementally updatable by
   its known participants. Unlike ONS, the ESDS has the ability to 
   store and answer queries about incremental events and their 
   referrals, providing a view to the entire supply chain, not just a
   stateful referral. ONS still comes into play, but only as an
   exception process.  In the rare event where no relevant event 
   records about an object have been posted through the ESDS, an 
   interested supply chain partner can then do a subsequent ONS lookup
   for a referral to the start of a given supply chain.  In conjunction
   with the use of the ESDS,the ONS becomes a secondary, not a primary 
   use lookup resolving the traffic concerns against the root 
   hierarchy.  


1.2.1. Security and Privacy Concepts.

   ONS raises privacy and security concerns by multiple participants in
   the supply chain.  While ONS can technically support multiple
   identifier schemes, with multiple issuing authorities, its 
   hierarchical operation does depend on structured identifiers (for
   example, ManagerNumber.ObjectType.SerialNumber).  These identifiers
   ?leak? information about products such as type and manufacturer and
   as a result could compromise the privacy of an individual 
   transporting them. Additionally, ONS has no authentication or access
   control.  ESDS is designed for serial level lookups and supports
   unstructured opaque identifiers which can be used as lookup keys
   within an ESDS service. It fully supports authentication and object
   level access controls and therefore can address privacy concerns.         
    

1.3.  Conventions Used In This Document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].



Young                    Expires April 22, 2008                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                ESDS Concepts                 October 2007


2.  Protocol Objects

   The ESDS defines the following protocol objects in order to provide
   the granular permission system that grants access to business event
   data generated in the process of tracking objects and services in a
   supply chain.  A supply chain represents a group of partners that
   will be sharing event information generated within that group.
   Partners grant or deny access to event data by assigning roles to
   particular users associated with partners in the supply chain.  The
   following protocol objects are described in more detail below:
   SupplyChain, Partner, User, Role, and Event.

2.1.  SupplyChain

   A supply chain is a logical group of partners that can share business
   event data generated within the group.  A partner's data can be made
   visible to other partners in the supply chain based on the access
   rules defined in the Security Considerations section of this
   document.  An ESDS interface can provide access to multiple supply
   chains.

2.2.  Partner

   A partner is a business entity whose computer systems or employees
   may post events associated with a supply chain via an authenticated
   user.  Partners may inquire about events posted to any one of the
   supply chains they are members of, but will only receive results for
   events they are authorized to access.  A partner may belong to more
   than one supply chain and can create and set policies for a given
   supply chain they have initiated. Policy can be set at multiple
   levels of the ESDS, for example server policy can set membership
   limitations in any defined supply chain, or the events posted in a
   defined supply chain, policy can also be set by the initiator of the
   supply chain on membership and event posting, and individual policy
   can be set by a partner against a particular event they post within
   a supply chain. Policy is server enforced, not ESDS protocol
   enforced.

2.3.  User

   Each agent associated with a partner is called a user, which may
   represent either a computer system or a person that acts on behalf of
   the partner.  A user is assigned a role that dictates what operations
   the user may invoke.  The ESDS may require partners to provide
   different access credentials for each user that connects to the
   discovery service.  When a partner's computer system initiates a
   connection to the ESDS on behalf of a person, that system must
   solicit the person's access credentials and provide them to the ESDS.
   A user can belong to only one partner.


Young                    Expires April 22, 2008                 [Page 6]


Internet-Draft                ESDS Concepts                 October 2007


2.4.  Role

   A role is an object used to define the permissions that are to be
   assigned to a user for the duration of an authenticated session.  A
   user MUST have exactly one role assigned to it.


2.5.  Event

   An event represents a new step in the life cycle of a tracked object
   or service.  It carries two time stamps, one which indicates the 
   instant at which the event was generated by the client system 
   and one that indicates when the event was injected into the ESDS.
   There are two types of events:

   o  An object event is captured when the system records a new life
      cycle step for an object bearing a given object identifier.  The
      event consists of a supply chain specific life cycle step
      identifier.

   o  A void event amends a specific event to indicate that the event
      was posted in error.






3.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.





4.  Security Considerations

   This RFC raises no security issues because of its conceptual nature.
   Security considerations related to the ESDS interface operations can
   be found in Extensible Supply-chain Discovery Service
   Commands[draft-thompson-esds-commands].










Young                    Expires April 22, 2008                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                ESDS Concepts                 October 2007


5.  Glossary

   EPC - Electronic Product Code - A globally unique, standardized
   identifier designed to enable automatic identification of objects.

   EPCglobal - A standards body for the EPC that supports the use of
   RFID.

   RFID - Radio Frequency Identification - A method of automatic
   identification that includes storing data on devices called RFID 
   tags or transponders, and remotely retrieving that data with 
   specialized readers.

   TDS - Tag Data Standards - defines the different EPC identifier 
   formats, together with their binary and URI representations and
   encoding/decoding rules.

   Pure-identity URI notation for an EPC  - the standard or canonical
   representation of an EPC that should be used especially for 
   inter-organizational information exchanges.




6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

6.2.  Informative References

   [TDS1.3]   EPCglobal Tag Data Standards v1.3, 8 March 2006.
   http://www.epcglobalinc.org/standards/tds

   [draft-thompson-esds-commands]
              Thompson, F., "Extensible Supply-chain Discovery Service
              Commands (work in progress)", April 2007.

   [draft-thompson-esds-schema]
              Thompson, F., "Extensible Supply-chain Discovery Service
              Schema (work in progress)", April 2007.









Young                    Expires April 22, 2008                [Page 08]

Internet-Draft                ESDS Concepts                 October 2007


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

6.2.  Informative References

   [TDS1.3]   EPCglobal Tag Data Standards v1.3, 8 March 2006.
   http://www.epcglobalinc.org/standards/tds

   [draft-thompson-esds-commands]
              Thompson, F., "Extensible Supply-chain Discovery Service
              Commands (work in progress)", April 2007.

   [draft-thompson-esds-schema]
              Thompson, F., "Extensible Supply-chain Discovery Service
              Schema (work in progress)", April 2007.












Author's Address

   Michael Young
   Afilias Canada
   204-4141 Yonge Street
   Toronto, ON  M2P 2A8
   CA

   Phone: +1.416.646.3304
   Email: myoung@ca.afilias.info










Young                    Expires April 22, 2008                [Page 09]


Internet-Draft                ESDS Concepts                 October 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).




Young                    Expires April 22, 2008                [Page 10]
