Internet-Draft                                                  R.Nagpal
draft-nagpal-biometric-digital-signature-00.txt                 S.Nagpal
Intended Category: Informational              Asian School of Cyber Laws
Expires: October 2002                                           May 2002


                  Biometric based Digital Signature scheme


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001). All Rights Reserved.

1. Abstract

   Digital Signatures are fast emerging as a viable information security
   solution, satiating the objectives of data integrity, entity 
   authentication, privacy, non-repudiation and certification. 

   The technique, as it stands today, faces the problem of the 
   maintenance of the secrecy of the private key. This document provides 
   a conceptual framework for the establishment of a biometric-based key 
   generation scheme. In this scheme, the private key is generated each 
   time a document or record requires to be signed. Such generation is 
   based upon a combination of biometric traits.

   The key words "MUST", "REQUIRED", "SHOULD", "RECOMMENDED", and "MAY"
   in this document (in uppercase, as shown) are to be interpreted as
   described in RFC 2119.

2. Pre-requisite for reading this document

   A certain basic knowledge of cryptography and Digital signatures 
   would be helpful in understanding this document. 

3. Overview of present system

Nagpal, et. al.          Expires November, 2002                  Page 1 


Internet-Draft           		                       May 2002 
   
   In a digital signature scheme, a person first generates two
   mathematically related keys (simply put, a key is a number), a 
   private key and a corresponding public key. Calculating the private
   key from the public key is considered computationally infeasible. 
   The public key is revealed to the world at large whereas the private 
   key is kept secret. 

   Digital signatures are created using the private key while they are 
   verified using the coressponding public key. 

   A compromise of the private key can cause security breaches of very 
   large magnitude. Maintaining the secrecy of the private key poses a 
   problem within the present system. 

4. Biometrics

   Biometrics is the use of some physiological or behavioural 
   characteristics for authentication and identification. This 
   technique of authentication is based upon the fact that certain 
   characteristics are never the same in any two people. 

   Biometric recognition systems operate in two modes - one is the 
   identification where the system identifies a person by searching a 
   large database for a match and the other the authentication mode 
   where the systems verifies a person's claimed identity by checking 
   against a previously entered pattern. 

   The techniques included in this method of identification are 
   retina scanning, iris scanning, fingerprint verification, voice 
   verification, facial analysis etc. Biometric based authentication 
   schemes are utilized in sectors like Public services, Law 
   Enforcement and Banking. 

5. Current method of key generation

   One of the most popular asymmetric encryption schemes is the RSA 
   algorithm, which goes as under:

   Take two large prime numbers say 'p' and 'q'.

   Calculate N = pq

   Calculate A = (p -1) (q -1)   

   Find a number E such that 1 < E < A and that E and A are coprime

   Find a D such that 1 < D < A and ED is congruent to 1 mod A.

   Now, the private key of a person is (N, D) and the public key is 
   (N, E). 

   Currently the key generation is handled by software applications 
    
Nagpal, et. al.          Expires November, 2002                  Page 2 


Internet-Draft           		                       May 2002 
   
   that randomly choose the numbers 'p', 'q' and 'E'.
   Once generated, the private key 'D' is supposed to be kept
   securely. For signing any document this private key needs to be used 
   and hence it needs to be securely stored. 

6. Proposed method of key generation
 
   The authors propose a biometric-based key generation scheme, which 
   would function something as follows:

   a. Firstly a person would visit his bank (or some other Government 
      authorised agency). There her / his retina, iris and fingerprint  
      (Note: any other combination of biometric traits can be used) 
      would be scanned.

   b. The result of the retina scanning would be a large number (a 
      suitable algorithm that always gives a fixed number for a fixed 
      retina pattern has still to be developed, though!). If this 
      number is a prime number it will be taken as 'p' as per the 
      formula in section 4 above. If this number is not a prime number, 
      then it will be incremented by one till a prime number is 
      obtained and then this prime number now obtained will be treated 
      as 'p'. 

   c. The result of the iris scanning would be another large number (a
      suitable algorithm that always gives a fixed number for a fixed
      iris pattern has still to be developed, though!). If this number 
      is a prime number it will be taken as 'q' as per the formula in 
      section 4 above. If the generated number is not a prime number, 
      then it will be incremented by one till a prime number is arrived 
      at and then this prime number now obtained will be treated as 'q'.

   d. According to section 4 above the next step would be to get 'N'
      which is the product of 'p' and 'q'.

   e. Fingerprinting the person shall provide the third large number 
      required, 'E'(a suitable algorithm that always gives a fixed 
      number for a fixed retina pattern has still to be developed, 
      though!). E has to be greater than 1 and less than A and E and A 
      are co-prime. Thus in the next step the system shall attempt to 
      satisfy both these conditions by reducing (or incrementing) the 
      number generated by 1 time till the conditions are met. 

   f. Having obtained the relevant numbers, the private key and the 
      public key can be generated. 

7. Moral of the Story

   The private key of the person would be generated every time that 
   the person wishes to sign (or for that matter decrypt) a record. 
   His public key, on the other hand will always be taken from the 
   records of the bank (or other Government appointed agency) where 
   
Nagpal, et. al.          Expires November, 2002                  Page 3 


Internet-Draft           		                       May 2002 
   
   the key pair was first generated.
   An elaborate key revocation protocol would have to be worked out 
   based upon current practices with relevant modifications.
   The private key should be allowed to sign as long as the iris, 
   retina and fingerprint of the person are in adequate physical 
   proximity to the system. Once that proximity is lost, the private 
   key should be permanently erased by the system.

8. Applications

   This method of key generation would ensure the trust of the public
   in cryptography and digital signatures to a much larger extent. It 
   would be possible to utilize this method in many applications 
   requiring authentication or identification.
      
   a. Banking transactions

      When a person goes to a bank to open an account he will be asked 
      to fill out an electronic form. Then he will place his head in 
      front of a console where his retina and then iris shall be 
      scanned. On the same console shall be provided the facility for 
      fingerprinting. While the above processes are taking place the 
      scanning computer may be disconnected from the network thus 
      transforming it into a stand-alone machine. Once this is done and 
      the keys generated, he will sign the electronic form using the 
      private key. The private key will then self-destruct, leaving no 
      trace of it anywhere even on the generating computer.

      The public key shall be backed up with the bank. One copy of it 
      shall be given to the customer and one copy shall be provided to 
      the Certifying Authority working in association with the bank. 
      The Certifying Authority shall certify the public key by issuing 
      the relevant digital signature certificate.

      The ATM card provided to the customer will contain his public key
      apart from other details. Now every time that the person wants to 
      withdraw money, he will go to the ATM centre, wherein he will fill 
      in an electronic form stating that he wishes to withdraw a 
      particular amount. When he presses submit, a console will open up 
      allowing him to scan his retina and iris and record his fingerprint. 
      He will first unplug the machine making it stand-alone. The 
      private key generated in this way will be used to sign the request. 
      Once the signature is made the key shall be destroyed. The money 
      will be withdrawn on this basis. 

      The introduction of such a process in banking shall rid the customer
      of another very widely prevalent problem - that of wrongful use of 
      someone else's ATM card. This way even if a person does steal or get 
      access to a card, he will not be able to authenticate himself for 
      signing the final request. 
   
   b. Electronic Contracts

Nagpal, et. al.          Expires November, 2002                  Page 4 


Internet-Draft           		                       May 2002 

      A similar process may be used to authenticate electronic contracts.
      The contracting parties shall sign the contract after having created 
      their private keys on the spot. Since all the criteria for key 
      generation will be followed this system shall allow for signature
      and verification of all contracting parties to an electronic 
      contract.

   c. Credit card payments

      This procedure may further be used for credit card based 
      transactions. The credit card shall store the public key of the 
      person. The private key will have to be generated at the moment of 
      signing and will be destroyed once its requirement is over.

9. Security Considerations

   The security of the biometric based key generation system is based
   upon the integrity of the systems used by the agencies involved i.e 
   the Certifying Authorities, Banks etc.

10. Acknowledgments

   The authors gratefully acknowledge the contributions of Debasis Nayak
   and Abhinav Bhatt, whose review and comments significantly clarified 
   and improved the utility of this document. 




























Nagpal, et. al.             Expires November 2002                Page 5


Internet-Draft           		                       May 2002 

11. Authors' Addresses

    Rohas Nagpal
    Asian School of Cyber Laws
    6, Rajas, Pashan Road,
    Opp Abhimanshri,
    Pune 411008, INDIA

    Email: rn@asianlaws.org    

    Shuchi Nagpal
    Asian School of Cyber Laws
    6, Rajas, Pashan Road,
    Opp Abhimanshri,
    Pune 411008, INDIA

    Email: sn@asianlaws.org  






































Nagpal, et. al.             Expires November 2002                Page 6
