



Network Working Group                                      M. Kuehlewind
Internet-Draft                                                ETH Zurich
Intended status: Informational                         February 28, 2019
Expires: September 1, 2019


                  Security is a function, not a layer
              draft-kuehlewind-security-is-not-a-layer-00

Abstract

   This document argues that security functions should be implemented on
   each layer as needed.  Especially security functions should not be
   separated in its own layer.  Having security scoped to the needs of
   each layer makes it possible to separate different functions
   correctly without the risk of impacting security on another layer.
   Note that this does not mean that each layer needs to maintain and
   negotiate it's on security context.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 1, 2019.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Kuehlewind              Expires September 1, 2019               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           security is not a layer           February 2019


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

1.  Introduction

   Today, encryption and (server) authentication in the web is mostly
   provided by TLS.  TLS is a security protocol on top of (usually) TCP.
   However, a TLS session might possible not be end-to-end, where an
   end-point is associated with the actual user at the application
   level, but could be interrupted by an immediate device that e.g.
   terminates the TCP connection, so-called TCP proxies.  Further,
   intermediate devices might block TLS negotiation, as a side effect
   when higher layer in-network functions are preformed.  This effect
   has been often observed in e.g.  mobile network which a connection
   failure rate of up to 20% when TLS is used [CROWD].

   [More information to follow... this 00-draft is a place-holder only.]

2.  Definitions

3.  Discussion

4.  Informative References

   [CROWD]    Mandalari, A., Bagnulo, M., and A. Lutu, "Informing
              Protocol Design Through Crowdsourcing: The Case of
              Pervasive Encryption", 2015.

Author's Address

   Mirja Kuehlewind
   ETH Zurich
   Gloriastrasse 35
   8092 Zurich
   Switzerland

   Email: mirja.kuehlewind@tik.ee.ethz.ch














Kuehlewind              Expires September 1, 2019               [Page 2]
