





Internet-Draft                                   Yoshihiro Ohba (Editor)
Expires: September, 2002                                       Subir Das
                                                         Basavaraj Patil
                                                          Hesham Soliman


                                                           March 1, 2002


               Problem Space and Usage Scenarios for PANA

                <draft-ietf-pana-usage-scenarios-01.txt>


Status of This Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents, valid for a maximum of six
   months, and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

   Most of the commercial networks today require users (or devices on
   behalf of users) to provide their authentication information, such as
   identity, device identifier, etc., before being allowed access to
   network resources.  Resources here include basic access to the
   network, specific value added services, different grade of services
   etc.  While such networks are available in the market place, the
   authentication process and access control mechanisms depend upon the
   type of network that a user is attaching to and in most cases it is
   specific to an access technology.  Due to the rapid proliferation of
   access technologies, wireless devices and next generation services
   offerings, a flexible authentication (which is independent of
   underlying access technologies) and access control mechanisms are
   deemed necessary.  This document therefore attempts to describe
   several such scenarios where existing mechanisms are not sufficient
   and finally argue the need for a new higher layer protocol called
   PANA (Protocol for carrying Authentication for Network Access).  It
   also helps to understand the problem space clearly and facilitate the
   discussion for PANA requirements and framework.




                         Expires September, 2002                [Page 1]





Internet-Draft  Problem Space & Usage Scenarios for PANA   March 1, 2002


Table of Contents

   1         Terms ................................................... 2
   1.1.      Requirements Language ................................... 2
   1.2.      Acronyms ................................................ 2
   1.3.      Terminology ............................................. 2
   2.        Problem Space ........................................... 4
   3.        Usage Scenarios ......................................... 7
   3.1.      Multiple Access Routers ................................. 7
   3.2.      Multiple-Interface Device ............................... 7
   4.        Security Consideration .................................. 8
   5.        Acknowledgments ......................................... 8
   6.        References .............................................. 9
   7.        Authors' Information .................................... 9


1  Terms


1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [Keywords].


1.2.  Acronyms

   AAA: Authentication, Authorization and Accounting

   AP: Access Point

   AR: Access Router

   DSL: Digital Subscriber Line

   EAP: Extensible Authentication Protocol

   GPRS: General Packet Radio Service

   LSA: Local Security Association

   PDP: Packet Data Protocol

   PKI: Public Key Infrastructure

   NAS: Network Access Server

   PAA: PANA Authentication Agent

   PaC: PANA Client

   PPP: Point-to-Point Protocol


1.3.  Terminology




                         Expires September, 2002                [Page 2]





Internet-Draft  Problem Space & Usage Scenarios for PANA   March 1, 2002


   Following terminologies are defined for this document.  See also
   [PANAREQ].


     Device

       A network element (namely notebook computers, PDAs, etc.) that
       requires access to a provider's network.

     Device Identifier (DI)

       The identifier used by the network as a handle to control and
       police the network access of a client. Depending on the access
       technology, identifier might contain any of IP address, link-
       layer address, switch port number, etc. of a device. PANA
       authentication agent keeps a table for binding device identifiers
       to the PANA clients.

     PANA Client (PaC)

       The entity wishing to obtain network access from a PANA
       authentication agent within a network. A PANA client is
       associated with a device and a set of credentials to prove its
       identity within the scope of PANA.

     PANA Authentication Agent (PAA)

       The entity whose responsibility is to authenticate the
       credentials provided by a PANA client either locally or by using
       a back-end authentication infrastructure such as a AAA
       infrastructure and grant basic network access and specific
       service (if requested) to the device associated with the client
       and identified by a DI.

     Local Network

       The immediate network(s) that is available to the device for
       network access.

     Client

       An entity that resides on the device and provides authentication
       information to a NAS in the local network.  PaC is a client.

     Network Access Server (NAS)

       An entity in the local network which resides at the edge and
       allows network access to the device after verifying the
       credentials provided by the client.  For example, PAA is a NAS.

     Access Point

       A first-hop wireless L2 attachment point from the device in the
       local network.

     Access Router




                         Expires September, 2002                [Page 3]





Internet-Draft  Problem Space & Usage Scenarios for PANA   March 1, 2002


       A first-hop router from the device in the local network.

     Local Security Association (LSA)

       A temporary security association between a client and a NAS,
       which is derived from credentials of the client during initial
       authentication.

     Initial Authentication

       Authentication performed when a device enters into a local
       network and provides the credentials to be authorized for network
       access without having any a priori authorization information.
       This will require a NAS to verify the credentials either locally
       or by using a back-end authentication infrastructure.

     Re-authentication

       Authentication that occurs when a device needs to extend the
       authorization lifetime, changes attributes such as, IP address
       and/or MAC address, etc., for the same network access after
       successful initial authentication.  This may require a NAS to
       verify the credentials (used for initial authentication) either
       locally or by using a back-end authentication infrastructure.

     Local re-authentication

       A type of re-authentication that occurs locally between a client
       and a NAS by using the LSA established between them.  In this
       type of re-authentication, the client does not use the same
       credentials as used for initial authentication.

     Higher Layer

       A layer that is higher than layer two.


2.  Problem Space

   Today's technologies mostly rely on access specific authentication
   mechanisms (i.e., L2 authentication mechanisms) for network access.
   For example, PPP has a built-in mechanism for peer authentication
   [RFC1661] and IEEE 802 networks define a port-based network access
   control with peer authentication in point-to-point LAN segments
   [802.1X].  However, it is not guaranteed that L2 authentication is
   always available in the local network as long as authentication for
   establishing L2 connectivity is not a mandatory part in the
   specification of an L2 protocol, and this leads to the following
   need:

   i) Need for authentication over unauthenticated L2 links

      In order to satisfy this need where authentication for network
      access is required, a higher layer protocol for authentication is
      clearly needed.  While it is true that L2 can be extended to
      support authentication, we argue that a common higher layer
      protocol will provide a flexible and generic solution to all L2s.



                         Expires September, 2002                [Page 4]





Internet-Draft  Problem Space & Usage Scenarios for PANA   March 1, 2002


   Due to the rapid proliferation of access technologies, wireless
   devices are becoming very popular.  On the other hand, these
   technologies demands different kinds of authentication, such as:

   ii) Need for local re-authentication

      Re-authentication is necessary at least in the following
      situations:

      a) If the underlying access network does not have a capability to
         detect physical disconnection of devices, periodical re-
         authentication is necessary for minimizing the impact of
         attacks (e.g., free riding) due to IP address and/or MAC
         address spoofing, which would possibly occur when the device is
         shutdown or the user leaves the local network with the device
         without performing explicit log-off from the local network.

      b) If there is a change in attributes (e.g., IP address and/or MAC
         address) of a device, re-authentication is necessary in order
         to make sure that the change is informed by the entity that was
         once authenticated successfully.


      It is desired that re-authentication is performed locally between
      client and NAS as much as possible.  However, there might be some
      cases where re-authentication with help of back-end authentication
      infrastructure is necessary in addition to local re-
      authentication, considering security for accounting such as non-
      repudiation.

      While L2 authentication with some EAP mechanism [EAPSRP,RFC2284]
      that supports built-in local re-authentication may be used for
      situations in case (a), there are some scenarios where L2
      authentication is not desired.  For example, considering mobile
      and wireless environments, it is possible that a device has
      multiple wireless interfaces and switches from one interface to
      other in the same administrative domain with or without changing
      an IP address based on variable requirements (e.g., power saving
      vs. throughput).  In this case, re-authentication is necessary for
      the new interface to be authorized for network access, and it is
      desired that re-authentication is performed locally between the
      client and NAS in order to perform interface switching quickly.
      The need for local re-authentication for interface switching
      immediately leads to a need for an access-independent
      authentication mechanism that supports:

      o  an access technology independent authentication protocol for
         providing a generic method for local re-authentication among
         different interfaces, AND

      o  an access independent client identifier for associating the
         different interfaces with the same LSA that is used for local
         re-authentication.

      On the other hand, using an access-independent authentication
      mechanism is not sufficient for local re-authentication, and
      additional consideration for location of NAS is also necessary.



                         Expires September, 2002                [Page 5]





Internet-Draft  Problem Space & Usage Scenarios for PANA   March 1, 2002


      For example, if two NASes of L2 technologies A and B are
      physically in different boxes, it is not possible to use L2
      authentication to perform local re-authentication without using
      another protocol such as a context transfer protocol and/or a AAA
      protocol (note: initial authentication does not necessarily
      require a AAA protocol) in order to share the LSA used for local
      re-authentication directly or indirectly between the two L2 NASes.

      Thus, a higher layer protocol that provides not only an access-
      independent authentication mechanism but also flexibility in
      location of NAS is needed so that a client can continue to use a
      single NAS for performing local re-authentication in a "self-
      contained" manner (i.e., without requiring other protocols) when
      interface switching occurs.

   So far we have described the problem space and the need for an
   additional authentication protocol at the higher layer. In the
   following section we present some important issues that such a higher
   protocol MUST satisfy and consider them as base requirements.

   iii) Need for authentication independent of IP address configuration

      There are two types of independence between authentication and IP
      address configuration as described below.  Note that "IP address
      configuration" in this document means configuration of an IP
      address that needs to be authorized for network access, and thus
      configuring an IPv6 link local address or any temporal IP address
      that is used only for authentication purpose and not necessarily
      authorized for network access is excluded from the definition of
      "IP address configuration."

      o  Method independence.  Authentication MUST be independent of any
         IP address configuration method for both dynamic address
         configuration (e.g., DHCPv4/v6, and IPv6 stateless address
         autoconfiguration, etc.) and static address configuration.

      o  Timing independence.  Authentication MUST be able to occur both
         before and after configuring an IP address.  There are a number
         of situations where authentication before IP address
         configuration would be necessary, for example:

         a) If strict access control is required or the IP address
            resource used for network access is scarce, authentication
            should occur before IP address configuration.

         b) If an AP supports multiple VLANs and it is possible to
            dynamically associate a device with one of the VLANs
            depending on the authentication and authorization result,
            authentication should occur before IP address configuration.

         c) If a distinct IPv6 64-bit prefix can be assigned to each PDP
            context in GPRS[GPRS] or to each subscriber of DSL or cable
            internet, authentication should occur before IP address
            configuration.

         On the other hand, authentication after IP address
         configuration would be useful for providing a network access



                         Expires September, 2002                [Page 6]





Internet-Draft  Problem Space & Usage Scenarios for PANA   March 1, 2002


         service in which access to local information such as local-area
         map and flight information for free of charge, while access to
         specific external web-sites is subject to charge.

   In conclusion, we anticipate that a higher layer protocol like PANA
   (Protocol carrying Authentication for Network Access) will satisfy
   all of the above needs that are emerging.  We also understand that
   there are some functional overlap between L2 authentication and PANA.
   However, it is not very clear at this moment whether PANA and L2
   authentication both are required for a network or they can be used
   exclusively for different scenarios.

   In the following section, the problem domain is translated into few
   scenarios which we believe MUST be supported by PANA:

   -  Multiple access routers

   -  Multiple-interface device


3.  Usage Scenarios


3.1.  Multiple Access Routers


   In multi-access environments, such as IEEE 802 networks, it is
   possible for multiple ARs to coexist on the same shared media.  In
   such a scenario, it would be desirable to use multiple ARs in such a
   way that traffic coming from and going to a specific device always
   goes through a single AR for ease of access control, but traffic from
   different devices diverges over multiple ARs for the purpose of load
   balancing and redundancy.  If such a routing control is possible, it
   would be easier to perform authentication via the same AR.  On the
   other hand, there are some cases in which such a routing control
   would not be possible.  This is due to e.g., ICMP Redirect or the use
   of "IPv6 Host to Router Load Sharing" [Hinden], and it may be better
   to put a PANA authentication agent separately from ARs in those
   cases.  In other words, the types of routing control would affect the
   location of PAA in multi-AR environments.  Given that the location of
   PAA is not restricted within ARs, PANA MUST have a mechanism to
   provide the information of the location of PAA(s) to devices.

   The multi-AR scenario also addresses the issue of multiple providers
   on the same shared media, i.e., each AR may not be administered by
   the same provider.  In this case, it would be necessary for PANA to
   have a mechanism to provide the identity of PAA(s) for a PaC so that
   the PaC can choose an appropriate provider to access.  The important
   point is PANA MUST support all multi-AR scenarios.


3.2.  Multiple-Interface Device

   PANA MUST support a device with multiple interfaces of homogeneous or
   heterogeneous technologies.  There are two possible scenarios: multi-
   homing and interface switching.




                         Expires September, 2002                [Page 7]





Internet-Draft  Problem Space & Usage Scenarios for PANA   March 1, 2002


   In case of multi-homing, the multiple interfaces of a device may be
   activated at the same time for various requirements such as increased
   bandwidth, load balancing and reliability.  PANA MUST provide a way
   for the PaC of the device to perform initial authentication and local
   re-authentication for each interface.

   In case of interface switching, PANA MUST use an access-independent
   authentication mechanism (as described in section 2).  This access-
   independent authentication mechanism allows a PaC to perform local
   re-authentication with a PAA when interface switching occurs.
   Location of the PAA MUST be flexible so that the PaC can use the same
   PAA for each interface while it is roaming within the same domain.
   This will allow a device to roam seamlessly among different access
   technologies within an operator's domain.


4.  Security Consideration

   We anticipate following security issues or concerns relating to a
   higher layer protocol such as PANA.

   o  Consideration for Eavesdropping

      Since PANA protocol carries authentication information,
      consideration is necessary for preventing confidential part of the
      credentials of a PaC from being known by eavesdroppers in the
      local network.  The eavesdroppers include users and operators in
      the local network.

   o  Consideration for Denial of Service Attacks

      Since PANA protocol is used for authentication, consideration is
      necessary for preventing authentication of a legitimate PaC from
      being denied as a result of processing PANA messages sent from
      attackers.  Next, since both initial authentication and re-
      authentication would require cryptographic computation on both PaC
      and PAA, consideration is necessary for both PaC and PAA not to
      spend CPU and memory resources for processing PANA messages sent
      from an attacker more than that is spent by the attacker to
      attack.  The attackers may or may not be on the same link as the
      PaC or PAA.

      Additionally, since during initial authentication PAA may use
      back-end authentication infrastructure, consideration is necessary
      to prevent the authentication infrastructure from being attacked
      via PAA while using PANA.

   o  Consideration for Man-In-The-Middle Attacks

      Since PANA protocol needs to be able to operate over multiple
      router hops, consideration is necessary for preventing the
      communication between PaC and PAA from being spoofed by an
      attacker in between.


5.  Acknowledgments




                         Expires September, 2002                [Page 8]





Internet-Draft  Problem Space & Usage Scenarios for PANA   March 1, 2002


   The authors would like to thank James Carlson, Jacques Caron, Paal
   Engelstad, Henry Haverinen, James Kempf, Phil Roberts, David Spence,
   Barani Subbiah, George Tsirtsis, Cliff Wang, Alper Yegin, and the
   rest of the PANA Working Group for the ideas and support they have
   given to this document.


6.  References

   [802.1X] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks,
       "Port-Based Network Access Control", IEEE Std 802.1X-2001.

   [EAPSRP] J. Carlson, et al., "EAP SRP-SHA1 Authentication Protocol",
       Internet-Draft, Work in progress, July 2001.

   [GPRS] R. Bates, "GPRS", McGraw-Hill TELECOM, ISBN 007138188, 2002.

   [Hinden] R. Hinden, "IPv6 Host to Router Load Sharing",
       Internet-Draft, Work in progress, January 2002.

   [Keywords] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
       Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [PANAREQ] A. Yegin, et al., "Protocol for Carrying Authentication for
       Network Access (PANA) Requirements and Terminology", Internet-Draft,
       Work in progress, February 2001.

   [RFC1661] W. Simpson, "The Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP)", RFC 1661
       (STD 51), July 1994.

   [RFC2284] L. Blunk, et. al., "PPP Extensible Authentication Protocol
       (EAP)", RFC 2284, March 1998.


7.  Authors' Information

   Yoshihiro Ohba
   Toshiba America Research, Inc.
   P.O. Box 136
   Convent Station, NJ 07961-0136
   USA
   Phone: +1 973 829 5174
   Fax:   +1 973 829 5601
   Email: yohba@tari.toshiba.com

   Subir Das
   MCC 1D210R, Telcordia Technologies
   445 South Street, Morristown, NJ 07960
   Phone: +1 973 829 4959
   email: subir@research.telcordia.com

   Basavaraj Patil
   Nokia
   6000 Connection Dr.
   Irving, TX. 75039
   USA
   Phone:  +1 972-894-6709



                         Expires September, 2002                [Page 9]





Internet-Draft  Problem Space & Usage Scenarios for PANA   March 1, 2002


   Email:  Basavaraj.Patil@nokia.com

   Hesham Soliman
   Ericsson Radio Systems AB
   Torshamnsgatan 29,
   Kista, Stockholm 16480
   Sweden
   Phone:  +46 8 4046619
   Fax:    +46 8 4047020
   E-mail: Hesham.Soliman@era.ericsson.se


















































                         Expires September, 2002               [Page 10]


