

        Telephone Number Mapping (enum)                          D. Ranalli
        Internet Draft                                              D. Peek
        Document:                                                 R. Walter
           <draft-ranalli-peek-walter-enum-t1roles-00.txt>        NetNumber
        Category: Informational                               November 2000
         
      
      
                                 Tier-1 ENUM System 
                             Roles and Responsibilities 
         
      
         
     Status of this Memo 
         
        This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
        all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
         
        Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
        Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
        other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
        Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
        six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
        documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts 
        as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
        progress."  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
        The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
      
     1. Abstract 
         
        This document describes the actors in a global Tier-1 ENUM System 
        and the roles and responsibilities that each of the actors fulfills.  
        In this context, a "Tier-1 ENUM System" refers to a holistic system 
        for registering E.164 telephone numbers in a DNS top-level domain. 
        The population of NAPTR records with URI's in a Tier-2 ENUM System 
        as described in RFC 2916 [4] is not discussed in this draft. 
         
        This document is part of a series of Internet-Drafts on Tier-1 ENUM 
        services. The full list of Internet-Drafts in this series includes: 
         
        Tier-1 ENUM System:  Roles & Responsibilities   
        Tier-1 ENUM System:  Registry Architecture 
        Tier-1 ENUM System:  Registration Validation 
        Tier-1 ENUM System:  Conflict Resolution 
        Tier-1 ENUM System:  WHOIS 
        Tier-1 ENUM System:  Registry/Registrar Protocol and API 
         
         
         








     Ranalli, et al            Expires - May 2001                         1 



      
             Tier-1 ENUM System: Roles and Responsibilities   November 2000 
      
         
         
     2. Conventions used in this document 
      
        The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
        "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
        this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2]. 
      
         
     3. Introduction 
         
        Starting with the assignment of an E.164 telephone number to an end-
        user ("Subscriber"), this document describes the roles and 
        responsibilities of various actors in a global Tier-1 ENUM System.    
         
        Please send comments on this document to the ENUM working group or 
        directly to dpeek@netnumber.com 
         
      
     4. Actors In The Tier-1 ENUM System  
         
     4.1 E.164 Administration System 
         
        Well-defined process within the Public Switched Telephone Network 
        (PSTN) for defining dialing plans, creating E.164 numbers, and 
        distributing blocks of numbers to network operators and telephone 
        service providers.   In the context of a Tier-1 ENUM System, the key 
        players within the E.164 Administration System include the 
        following: 
         
          -  International Telecommunications Union (ITU):  Defines country 
             codes. 
         
          -  National PSTN Regulatory Agency: (eg: OFTEL in Great Britain):  
             Provides regulatory control over the PSTN numbering system 
             within a country or region. 
         
          -  National Numbering Plan Administrator (eg: NANPA in the United 
             States):  Administers a numbering plan within a country or 
             region under contract from a National PSTN Regulatory Agency.  
             Creates area-codes/city-codes.  Distributes blocks of numbers 
             to network operators and telephone service providers. 
         
          -  Network Portability Administrator (eg: NPAC in the United 
             States):  Administers the number portability process within a 
             country or region under contract from a National PSTN 
             Regulatory Agency.  Provides mechanisms for shifting control of 
             individual E.164 numbers from one telephone service provider to 
             another based on subscriber choice. 
      
      
      
      

      
      
     Ranalli, et al              Expires - May 2001                       2 



      
             Tier-1 ENUM System: Roles and Responsibilities   November 2000 
      
     4.2 Telephone Service Provider (TSP)   
      
        Entity with contractual control over a block of E.164 numbers and/or 
        a set of ported E.164 numbers via the E.164 Administration System.   
        Example:  Network operator, Application Service Provider, PSTN 
        service provider, etc.  Roles include: 
         
          -  E.164 Assignment:  Assigns E.164 numbers to Subscribers. 
         
          -  Tier-1 ENUM Service Termination:  Entity with authority to 
             terminate a Subscriber's Tier-1 ENUM service if the TSP has 
             revoked the Subscriber's assignment of an E.164 number for any 
             reason.  Termination right applies to E.164 numbers under 
             contractual control of the TSP through the E.164 Administration 
             System.      
      
      
     4.3 Subscriber  
      
          -  Entity with day-to-day control over an E.164 number.   
              
             1. Individual that has been assigned an E.164 number by a TSP. 
              
             2. Enterprise that has been assign a pool of E.164 numbers  
                by a TSP. 
               
      

     4.4 Subscriber Agent ("Agent") 
      
          -  Entity with authority to act on behalf of a Subscriber to 
             register an E.164 number in a Tier-1 ENUM service.  Example:  
             Telephone Service Provider, Application Service Provider (ASP), 
             etc. 
      
      
     4.5 Registrant 
      
          -  Subscriber, or an Agent acting on behalf of a Subscriber, that 
             registers an E.164 number with a Tier-1 ENUM service through an 
             Accredited ENUM Registrar.   
         
          -  Warrants that the E.164 number being registered is under the 
             day-to-day control of the Subscriber who's number is being 
             registered. 
         
          -  Agrees to abide be bound by the terms and conditions of the 
             Tier-1 ENUM "Conflict Resolution Process". 
         
          -  Responsible for notifying the Registrar of dialing plan changes 
             that affect (change) the Registrant's E.164 number(s). In the 
             market, registrars may choose to provide automated tools, or 
             ongoing support services, to fulfill this obligation on behalf 
             of Registrants. 
      

     Ranalli, et al              Expires - May 2001                       3 



      
             Tier-1 ENUM System: Roles and Responsibilities   November 2000 
      
      
     4.6 Tier-1 ENUM Registry ("Registry") 
      
        Entity that operates the Tier-1 ENUM service within a country or 
        region.  Responsibilities include: 
         
          -  DNS Resolution Service:  Delegation of a complete E.164 domain 
             name to the appropriate Tier-2 ENUM service provider.  
              
          -  Registration Service: A registration system that provides the 
             ability for multiple competing registrars to access 
             administrative services offered by the Registry. 
         
          -  WHOIS Service:  Publicly accessible thick WHOIS service 
             provided on behalf of all Accredited Registrars.   
         
          -  Conflict Resolution Service:  A system or service for resolving 
             conflict between two registrants that both claim day-to-day 
             control over the same E.164 number.  System or service for use 
             by all accredited registrars  
      
      
      

     4.7 Accredited ENUM Registrar ("ENUM Registrar" or "Registrar") 
      
          -  Registration:  Entity that has been accredited and authorized 
             to enter E.164 numbers and associated registrant information 
             into the Tier-1 ENUM Registry.   
         
          -  Registrant Validation:  Responsible for validating the identity 
             of a Registrant to confirm that the E.164 numbers being 
             registered are under the day-to-day control of the Subscriber 
             being represented by the Registrant.   Acceptable validation 
             mechanisms are outlined in the companion document "Tier-1 ENUM 
             System: Registration Validation". 
         
          -  TSP Validation:  Responsible for validating the identity of any 
             TSP requesting the termination of Tier-1 ENUM services for a 
             given E.164 number to confirm that the TSP has contractual 
             control over the E.164 number in question via the E.164 
             Administration System.   
         
          -  The primary responsibility of the Registrar in the Tier-1 ENUM 
             System is to validate the identity of the entity with day-to-
             day control over an E.164 number before a change is made to the 
             Registry.  As such, Telephone Service Providers (TSP's) are 
             well positioned to provide Registrar services for the numbers 
             under their control since they have easy access to the 
             information necessary to confirm the identity of a Subscriber.   
      
      
      
      
      

     Ranalli, et al              Expires - May 2001                       4 



      
             Tier-1 ENUM System: Roles and Responsibilities   November 2000 
      
     4.8 Tier-2 ENUM Provider 
      
          -  Entity that provides Tier-2 ENUM services which involves the 
             registration of URI's in DNS NAPTR resource records as defined 
             in RFC 2916 [4].  The full scope of services provided by a 
             Tier-2 ENUM provider is outside the scope of this Internet-
             Draft. 
         
         
     5. Entity Relationship Diagram _ Tier-1 ENUM System 
         
         
                      ------------------- 
                      |      E.164      | 
                      | Administration  | 
                      |     System      | 
                      ------------------- 
                               | 
                               | 
                               V 
                      ------------------- 
                      |    Telephone    |---- 
                      | Service Provider|   | 
                      -------------------   | 
                               |            | 
                               |            | 
                               V            | 
                      -------------------   | 
                      |    Registrant   |   | 
                      |  (Subscriber or |   | 
                      |      Agent)     |   | 
                      -------------------   | 
                               |            | 
                               |            | 
                               V            | 
                      -------------------   | 
                      |       ENUM      |   | 
                      |     Registrar   |<--- 
                      ------------------- 
                               | 
                               | 
                               V 
                      ------------------- 
                      |    Tier-1 ENUM  | 
                      |      Registry   | 
                      ------------------- 
                               | 
                               | 
                               V 
                      ------------------- 
                      |    Tier-2 ENUM  | 
                      |      Provider   | 
                      ------------------- 
         
         

     Ranalli, et al              Expires - May 2001                       5 



      
             Tier-1 ENUM System: Roles and Responsibilities   November 2000 
      
     6. Typical Use Cases 
      
      
     6.1 ENUM Registration 
      
          1. Registrant (Subscriber or an Agent acting on behalf of a 
             Subscriber) registers with a Tier-1 ENUM Service through an 
             accredited registrar.   
              
          2. Registrar validates the identity of the Registrant to confirm 
             day-to-day control over the E.164 number being registered.   
         
          3. The Registrar submits the following information to the 
             Registry's secure ENUM Registration Service: E.164 domain name, 
             the NS/A records for the appropriate Tier-2 ENUM Provider, and 
             the required registrant WHOIS information.   
              
          4. The Registry either accepts or rejects the registration.  If 
             the registration is rejected due to a conflict over control of 
             an E.164 number, the Registry initiates its conflict resolution 
             service.   
         
         
     6.2 Conflict Resolution 
      
          1. Conflict occurs in the Tier-1 ENUM registration process when 
             two Registrants claim day-to-day control over the same E.164 
             number. 
                
          2. The registry is responsible for providing a conflict resolution 
             service for use by all accredited registrars in resolving 
             registration conflicts.  See the companion document "Tier-1 
             ENUM System: Conflict Resolution" for additional detail. 
           

           
     6.3 Dialing Plan Changes 
      
          1. The E.164 Administration System communicates dialing plan 
             changes to affected TSP. 
        
          2. The TSP communicates dialing plan changes to the Subscriber. 
        
          3. The Registrant communicates dialing plan changes to the   Tier-1 
             ENUM Registrar and to the selected Tier-2 ENUM Provider. 
        
          4. The Registrar communicates dialing plan changes to the Registry. 
        
          5. The Registry supports records for both the original E.164 number 
             and the new E.164 number for a defined grace period and then 
             removes the original number from the Tier-1 ENUM DNS Resolution 
             Service.  
      
      
      

     Ranalli, et al              Expires - May 2001                       6 



      
             Tier-1 ENUM System: Roles and Responsibilities   November 2000 
      
     6.4 Service Termination By TSP 
      
        TSP terminates a Subscriber's service and reclaims day-to-day 
        control over an E.164 number. 
         
          1. TSP makes a request to an Accredited Registrar to terminate 
             Tier-1 ENUM service for the E.164 number. 
         
          2. Registrar validates that the TSP is the entity with contractual 
             control over the E.164 number as defined by the E.164 
             Administration System.  
         
          3. The Registrar terminates the service by updating the Tier-1 
             ENUM Registry.  
         
          4. The Registrar sends an e-mail message to the Registrant 
             explaining the reason for the termination and the name of the 
             TSP that terminated the service.   
           
      
     6.5 Number Portability 
      

          -  No impact on Tier-1 ENUM services.  Number Portability is an 
             important component of the E.164 Administration System but it 
             does not affect the ENUM process because the E.164 number 
             remains unchanged and the identity of the Subscriber with day-
             to-day control over the E.164 number remains unchanged. 
         
          -  Number Portability changes the identity of the TSP with 
             contractual control over a given E.164 number.  This change in 
             control only comes into play when a TSP requests termination of 
             Tier-1 ENUM services for a given E.164 number. 
           
      
     7. Security Considerations 
         
        Tier-1 ENUM registry operators have the responsibility to protect 
        physical and network resources, as well as, to ensure the validity 
        of the DNS and its associated information. General ENUM users must 
        be assured that they will receive valid information, and that they 
        will be allowed access to this data without interruption. Registrars 
        that have authority to manage entries must be assured that they are 
        updating data in an authentic registry, have uninterrupted access to 
        the data and are allowed to update the data after providing valid 
        credentials.  When preparing to prevent security breaches, the 
        following types of attacks must be considered: 
         
        Impersonation:  Registrars that attempt to add and update entries 
                        must be able to unequivocally prove their identity 
                        to the registry. Spoofing or misrepresentation of  
                        the identity of the originator of the information 
                        could allow unauthorized updates to the database. 
                        Invalid or missing data could in turn cause 
                        malicious redirection and denial of service. 
         
     Ranalli, et al              Expires - May 2001                       7 



      
             Tier-1 ENUM System: Roles and Responsibilities   November 2000 
      
        Eavesdropping:  If the privacy of the information that is being 
                        transmitted is compromised, then registrar-sensitive 
                        information such as the registrar's username and 
                        password, could be obtained by a malicious intruder. 
         
        Data Tampering: During the transmission of directory records, valid 
                        URI's could be replaced by invalid URI's, in turn 
                        causing malicious redirection as discussed below.  
                        Since a higher percentage of security breaches such 
                        as data tampering are caused by "insiders", physical 
                        and network security must be addressed. 
         
        Malicious       Malicious entries into the database will cause users 
        Redirection:    to retrieve fraudulent or damaging content. This can 
                        be accomplished by either data tampering or server 
                        impersonation whereby a malicious server is  
                        masquerading as a registry server. 
           
        Denial of       There are several ways that a client could be denied 
        Service:        access to the desired registry resources.  First, a 
                        malicious intruder could remove data from DNS, thus 
                        making it impossible for the client to access the 
                        information. Secondly, the system could be flooded 
                        with bogus requests that prevent communications. 
                        And finally, by breaching the physical security of 
                        the system, for example, by cutting off electricity 
                        to the facility. 
         
        The SSL protocol is not an IETF Standards Track protocol. However, 
        it is widely available and considered a defacto-standard for 
        securely transmitting data over the Internet. The Transport Layer 
        Security protocol is a Standards Track protocol that provides SSL 
        v3.0 compatibility features and will be used when widely available. 
         
      
     9. References 
      
        [1] Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3",  
             BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
         
        [2] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
             Levels", BCP 14,RFC 2119, March 1997 
           
        [3]  A. Brown, "Telephone Number Mapping", draft-enum-rqmts-01-txt, 
             June 2000.  
         
        [4]  P. Faltstrom, "E.164 number and DNS," RFC 2916, September 2000. 
         
         
     11. Acknowledgements 
      
        We would like to extend our special thanks to Lynette Khirallah for 
        her expert advice on security considerations. 
         
         
         
     Ranalli, et al              Expires - May 2001                       8 



      
             Tier-1 ENUM System: Roles and Responsibilities   November 2000 
      
         
     10. Author's Addresses 
         
        Douglas Ranalli 
          NetNumber 
          650 Suffolk Street, Suite 307 
          Lowell, MA  01854 
          Phone: +1-978-454-4210 x22 
          Email: dranalli@netnumber.com 
         
        David P. Peek 
          NetNumber 
          650 Suffolk Street, Suite 307 
          Lowell, MA  01854 
          Phone: +1-603-362-4315 
          Email: dpeek@netnumber.com 
         
        Robert Walter 
          NetNumber 
          650 Suffolk Street, Suite 307 
          Lowell, MA 01854 
          Phone: +1-978-454-4210 x24 
          Email: rwalter@netnumber.com  
          
     Full Copyright Statement 
      
        "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. 
        This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
        others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
        or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
        and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
        kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
        are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
        document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
        the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
        Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
        developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
        copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
        followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
        English. 
         
        The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
        revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
         
        This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
        "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
        TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
        BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
        HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
        MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
         
     Acknowledgement 
         
        Funding for the RFC editor function is currently provided by the 
        Internet Society. 

     Ranalli, et al              Expires - May 2000                       9 

