
Network Working Group                                           J. Galvin
INTERNET DRAFT                                                        TIS
draft-ietf-poised95-nomcom-01.txt                            October 1995


       IAB and IESG Selection, Confirmation, and Recall Process:
           Operation of the Nominating and Recall Committees



Status of this Memo

This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas, and
its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working
documents as Internet Drafts.

Internet Drafts are valid for a maximum of six months and may be
updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any time.  It is
inappropriate to use Internet Drafts as reference material or to cite
them other than as ``work in progress''.

To learn the current status of any Internet Draft, please check the
1id-abstracts.txt listing contained in one of the Internet Drafts Shadow
Directories on ds.internic.net (US East Coast), venera.isi.edu (US West
Coast), munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), or nic.nordu.net (Europe).

Abstract

The process by which the members of the IAB and IESG are selected,
confirmed, and recalled has been exercised three times since its formal
creation.  The evolution of the process has relied principally on oral
tradition as a means by which the lessons learned could be passed on to
successive committees.  This document is a self-consistent, organized
compilation of the process as it is known today.

1.  Introduction

By 1992, many aspects of the operation of the Internet Architecture
Board (IAB), Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), and the Internet
Engineering Steering Group (IESG) had been reviewed and changes were
being implemented.  Included in those changes was the process by which
members of the IAB and IESG are selected, confirmed, and recalled.
Since 1992, the process of selection and confirmation has been exercised
three times: 1992, 1993, and 1994.  The recall process has not been





Galvin                    Expires: April 1996                   [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT        NOMCOM and Recall Operation         September 1995


exercised.

A single paragraph in RFC1602 is the extent to which the process has
been formally recorded to date.  Informally, following the 1992 exercise
of the process, an internet draft was distributed recording many of the
details of the operation of that first nominating committee.  In
addition, in both 1994 and 1995, the POISED working group met, which
facilitated the "oral tradition" transference of the selection and
confirmation process lessons learned, including the email archives of
the working group mailing list.  This document is a self-consistent,
organized compilation of the process as described by each of these
sources.

The process described here includes only items for which the consensus
of those participating in the various discussions was easily recognized.
As a result, two assumptions are made.

(1)  The IRTF and IRSG are not a part of the process described here.

(2)  The organization (and re-organization) of the IESG is not a part of
     the process described here.

In addition, this document specifies time frames the frame of reference
of which is IETF meetings.  The time frames assume that the IETF meets
at least once per year with that meeting occurring during the North
American Spring time, i.e., the IETF meets at least on or about March of
each year.

The remainder of this document is divided into four major topics as
follows.

General
     This a set of rules and constraints that apply to the selection and
     confirmation process as a whole.

Nominating Committee Selection
     This is the process by which volunteers from the IETF community are
     recognized to serve on the committee that nominates candidates to
     serve on the IESG and IAB.

Nominating Committee Operation
     This is the set of principles, rules, and constraints that guide
     the activities of the nominating committee, including the
     confirmation process.






Galvin                    Expires: April 1996                   [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT        NOMCOM and Recall Operation         September 1995


Member Recall
     This is the process by which the behavior of a sitting member of
     the IESG or IAB may be questioned, perhaps resulting in the removal
     of the sitting member.

2.  General

The following set of rules apply to the selection and confirmation
process as a whole.  If necessary, a paragraph discussing the
interpretation of each rule is included.

(1)  The principal function of the nominating committee is to nominate
     candidates for open IESG and IAB positions.

     The nominating committee does not select the open positions to be
     refilled; it is instructed as to which positions to refill.  At a
     minimum, the nominating committee will be given the title of the
     position to be filled.  The nominating committee may be given a
     desirable set of qualifications for the candidates nominated to
     fill a position.  The nominating committee does not confirm its
     candidates; it presents its slate of candidates to the appropriate
     confirming body as indicated below.

(2)  The selection and confirmation process must be completed within 3
     months.

     The selection and confirmation process must be completed on the
     friday of the week before the Spring IETF.  It begins 3 months
     prior to that date.

(3)  One-half of each of the then current IESG and IAB positions is
     selected to be refilled each year.

     A given position is selected every other year.  In this way, never
     more than 50% of the sitting IESG and IAB members is replaced in
     any one year.

     A position may be refilled with its sitting member, if the sitting
     member is nominated by the nominating committee.

(4)  Confirmed candidates are expected to serve at least a 2 year term.

     The nominal 2 year term of a confirmed candidate begins the day
     after the last day of the Spring IETF meeting.  The term ends on
     the last day of the second Spring IETF meeting following the





Galvin                    Expires: April 1996                   [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT        NOMCOM and Recall Operation         September 1995


     beginning of the term.

(5)  Mid-term IESG vacancies are filled by the same rules as documented
     here with three qualifications.  First, the remaining IESG members
     act as the nominating committee.  Second, the confirming body has
     two weeks from the day it is notified of a candidate to reject the
     candidate, otherwise the candidate is assumed to have been
     confirmed.  Third, the term of the confirmed candidate will be
     either:

a.   the remainder of the term of the open position if that remainder is
     more than one year.

b.   the remainder of the term of the open position plus the next 2 year
     term.

(6)  Mid-term IAB vacancies are filled by the same rules as documented
     here with three qualifications.  First, the remaining IAB members
     act as the nominating committee.  Second, the confirming body has
     two weeks from the day it is notified of a candidate to reject the
     candidate, otherwise the candidate is assumed to have been
     confirmed.  Third, the term of the confirmed candidate will be
     either:

a.   the remainder of the term of the open position if that remainder is
     more than one year.

b.   the remainder of the term of the open position plus the next 2 year
     term.

(7)  All deliberations and supporting information of all the
     participants in the selection and confirmation process are private.

     The nominating committee and confirming body members will be
     exposed to confidential information from each other as a result of
     their deliberations and from nominees who provide requested
     supporting information.  All members and all other participants are
     expected to handle this information in a manner consistent with its
     sensitivity.

(8)  Unless otherwise specified, the advise and consent model is used
     throughout the process.  This model is characterized as follows.

a.   The IETF Executive Director advises the nominating committee of the
     IESG and IAB positions to be refilled.





Galvin                    Expires: April 1996                   [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT        NOMCOM and Recall Operation         September 1995


b.   The nominating committee selects candidates and advises the
     confirming bodies of them.

c.   The sitting IAB members review the IESG candidates, consenting to
     some, all, or none.

     If all of the candidates are confirmed, the job of the nominating
     committee with respect to filling the open IESG positions is
     considered complete.  If some or none of the candidates are
     confirmed, the nominating committee must reconvene to select
     alternate candidates for the rejected candidates.  Any additional
     time required by the nominating committee must not exceed its
     maximum time allotment.

d.   The Internet Society Board of Trustees reviews the IAB candidates,
     consenting to some, all, or none.

     If all of the candidates are confirmed, the job of the nominating
     committee with respect to filling the open IAB positions is
     considered complete.  If some or none of the candidates are
     confirmed, the nominating committee must reconvene to select
     alternate candidates for the rejected candidates.  Any additional
     time required by the nominating committee must not exceed its
     maximum time allotment.

e.   The confirming bodies decide their consent according to a mechanism
     of their own choosing.

     Sitting members of the confirming bodies must agree to confirm
     individual candidates.  The agreement may be decided by conducting
     a formal vote, by asserting consensus based on informal
     conversations, or by whatever mechanism is used to conduct the
     normal business of the confirming body.

3.  Nominating Committee Selection

The following set of rules apply to the creation of the nominating
committee and the selection of its members.

(1)  The committee is comprised of a non-voting Chair, 10 voting
     volunteers, and 2 non-voting liaisons.

(2)  The Internet Society President appoints the non-voting Chair, who
     must meet the usual requirements for membership in the nominating
     committee.





Galvin                    Expires: April 1996                   [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT        NOMCOM and Recall Operation         September 1995


     The nominating committee Chair must agree to invest the time
     necessary to complete the duties of the nominating committee and to
     perform in the best interests of the IETF community during the
     performance of those duties.

(3)  The Chair solicits and collects a pool of names of volunteers from
     the IETF community willing to serve on the nominating committee.

     The solicitation for names must be publicized using at least the
     same mechanism used by the IETF secretariat for its announcements.

(4)  Members of the IETF community must have attended at least 2 of the
     last 3 IETF meetings in order to volunteer.

(5)  Internet Society Board of Trustees, sitting members of the IAB, and
     sitting members of the IESG may not volunteer.

(6)  The Chair randomly selects the 10 voting volunteers from the pool
     of names of volunteers.

(7)  The sitting IAB and IESG members each appoint from their current
     membership a non-voting liaison to the nominating committee.

4.  Nominating Committee Operation

The following rules apply to the operation of the nominating committee.
If necessary, a paragraph discussing the interpretation of each rule is
included.

The rules are organized approximately in the order in which they would
be invoked.

The term nominee refers to an individual under consideration by the
nominating committee.  The term candidate refers to a nominee that has
been selected by the nominating committee to be considered for
confirmation by a confirming body.  A confirmed candidate is a candidate
that has been reviewed and approved by a confirming body.

(1)  All rules not otherwise specified are at the discretion of the
     Chair.

     Exceptional circumstances will occasionally arise during the normal
     operation of the nominating committee.  This rule is intended to
     foster the continued forward progress of the committee.  All
     members of the committee should consider whether the exception is





Galvin                    Expires: April 1996                   [Page 6]

INTERNET DRAFT        NOMCOM and Recall Operation         September 1995


     worthy of mention in the next revision of this document and
     followup accordingly.

(2)  The Chair must establish and publicize milestones, which must
     include at least a call for nominations.

     There is a defined time period during which the selection and
     confirmation process must be completed.  The Chair must establish a
     set of milestones which, if met in a timely fashion, will result in
     the completion of the process on time.  The Chair should allow time
     for iterating the activities of the committee if one or more
     candidates is not confirmed.

     The milestones must be publicized using at least the same mechanism
     used by the IETF secretariat for its announcements.

(3)  The Chair must establish a voting mechanism.

     The committee must be able to objectively determine when a decision
     has been made during its deliberations.  The criteria for
     determining closure must be established and known to all members of
     the nominating committee.

(4)  At least 7 voting members are required to be present for a quorum.

(5)  The Chair may establish a process by which a member of the
     nominating committee may be recalled.

     The process, if established, must be agreed to by all members of
     the nominating committee, including the non-voting members since
     they would be subject to the same process.

(6)  All members of the nominating committee may participate in all
     deliberations.

     The emphasis of this rule is that no member, whether voting or
     non-voting, can be explicitly excluded from any deliberation.
     However, a member may individually choose not to participate in a
     deliberation.

(7)  The Chair announces the open positions to be filled and the call
     for nominees.

     The announcements must be publicized using at least the same
     mechanism used by the IETF secretariat for its announcements.





Galvin                    Expires: April 1996                   [Page 7]

INTERNET DRAFT        NOMCOM and Recall Operation         September 1995


(8)  Any member of the IETF community may nominate any member of the
     IETF community for any open position.

     A self-nomination is permitted.

(9)  Nominating committee members must not be nominees.

     To be a nominee is to enter the process of being selected as a
     candidate and confirmed.  Nominating committee members are not
     eligible to be considered for filling any open position.

(10) The nominating committee selects candidates based on its
     understanding of the IETF community's consensus of the
     qualifications required to fill the open positions.

(11) Nominees should be advised that they are being considered and must
     consent to their nomination prior to being confirmed.

     The nominating committee should help nominees provide justification
     to their employers.

     A nominee's consent must include a commitment to provide the
     resources necessary to fill the open position and an assurance that
     the candidate's employer agrees that the candidate will not be
     required to only represent the employer's interests.

(12) The nominating committee advises the confirming bodies of their
     candidates, specifying a single candidate for each open position
     and a testament as to how each candidate meets the qualifications
     of an open position.

     The testament may include a brief resume of the candidate and a
     summary of the deliberations of the nominating committee.

(13) With respect to any action to be taken in the context of notifying
     and announcing confirmed candidates, and notifying rejected
     nominees and candidates, the action must be valid according to all
     of the rules specified below prior to its execution.

a.   Up until a candidate is confirmed, the identity of the candidate
     must be kept strictly confidential.

b.   The identity of all nominees must be kept strictly confidential
     (except that the nominee may publicize their intentions).






Galvin                    Expires: April 1996                   [Page 8]

INTERNET DRAFT        NOMCOM and Recall Operation         September 1995


c.   Rejected nominees may be notified as soon as they are rejected.

d.   Rejected candidates may be notified as soon as they are rejected.

e.   Rejected nominees and candidates must be notified prior to
     announcing confirmed candidates.

f.   Confirmed candidates may be notified and announced as soon as they
     are confirmed.

     It is consistent with these rules for a nominee to never know if
     they were a candidate or not.

     It is consistent with these rules for a nominating committee to
     reject some nominees early in the process and to keep some nominees
     as alternates in case a candidate is rejected by a confirming body.
     In the matter of whether a confirmed candidate was a first choice
     or an alternate, that information need not ever be disclosed and,
     in fact, probably never should be.

     Alternate nominees must be notified that they were not selected for
     candidacy prior to the announcement of a confirmed candidate.

     It is consistent with these rules for confirmed candidates to be
     notified and announced as quickly as possible instead of requiring
     all confirmed candidates to wait until all open positions have been
     refilled.

     The announcements must be publicized using at least the same
     mechanism used by the IETF secretariat for its announcements.

5.  Member Recall

The following rules apply to the recall process.  If necessary, a
paragraph discussing the interpretation of each rule is included.

(1)  Anyone may request the recall of any sitting IAB or IESG member, at
     any time, upon written (including email) request with justification
     to the Internet Society President.

(2)  Internet Society President shall appoint a Recall Committee Chair.

     The Internet Society President must not evaluate the recall
     request.  It is explicitly the responsibility of the IETF community
     to evaluate the behavior of its leaders.





Galvin                    Expires: April 1996                   [Page 9]

INTERNET DRAFT        NOMCOM and Recall Operation         September 1995


(3)  The recall committee is created according to the same rules as is
     the nominating committee with the qualification that the person
     being investigated and the person requesting the recall must not be
     a member of the recall committee in any capacity.

(4)  The recall committee operates according to the same rules as the
     nominating committee with the qualification that there is no
     confirmation process.

(5)  The recall committee investigates the circumstances of the
     justification for the recall and votes on its findings.

     The investigation must include at least both an opportunity for the
     member being recalled to present a written statement and
     consultation with third parties.

(6)  A 3/4 majority of the members who vote on the question is required
     for a recall.

     If a sitting member is recalled the open position is to be filled
     according to the mid-term vacancy rules.

6.  Security Considerations

Any selection, confirmation, or recall process necessarily involves
investigation into the qualifications and activities of prospective
candidates.  The investigation may reveal confidential or otherwise
private information about candidates to those participating in the
process.  Each person who participates in any aspect of the process has
a responsibility to maintain the confidentiality of any and all
information not explicitly identified as suitable for public
dissemination.

7.  Editor's Address

    James M. Galvin
    Trusted Information Systems
    3060 Washington Road
    Glenwood, MD 21738

    Email: galvin@tis.com
    Phone: 301.854.6889
    FAX: 301.854.5363







Galvin                    Expires: April 1996                  [Page 10]

INTERNET DRAFT        NOMCOM and Recall Operation         September 1995


Table of Contents


 Status of this Memo ..............................................    1
 Abstract .........................................................    1
1 Introduction ....................................................    1
2 General .........................................................    3
3 Nominating Committee Selection ..................................    5
4 Nominating Committee Operation ..................................    6
5 Member Recall ...................................................    9
6 Security Considerations .........................................   10
7 Editor's Address ................................................   10






































Galvin                    Expires: April 1996                  [Page 11]

