 
   
 
CCAMP Working Group  
Internet Draft                                      
Category: Informational                                    Zafar Ali 
Expires: September 08, 2009                    Jean-Philippe Vasseur 
                                                         Anca Zamfir 
                                                 Cisco Systems, Inc. 
                                                     Jonathan Newton 
                                                  Cable and Wireless
                                                      March 09, 2009 
 
           Graceful Shutdown in MPLS and Generalized MPLS  
                    Traffic Engineering Networks 

           draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-10.txt 
 
 
Status of this Memo 

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  This document may contain 
   material from IETF Documents or IETF Contributions published or 
   made publicly available before November 10, 2008.  The person(s) 
   controlling the copyright in some of this material may not have 
   granted the IETF Trust the right to allow modifications of such 
   material outside the IETF Standards Process.  Without obtaining 
   an adequate license from the person(s) controlling the copyright 
   in such materials, this document may not be modified outside the 
   IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may not be 
   created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format it 
   for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other 
   than English. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work 
   in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 08, 2009. 
                       Expires September 2009               [Page 1]  


       draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-10.txt      
 
 
Abstract 
 
   MPLS-TE Graceful Shutdown is a method for explicitly notifying 
   the nodes in a Traffic Engineering (TE) enabled network that the 
   TE capability on a link or on an entire Label Switching Router 
   (LSR) is going to be disabled. MPLS-TE graceful shutdown 
   mechanisms are tailored toward addressing planned outage in the 
   network.  
    
   This document provides requirements and protocol mechanisms to 
   reduce/eliminate traffic disruption in the event of a planned 
   shutdown of a network resource. These operations are equally 
   applicable to both MPLS and its Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) 
   extensions.  
 
Table of Contents 
 
1. Introduction....................................................2 
2. Terminology.....................................................3 
3. Requirements for Graceful Shutdown..............................3 
4. Mechanisms for Graceful Shutdown................................4 
4.1 OSPF/ ISIS Mechanisms for graceful shutdown....................5 
 4.2 RSVP-TE Signaling Mechanisms for graceful shutdown............6 
5. Security Considerations.........................................7 
6. IANA Considerations.............................................7 
7. Acknowledgments.................................................7 
8. Reference.......................................................8 
 8.1 Normative Reference...........................................8 
 8.2 Informative Reference.........................................8 
9. Authors' Address:...............................................9 
10. Copyright Notice..............................................10 
11. Legal.........................................................10 


1. Introduction 
 
   When outages in a network are planned (e.g. for maintenance 
   purpose), some mechanisms can be used to avoid traffic 
   disruption. This is in contrast with unplanned network element 
   failure, where traffic disruption can be minimized thanks to 
   recovery mechanisms but may not be avoided. Hence, a Service 
   Provider may desire to gracefully (temporarily or indefinitely) 
   remove a TE Link, a group of TE Links or an entire node for 
   administrative reasons such as link maintenance, 
   software/hardware upgrade at a node or significant TE 
   configuration changes. In all these cases, the goal is to 
   minimize the impact on the traffic carried over TE LSPs in the 
   network by triggering notifications so as to gracefully reroute 
   such flows before the administrative procedures are started. 

                                                             
                      Expires September 2009               [Page 2] 








 
       draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-10.txt      
 
 
   These operations are equally applicable to both MPLS [RFC3209] 
   and its Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) extensions [RFC3471], [RFC3473].  
    
   Graceful shutdown of a resource may require several steps. These 
   steps can be broadly divided into two sets: disabling the 
   resource in the control plane and removing the resource for 
   forwarding. The node initiating the graceful shutdown condition 
   is expected to introduce a delay between disabling the resource 
   in the control plane and removing the resource for forwarding. 
   This is to allow the control plane to gracefully divert the 
   traffic away from the resource being gracefully shutdown. The 
   trigger for the graceful shutdown event is a local matter at the 
   node initiating the graceful shutdown. Typically, graceful 
   shutdown is triggered for administrative reasons, such as link 
   maintenance or software/hardware upgrade.  
    
   This document describes the mechanisms that can be used to 
   gracefully shutdown MPLS/ GMPLS Traffic Engineering on a resource 
   such as a TE link, a component link within a bundled TE link, a 
   label resource or an entire TE node.  
 
2. Terminology 
  
   LSR - Label Switching Router. The terms node and LSR are used 
   interchangeably in this document.  
    
   GMPLS - The term GMPLS is used in this document to refer to 
   packet MPLS-TE, as well as GMPLS extensions to MPLS-TE.  
    
   LSP - An MPLS-TE/ GMPLS-TE Label Switched Path. 
    
   Head-end node: Ingress LSR that initiated signaling for the Path. 
    
   Border node: Ingress LSR of an LSP segment (S-LSP).   
    
   Path Computation Element (PCE): An entity that computes the 
   routes on behalf of its clients (PCC). 
    
   TE Link - The term TE link refers to single or a bundle of 
   physical link(s) or FA-LSP(s) on which traffic engineering is 
   enabled [RFC4206], [RFC4201]. 
    
   Last resort resource: If a path to a destination from a given 
   head-end node cannot be found upon removal of a resource (e.g., 
   TE link, TE node), the resource is called last resort to reach 
   that destination from the given head-end node.  
 
 
3. Requirements for Graceful Shutdown 
 
   This section lists the requirements for graceful shutdown in the 
   context of GMPLS Traffic Engineering. 
                                                             
                      Expires September 2009               [Page 3] 








 
       draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-10.txt      
 
 
 
   - Graceful shutdown is required to address graceful removal of 
   one TE link, one component link within a bundled TE link, a set 
   of TE links, a set of component links, label resource(s) or an 
   entire node.  
    
   - Once an operator has initiated graceful shutdown of a network 
   resource, no new TE LSPs may be set up that use the resource. 
   Any signaling message for a new LSP that explicitly specifies the 
   resource, or that would require the use of the resource due to 
   local constraints, is required to be rejected as if the resource 
   were unavailable. 
    
   - It is desirable for new LSP setup attempts that would be 
   rejected because of graceful shutdown of a resource (as described 
   in the previous requirement) to avoid any attempt to use the 
   resource by selecting an alternate route or other resources. 
    
    
   - If the resource being shutdown is a last resort, it can be 
   used. Time or decision for removal of the resource being shutdown 
   is based on a local decision at the node initiating the graceful 
   shutdown procedure.  
     
   - It is required to give the ingress node the opportunity to take 
   actions in order to reduce/eliminate traffic disruption on the 
   LSP(s) that are using the network resources which are about to be 
   shutdown.  
 
   - Graceful shutdown mechanisms are equally applicable to intra-
   domain and TE LSPs spanning multiple domains. Here, a domain is 
   defined as either an IGP area or an Autonomous System [RFC4726]. 
    
   - Graceful shutdown is equally applicable to GMPLS-TE, as well as 
   packet-based (MPLS) TE LSPs. 
    
   - In order to make rerouting effective, it is required that when 
     a node initiates the graceful shutdown of a resource, it 
     identifies to all other network nodes the TE resource under 
     graceful shutdown. 
   - Depending on switching technology, it may be possible to 
     shutdown a label resource, e.g., shutting down a lambda in a 
     Lambda Switch Capable (LSC) node.  
 
 
4. Mechanisms for Graceful Shutdown 
 
   An IGP only solution based on [RFC3630], [RFC5305], [RFC4203] and 
   [RFC5307] are not applicable when dealing with Inter-area and 
   Inter-AS traffic engineering, as IGP LSA/LSP flooding is 
   restricted to IGP areas/levels. Consequently, RSVP based 
   mechanisms are required to cope with TE LSPs spanning multiple 
                                                             
                       Expires September 2009               [Page 4] 








 
       draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-10.txt      
 
 
   domains. At the same time, RSVP mechanisms only convey the 
   information for the transiting LSPs to the router along the 
   upstream Path and not to all nodes in the network. Furthermore, 
   graceful shutdown notification via IGP flooding is required to 
   discourage a node from establishing new LSPs through the 
   resources being shutdown. In the following sections the 
   complementary mechanisms for RSVP-TE and IGP for Graceful 
   Shutdown are described. 
    
   A node where a link or the whole node is being shutdown may first 
   trigger the IGP updates as described in Section 4.1, introduce a 
   delay to allow network convergence and only then use the 
   signaling mechanism described in Section 4.2. 
    
 
4.1 OSPF/ ISIS Mechanisms for graceful shutdown 
 
   The procedures provided in this section are equally applicable to 
   OSPF and ISIS.  
 
   OSPF and ISIS procedure for graceful shutdown of TE link(s) is 
   similar to graceful restart of OSPF and ISIS as described in 
   [RFC4203] and [RFC5307], respectively. Specifically, the node 
   where graceful-shutdown of a link is desired originates the TE 
   LSA/LSP containing Link TLV for the link under graceful shutdown 
   with Traffic Engineering metric set to 0xffffffff, 0 as 
   unreserved bandwidth, and if the link has LSC or FSC as its 
   Switching Capability then also with 0 as Max LSP Bandwidth. A 
   node may also specify a value for Minimum LSP bandwidth which is 
   greater than the available bandwidth. This would discourage new 
   LSP establishment through the link under graceful shutdown.  
    
   If graceful shutdown procedure is performed for a component link 
   within a TE Link bundle and it is not the last component link 
   available within the TE link, the link attributes associated with 
   the TE link are recomputed. Similarly, If graceful shutdown 
   procedure is performed on a label resource within a TE Link, the 
   link attributes associated with the TE link are recomputed. If 
   the removal of the component link or label resource results in a 
   significant bandwidth change event, a new LSA is originated with 
   the new traffic parameters. If the last component link is being 
   shutdown, the routing procedure related to TE link removal is 
   used.  
 
   Neighbors of the node where graceful shutdown procedure is in 
   progress continues to advertise the actual unreserved bandwidth 
   of the TE links from the neighbors to that node, without any 
   routing adjacency change.  
 
   When graceful shutdown at node level is desired, the node in 
   question follows the procedure specified in the previous section 
   for all TE Links.  
                                                             
                      Expires September 2009               [Page 5] 








 
       draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-10.txt      
 
 

 
4.2 RSVP-TE Signaling Mechanisms for graceful shutdown 
 
   As discussed in Section 3, one of the requirements for the 
   signaling mechanism for graceful shutdown is to carry information 
   about the resource under graceful shutdown. For this purpose the 
   Graceful Shutdown uses LSP rerouting mechanism as defined in 
   [LSP-REROUTE].  
    
   Specifically, the node where graceful shutdown of an unbundled TE 
   link or an entire bundled TE link is desired triggers a PathErr 
   message with the error codes and error values of "Notify/Local 
   link maintenance required", for all affected LSPs. Similarly, the 
   node that is being gracefully shutdown triggers a PathErr message 
   with the error codes and error values of "Notify/ Local node 
   maintenance required", for all LSPs. For graceful shutdown of a 
   node, an unbundled TE link or an entire bundled TE link, the 
   PathErr message may contain either an [RFC2205] format ERROR_SPEC 
   object, or an IF_ID [RFC3473] format ERROR_SPEC object. In either 
   case, it is the address and TLVs carried by the ERROR_SPEC object 
   and not the error value that indicates the resource that is to be 
   gracefully shutdown. 
    
   MPLS TE Link Bundling [RFC4201] requires that an LSP is pinned 
   down to a component link. Consequently, graceful shutdown of a 
   component link in a bundled TE link differs from graceful 
   shutdown of unbundled TE link or entire bundled TE link. 
   Specifically, in the former case, when only a subset of component 
   links and not the entire TE bundled link is being shutdown, the 
   remaining component links of the bundled TE link may still be 
   able to admit new LSPs. The node where graceful shutdown of a 
   component link is desired triggers a PathErr message with the 
   error codes and error values of "Notify/Local link maintenance 
   required". The rest of the ERROR_SPEC object is constructed using 
   Component Reroute Request procedure defined in [LSP-REROUTE].  
    
   If graceful shutdown of a label resource is desired, the node 
   initiating this action triggers a PathErr message with the error 
   codes and error values of "Notify/Local link maintenance 
   required". The rest of the ERROR_SPEC object is constructed using 
   Label Reroute Request procedure defined in [LSP-REROUTE].   
 
    
   When a head-end node, a transit node or a border node receive a 
   PathErr message with error codes and error values of "Notify/Local 
   link maintenance required" or "Notify/ Local node maintenance 
   required", it follows the procedures defined in [LSP-REROUTE] to 
   reroute the traffic around the resource being gracefully shutdown. 
   When performing path computation for the new LSP, the head-end node,  
   or border node avoids using the TE resources identified by the 
                                                             
                      Expires September 2009               [Page 6] 





       draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-10.txt      
 
 
   ERROR_SPEC object. If PCE is used for path computation, head-end  
   node or border node acts as PCC to request the PCE via PCEP for path 
   computation avoiding resource being gracefully shutdown. The 
   amount of time the head-end node, or border node avoid using the 
   TE resources identified by the IP address contained in the 
   PathErr is based on a local decision at head-end node or border 
   node.  
    
   If node initiating the graceful shutdown procedure received path 
   setup request for a new tunnel using resource being gracefully 
   shutdown, it sends a Path Error message with "Notify" error code 
   in the ERROR SPEC object and an error value consistent with the 
   type of resource being gracefully shutdown. However, based on a 
   local decision, if an existing tunnel continues to use the 
   resource being gracefully shutdown, the node initiating the 
   graceful shutdown procedure may allow resource being gracefully 
   shutdown to be used as a "last resort". The node initiating the 
   graceful shutdown procedure can distinguish between new and 
   existing tunnels based on the tunnel ID in the SESSION object.  
    
   Time or decision for removal of the resource being shutdown from 
   forwarding is based on a local decision at the node initiating 
   the graceful shutdown procedure. For this purpose, the node 
   initiating graceful shutdown procedure follows the Reroute 
   Request Timeout procedure defined in [LSP-REROUTE].  
    
5. Security Considerations 
 
   This document introduces no new security considerations as this 
   document describes usage of existing formats and mechanisms. This 
   document relies on existing procedures for advertisement of TE 
   LSA/LSP containing Link TLV. Tampering with TE LSAs may have an 
   effect on traffic engineering computations, and it is suggested 
   that any mechanisms used for securing the transmission of normal 
   OSPF LSAs/ ISIS LSPs be applied equally to all Opaque LSAs/ LSPs 
   this document uses.  Existing security considerations specified 
   in [RFC3630], [RFC5305], [RFC4203], [RFC5307] and [MPLS-GMPLS-
   SECURITY] remain relevant and suffice. Furthermore, security 
   considerations section in [LSP-REROUTE] and the Section 9 of 
   [RFC4736] should be used for understanding the security 
   considerations related to the formats and mechanisms used in this 
   document. 
 
 
6. IANA Considerations 
    
   This document has no IANA actions. 
 
7. Acknowledgments 
 
   The authors would like to thank Adrian Farrel for his detailed 
   comments and suggestions. The authors would also like to 
                                                            
                      Expires September 2009               [Page 7] 








 
       draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-10.txt      
 
 
   acknowledge useful comments from David Ward, Sami Boutros, and 
   Dimitri Papadimitriou.  
 
8. Reference 
 
8.1 Normative Reference 
 
   [RFC2205] Braden, R. Ed. et al, "Resource ReSerVation Protocol 
   (RSVP) Version 1, Functional Specification", RFC 2205.  
    
   [LSP-REROUTE] Berger, L., Papadimitriou, D., and J. Vasseur, 
   "PathErr Message Triggered MPLS and GMPLS LSP Reroute", draft-
   ietf-mpls-gmpls-lsp-reroute (work in progress). 
 
8.2 Informative Reference 
 
   [RFC3209] Awduche D., Berger, L., Gan, D., Li T., Srinivasan, V., 
   Swallow, G., "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels", RFC 
   3209. 
 
   [RFC4736] Jean-Philippe Vasseur, et al "Reoptimization of MPLS 
   Traffic Engineering loosely routed LSP paths", RFC 4736.  
     
   [RFC3630] Katz D., Kompella K., Yeung D., "Traffic Engineering 
   (TE) Extensions to OSPF Version 2", RFC 3630.  
    
   [RFC5305] Smit, H. and T. Li, "Intermediate System to 
   Intermediate System (IS-IS) Extensions for Traffic Engineering 
   (TE)", RFC 5305. 
    
   [RFC4203] Kompella, K., Ed., and Y. Rekhter, Ed., "OSPF 
   Extensions in Support of Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
   Switching (GMPLS)", RFC 4203.  
    
   [RFC5307]  Kompella, K., Ed., and Y. Rekhter, Ed., "Intermediate 
   System to Intermediate System (IS-IS) Extensions in Support of 
   Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS)", RFC 5307. 
 
    
   [RFC3471]  Berger, L., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
   Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Functional Description", RFC 3471. 
    
  [RFC3473]  Berger, L., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
   Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Resource ReserVation Protocol-Traffic 
   Engineering (RSVP-TE) Extensions", RFC 3473. 
    
     
   [RFC4726] Farrel A, Vasseur, J.-P., Ayyangar A., "A Framework for 
   Inter-Domain MPLS Traffic Engineering", RFC 4726, November 2006.  
     
   [RFC4201] Kompella, K., Rekhter, Y., Berger, L., "Link Bundling 
   in MPLS Traffic Engineering", RFC 4201. 
                                                             
                      Expires September 2009               [Page 8] 








 
       draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-10.txt      
 
 
    
   [RFC4206] Kompella K., Rekhter Y., "Label Switched Paths (LSP) 
   Hierarchy with Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) 
   Traffic Engineering (TE)", RFC 4206.  
    
   [MPLS-GMPLS-SECURITY] Luyuan Fang, Ed. "Security Framework for 
   MPLS and GMPLS Networks", draft-ietf-mpls-mpls-and-gmpls-
   security-framework, work in progress.  
 
 
9. Authors' Address: 
 
   Zafar Ali 
   Cisco systems, Inc., 
   Email: zali@cisco.com 
    
   Jean Philippe Vasseur 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   Email: jpv@cisco.com 
    
   Anca Zamfir 
   Cisco Systems, Inc.  
   Email: ancaz@cisco.com  
    
   Jonathan Newton 
   Cable and Wireless 
   jonathan.newton@cw.com 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
                                                             
                      Expires September 2009               [Page 9] 








 
       draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-10.txt      
 
 
10. Copyright Notice 
 
   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors.  All rights reserved. 
    
   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info). 
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your 
   rights and restrictions with respect to this document. 
 
 
 
 
11. Legal  
     
   This documents and the information contained therein are provided 
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION THEREIN WILL NOT 
   INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY 
   OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
 
   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process. 
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s)
   controlling the copyright in such materials, this document may not
   be modified outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative
   works of it may not be created outside the IETF Standards Process,
   except to format it for publication as an RFC or to translate it
   into languages other than English.
 













                                                             
                      Expires September 2009               [Page 10] 







