Mobile IPv6 Working Group                                 Zhongqi Xia 
Internet Draft                            Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd 
Expires: 21 February 2007                              August 21, 2006 
                                   
 
                                      
            Consideration about Location Privacy of CoA in MIP6 
              draft-xia-mip6-coa-privacy-consideration-01.txt 


Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that       
   any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is       
   aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she       
   becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of       
   BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 21, 2006. 

Abstract 

   In this document, we discuss the problem about location privacy of 
   CoA in Mobile IPv6. And some possible policies and solutions are 
   discussed in order to protect location privacy of CoA in route 
   optimization mode.  

Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [1]. 

 
 
 
Xia                  Expires February 21, 2007               [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft Consideration About CoA Location Privacy     August 2006 
    

Table of Contents 

   1. Introduction................................................2 
   2. Policies and solutions.......................................3 
      2.1. Consideration for Route Optimization Agent (ROA).........3 
      2.2. Security Consideration..................................4 
         2.2.1. Consideration for authenticating ROA/CN............4 
         2.2.2. Consideration for relations between ROA and CN......4 
         2.2.3. Other security consideration.......................5 
   3. Miscellaneous...............................................5 
   4. IANA consideration..........................................5 
   5. Acknowledgments.............................................5 
   6. References..................................................6 
      6.1. Normative References....................................6 
      6.2. Informative References..................................6 
   Author's Addresses.............................................6 
   Intellectual Property Statement.................................6 
   Disclaimer of Validity.........................................7 
   Copyright Statement............................................7 
   Acknowledgment.................................................7 
    

1. Introduction 

   In communication systems, especially in IP environment, privacy is an 
   important issue and more and more attention is being paid to it. 
   Location privacy is a subset of the overall privacy issue [1]. For 
   traditional IP communication, there is no location privacy between 
   communication peers (devices or users) since the IP address in the IP 
   packet reveals the location of communication peers. Similarly, this 
   location privacy deficiency is applicable to Mobile IPv6 as well and 
   it is more serious for Mobile IPv6 users than for traditional IP 
   users.  
    
   When away from home network, mobile node uses a new IPv6 address 
   called Care of Address (CoA). The CoA is an indication representing 
   the new location of the mobile node. In the tunnel mode, CoA is 
   encapsulated in the outer layer IPv6 packet header. The eavesdroppers 
   on the path between new location and home network can intercept the 
   tunneled packets and get to know CoA of mobile node. But for 
   correspondence node, it does not receive the tunneled packets and 
   does not know the new CoA of mobile node. The correspondence node 
   always assumes that it communicates with mobile node in its home 
   network.  
    
   If mobile node wants to improve the communication efficiency and to 
   adopt route-optimization mode, it has to execute Return Routability 
 
 
Xia                    Expires April 24, 2006                 [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft Consideration About CoA Location Privacy     August 2006 
    

   Procedure (RRP) firstly. Then mobile user can registers its CoA with 
   its correspondent and finally the correspondent will know the mobile 
   user's current CoA and mapped location. 
    
2. Policies and solutions 

2.1. Consideration for Route Optimization Agent (ROA) 

   Because correspondent node (CN) has the binding cache between HoA and 
   CoA of mobile node (MN), it can determine the location information of 
   mobile node. So it is necessary to separate the binding cache from 
   the correspondent node. One solution is to place the binding cache on 
   another physical entity or device called Route Optimization Agent 
   (ROA) here. The following figure is the basic network model when ROA 
   is involved. 
    
                  |-----------------| 
    |-----|       |                 |     |-----|     |-----| 
    | MN  |-------|     NETWORK     |-----| ROA |-----| CN  | 
    |-----|       |                 |     |-----|     |-----| 
                  |-----------------| 
                       Fig1 ROA network model 
    
   In Fig1, the correspondent node accesses Internet through the route 
   optimization agent. When MN starts the RRP and registers itself with 
   CN, ROA intercepts signaling messages from MN to CN and processes 
   them on behalf of correspondent node. The final processing results, 
   including the binding relation information between HoA and CoA of MN, 
   will be maintained on ROA. Therefore, it is not necessary for 
   correspondent node to have the capability to process the route 
   optimization procedure. This makes the implementation and 
   administration of the correspondent node more simple and safe. 
    
   After finishing the route optimization procedure, mobile node will 
   communicate with correspondent node directly, using its CoA as 
   packets' source address. Meanwhile, Home Address Option is used 
   within packets. When ROA intercepts traffic packets which are from MN 
   to CN, it will change the content of these packets, e.g. CoA will be 
   substituted with HoA of MN, and Home Address Option will be removed. 
   Likewise, when ROA intercepts traffic packets from CN to MN, MN's HoA 
   will be substituted with its CoA and the Destination Route Option 
   will be added to the traffic packets. 
    




 
 
Xia                    Expires April 24, 2006                 [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft Consideration About CoA Location Privacy     August 2006 
    

2.2. Security Consideration 

   If the network model of ROA is used, many other security and 
   authentication related factors must be considered carefully. 

2.2.1. Consideration for authenticating ROA/CN 

   The mobile node has to authenticate ROA before it can start Care of 
   Test procedure and register its CoA with the correspondent node 
   (actually with ROA, but the mobile node is not aware of this; in the 
   following text, we will only refer to ROA and will not mention 
   correspondent node). If the authentication result is ok, mobile node 
   continues to register its CoA with ROA. Otherwise, route optimization 
   should be terminated immediately.  
    
   There are many kinds of authentication methods, such as user 
   ID/password, CA, and secret key etc. These methods should be 
   supported when mobile node authenticates ROA. Nonetheless, no 
   authentication should be supported so as to be incompatible with the 
   current mechanism of Mobile IPv6.  
    
   In fact it is difficult for mobile node to decide when and where to 
   authenticate ROA or correspondent node. Authentication has to be 
   carried out before mobile node's CoA is revealed to ROA i.e. 
   authentication should be finished before mobile node starts Care of 
   Test, because the test message tells ROA mobile node's CoA implicitly. 
   Therefore, there are three left possibilities to finish 
   authentication procedure. One is that in the tunnel mode 
   authentication goes with traffic packets; another is that 
   authentication goes with Home of Test packets; and the last is to 
   define new message type to finish the authentication procedure.  
    
   It is not reasonable that mobile node authenticates ROA alone. Mobile 
   node needs help from its home network, such as the participation of 
   Home Agent. Because the contract of keeping privacy is provided by 
   network operators, there are AAA databases in mobile node's home 
   network. Therefore, the network element (i.e. Home Agent) has the 
   ability to authenticate ROA. It's very important for home network to 
   assist mobile node with finishing authentication procedure. If mobile 
   node's home network has no ability to authenticate the ROA, mobile 
   node has to decide the authentication method and result alone. 

2.2.2. Consideration for relations between ROA and CN 

   Because mobile node registers its CoA with ROA, it's very important 
   that ROA is secure enough to protect its privacy data from evil 
   node's attack and eavesdropping. Since ROA serves correspondent node 
 
 
Xia                    Expires April 24, 2006                 [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft Consideration About CoA Location Privacy     August 2006 
    

   as a route optimization agent for CN, the ROA should have the 
   capability to authenticate the CN and the CN should have the 
   capability to authorize the ROA in order to accomplish the route 
   optimization. 

2.2.3. Other security consideration 

   Even though mobile node's CoA is shielded from the correspondent node 
   when ROA is used, the CoA is still in the clear on the path from 
   mobile node to ROA. However, this issue is not derived from the 
   introduction of Mobile IPv6 and route optimization but a legacy 
   problem raised from traditional IP communication. If Home Address 
   Option is encrypted [2], the impacts will be mitigated significantly. 

3. Miscellaneous 

   If ROA network model is used, ROA might become the bottleneck of the 
   access network. The traffic burden will be very heavy for ROA because 
   all traffic packets must go through ROA and ROA must perform a great 
   deal of translation processing. For large scale access network, 
   efficiency and performance should be considered carefully when 
   deploying. 

   If Home Agent is used to assist mobile node for authentication, the 
   authentication burden will be very heavy for Home Agent when many 
   mobile nodes request Home Agent's help for authentication at the same 
   time. It is necessary to consider the deployment issues of home 
   network carefully. 

   When deployment, ROA should be the access router. If CN's access 
   network does not contain an ROA, no privacy for the MN will be in 
   effect. And if CN and MN are attached to the same link, the traffic 
   packets have to go through ROA. Otherwise, MN's privacy is revealed 
   to CN. 

4. IANA consideration 

   There is no IANA consideration introduced by this draft. 

5. Acknowledgments 

   Thanks Robert P Jaksa, Carl Williams, Hongfei Chen, Jian Zhang, 
   Xianfeng Dai, Wei Cao, Hui Liu and Lianshu Zheng for reviewing the 
   earlier version of this draft. 



 
 
Xia                    Expires April 24, 2006                 [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft Consideration About CoA Location Privacy     August 2006 
    

6. References 

6.1. Normative References 

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

   [2]  Crocker, D. and Overell, P.(Editors), "Augmented BNF for Syntax 
         Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, Internet Mail Consortium and 
         Demon Internet Ltd., November 1997. 

6.2. Informative References 

   [3]  Rajeev Koodli; IP Address Location Privacy and Mobile IPv6:  
         Problem Statement; Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task 
         Force, October 2005. 

   [4]  Rajeev Koodli, Vijay Devarapalli, Hannu Flinck, Charlie Perkins; 
         Solutions for IP Address Location Privacy in the presence of IP 
         Mobility; Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, Feb 
         2005. 

Author's Addresses 

   Zhongqi Xia 
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd. 
   Huawei Building, No. 3 Xinxi Road, 
   Shand-Di Information Industry Base, 
   Hai-Dian District, 
   Beijing P.R.China,100085 
   Phone: 86-10-82836050 
   Email: xiazhongqi@huawei.com 
    

Intellectual Property Statement 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
 
 
Xia                    Expires April 24, 2006                 [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft Consideration About CoA Location Privacy     August 2006 
    

   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

Disclaimer of Validity 

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). 

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 

Acknowledgment 

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 

    











 
 
Xia                    Expires April 24, 2006                 [Page 7] 

