Network Working Group                                      Scott Bradner
Internet-Draft                                        Harvard University
                                                             Vern Paxson
                                                                   ACIRI
                                                            October 1999

                IANA Allocation Guidelines For Values In
               the Internet Protocol and Related Headers

                 <draft-bradner-iana-allocation-02.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This document will expire in February 2000.

Abstract

   This memo provides guidance for the IANA to use in assigning
   parameters for fields in the IPv4, TCP, UDP, ICMP and IPv6 protocol
   headers.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1999).  All Rights Reserved.

Bradner & Paxson                                                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              IANA Assignments                October 1999

1. Introduction

   For many years the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA)
   (www.iana.org) has allocated parameter values for fields in the
   network protocols which have been created or are maintained by the
   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).  Starting a few years ago the
   IETF began to provide the IANA with guidance for the assignment of
   parameters for fields in newly developed protocols.  Unfortunately
   this type of guidance was not consistently provided for the fields in
   protocols developed before 1998.  This memo attempts to codify
   existing IANA practice used in the assignment of parameters in the
   specific case of some of these protocols.  It is expected that
   additional memos will be developed in the future to codify existing
   practice in other cases.

   This memo addresses the fields within the IPv4, TCP, UDP, ICMP and
   IPv6 headers for which the IANA assigns values.

   The terms "Specification Required", "Expert Review", "IESG Approval",
   "IETF Consensus", and "Standards Action", are used in this memo to
   refer to the processes described in [CONS].

2. Temporary Assignments

   From time to time temporary assignments are made in the values for
   fields in these headers for use in experiments.  IESG Approval is
   required for any such temporary assignments.

3. IANA Considerations for fields in the IPv4 header

   The IPv4 header [V4] contains the following fields that carry values
   assigned by the IANA: Version (by definition always 4 in IPv4), Type
   of Service, Protocol, Source Address, Destination Address, and Option
   Type.

   3.1 IPv4 IP Version field

      The IANA allocates values from the IP Version name space following
      a Standards Action process.

   3.2 IPv4 Type of Service field

      The Type of Service field described in [V4] has been superceded
      [DIFF] by the 6-bit Differentiated Services (DS) field and a 2-bit
      "currently unused" field.  The IANA allocates values in the DS
      field following the IANA Considerations section in [DIFF].  [ECN]

Bradner & Paxson                                                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              IANA Assignments                October 1999

      describes an experimental use of the 2-bit "currently unused"
      field.  Other experimental uses of this field are assigned after
      IESG Approval processes.  Permanent values in this field are
      allocated following a Standards Action process.

   3.3 IPv4 Protocol field

      IANA allocates values from the IPv4 Protocol name space following
      an Expert Review, IESG Approval or Standards Action process.  The
      Expert Review process should only be used in those special cases
      where non-disclosure information is involved.  In these cases the
      expert should be designated by the IESG.

   3.4 IPv4 Source and Destination addresses

      The IPv4 source and destination addresses use the same values.
      These values fall into a number of ranges defined in [V4] and
      [MULT].

      3.4.1 IPv4 Unicast addresses

         The Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN)
         recently accepted responsibility for the formulation of
         specific guidelines for the allocation of the values from the
         IPv4 unicast address space (values 0.0.0.0 through
         223.255.255.255 ) other than values from the ranges 0/8 (which
         was reserved in [AN80]) and 127/8 (from which the loopback
         address has been taken) along with other values already
         assigned by the IETF for special functions or purposes. (For
         example, the private addresses defined in RFC 1918.) Further
         assignments in the 0/8 and 127/8 ranges require a Standards
         Action process since current IP implementations may break if
         this is done.

      3.4.2 IPv4 Multicast addresses

         IPv4 addresses that fall in the range from 224.0.0.0 through
         239.255.255.255 are known as multicast addresses.  The IETF has
         assigned a number of IPv4 multicast addresses for special
         purposes. For example, the values in the range from 224.0.0.0
         to 224.0.0.255 , inclusive, are reserved for the use of routing
         protocols and other low-level topology discovery or maintenance
         protocols, such as gateway discovery and group membership
         reporting. (See the IANA web page) New values in this range are
         assigned following an IESG Approval or Standards Action
         process.  Assignments of individual multicast address follow an
         Expert Review, IESG Approval or Standards Action process.
         Until further work is done on multicast protocols large-scale

Bradner & Paxson                                                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              IANA Assignments                October 1999

         assignments of IPv4 multicast addresses is not recommended.

      3.4.3 IPv4 Reserved addresses

         IPv4 addresses in the range from 240.0.0.0 through
         247.255.255.255 are reserved [MULT] and compliant IPv4
         implementations will discard any packets that make use of them.
         Addresses in this range are not to be assigned unless an IETF
         Standards Action modifies the IPv4 protocol in such a way as to
         make these addresses valid.

   3.5 IPv4 Option Type field

      The IANA allocates values from the IPv4 Option Type name space
      following an IESG Approval, IETF Consensus or Standards Action
      process.

4. IANA Considerations for fields in the IPv6 header

   The IPv6 header [V6] contains the following fields that carry values
   assigned from IANA-managed name spaces: Version (by definition always
   6 in IPv6), Traffic Class, Next Header, Source and Destination
   Address.  In addition, the IPv6 Hop-by-Hop Options and Destination
   Options extension headers include an Option Type field with values
   assigned from an IANA-managed name space.

   4.1 IPv6 Version field

      The Version field in the IPv6 header uses the same name space as
      the Version field in the IPv4 header. Values in this field are
      allocated as described in Section 3.1.

   4.2 IPv6 Traffic Class field

      The IPv6 Traffic Class uses the same namespace as the IPv4 6-bit
      DS field and 2-bit unused field. Values in these fields are
      allocated as described in Section 3.2.

   4.3 IPv6 Next Header field

      The IPv6 Next Header field carries values from the same name space
      as the IPv4 Protocol name space. These values are allocated as
      discussed in Section 3.3.

   4.4 IPv6 Source and Destination Unicast Addresses

      The IPv6 Source and Destination address fields both use the same

Bradner & Paxson                                                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              IANA Assignments                October 1999

      values and are described in [V6AD].  The addresses are divided
      into ranges defined by a variable length Format Prefix (FP).

      4.4.1 IPv4 Aggregatable Global Unicast Addresses

         The Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN)
         recently accepted responsibility for the formulation of
         specific guidelines for the assignment of values in the
         Aggregatable Global Unicast Addresses FP (FP 001).

      4.4.2 IPv6 Anycast Addresses

         IPv6 anycast addresses are defined in [V6AD].  Anycast
         addresses are allocated from the unicast address space and
         anycast addresses are syntactically indistinguishable from
         unicast addresses.  Assignment of IPv6 Anycast addresses
         follows the process used for IPv6 Aggregatable Global Unicast
         Addresses. (section 4.4)

      4.4.3 IPv6 Multicast Addresses

         IPv6 multicast addresses are defined in [V6AD]. They are
         identified by a FP of 0xFF.  Assignment guidelines for IPv6
         multicast addresses are described in [MASGN].

      4.4.4 IPv6 Unassigned and Reserved IPv6 Format Prefixes

         The responsibility for assigning values in each of the
         "unassigned" and "reserved" Format Prefixes is delegated by
         IESG Approval or Standards Action processes since the
         processing rules for these Format Prefixes have not been
         defined.

   4.5 IPv6 Hop-by-Hop and Destination Option Fields

      Values for the IPv6 Hop-by-Hop Options and Destination Options
      fields are allocated using an IESG Approval, IETF Consensus or
      Standards Action processes.

5. IANA Considerations for fields in the ICMP header

   The ICMP header [ICMP] contains the following fields that carry
   values assigned from IANA-managed name spaces: Type and Code.

   Values for the ICMP Type and Code fields are allocated using an IESG
   Approval or Standards Action processes.

Bradner & Paxson                                                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              IANA Assignments                October 1999

6. IANA Considerations for fields in the UDP header

   The UDP header [UDP] contains the following fields that carry values
   assigned from IANA-managed name spaces: Source and Destination Port.

   Both the Source and Destination Port fields use the same namespace.
   Values in this namespace are assigned following a Specification
   Required, Expert Review, IESG Approval, IETF Consensus, or Standards
   Action process.  Note that some assignments may involve non-
   disclosure information.

7. IANA Considerations for fields in the TCP header

   The TCP header [TCP] contains the following fields that carry values
   assigned from IANA-managed name spaces: Source and Destination Port,
   Reserved Bits, and Option Kind.

   7.1 TCP Source and Destination Port fields

      Both the Source and Destination Port fields use the same
      namespace.  Values in this namespace are assigned following a
      Specification Required, Expert Review, IESG Approval, IETF
      Consensus, or Standards Action process.  Note that some
      assignments may involve non-disclosure information.

   7.2 Reserved Bits in TCP Header

      The reserved bits in the TCP header are assigned following a
      Standards Action process.

   7.3 TCP Option Kind field

      Values in the Option Kind field are assigned following an IESG
      Approval or Standards Action process.

8. Security Considerations

   Security analyzers such as firewalls and network intrusion detection
   monitors often rely on unambiguous interpretations of the fields
   described in this memo.  As new values for the fields are assigned,
   existing security analyzers that do not understand the new values may
   fail, resulting in either loss of connectivity if the analyzer
   declines to forward the unrecognized traffic, or loss of security if
   it does forward the traffic and the new values are used as part of an
   attack.  This vulnerability argues for high visibility (which the
   Standards Action and IETF Consensus processes ensure) for the

Bradner & Paxson                                                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              IANA Assignments                October 1999

   assignments whenever possible.

9. References

   [AN80] Postel, J., "Assigned numbers", RFC 758, August 1979

   [CONS] Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an IANA
      Considerations Section in RFCs", RFC 2434, October 1998.

   [DIFF] Nichols, K., S. Blake, F. Baker, D. Black, " Definition of the
      Differentiated Services Field (DS Field) in the IPv4 and IPv6
      Headers", RFC 2474, December 1998.

   [ECN] Ramakrishnan, K., S. Floyd, "A Proposal to add Explicit
      Congestion Notification (ECN) to IP", RFC 2481, January 1999

   [ICMP] Postel, J., "Internet Control Message Protocol", RFC 792,
      September 1981.

   [MASGN] Hinden, R., and S. Deering, "IPv6 Multicast Address
      Assignments", RFC 2375, July 1998.

   [MULT] Deering, S. E., "Host extensions for IP multicasting", RFC
      988, July 1986

   [TCP] Postel, J., "Transmission Control Protocol", RFC 793, September
      1981.

   [UDP] Postel, J., "User Datagram Protocol", RFC 768, August 1980.

   [V4] Postel, J., "Internet Protocol", RFC 791, September, 1981.

   [V6] Deering, S., R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6)
      Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998.

   [V6AD] Hinden, R., S. Deering, "IP Version 6 Addressing
      Architecture", RFC 2373, July 1998

10. Author's Addressees

   Scott Bradner
   Harvard University
   Cambridge MA - USA
   02138

   sob@harvard.edu
   +1 617 495 3864

Bradner & Paxson                                                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              IANA Assignments                October 1999

   Vern Paxson
   ACIRI / ICSI
   1947 Center Street, Suite 600
   Berkeley, CA - USA
   94704-1198

   vern@aciri.org
   +1 510/642-4274 x302

Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1999).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Bradner & Paxson                                                [Page 8]
