
Internet Engineering Task Force                               F. Eusebio
Internet-Draft                                          Portugal Telecom
Intended status: Standards Track                       December 19, 2007
Expires: June 21, 2007                                      
                                 
                         
                      Ethernet Label Switching (ELS)
                      draft-eusebio-mpls-els-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2006).


Abstract

   This document proposes an evolution for MPLS forwarding component,
   based on a global hierarchical label, in order to reduce the number 
   of labels managed by each router and to provide a stateless fast
   local repair mechanism.






Eusebio                   Expires June 21, 2007                 [Page 1]
 

Internet Draft        draft-eusebio-mpls-els-00.txt        December 2006



Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

1. Introduction

   On medium and large IP/MPLS networks, designers have to make a few
   options in order to prevent hitting the box limits, namely those 
   concerning the maximum number of LSPs. However, the current available 
   alternatives have drawbacks, such as extra complexity, extra cost, 
   and the loss or limited deployment of some features. One of those 
   features is Fast Re-Route (FRR), which builds upon RSVP LSPs. Above a 
   few hundreds of routers a full mesh of RSVP LSPs is far beyond the 
   system limits, which in practice implies either deploying a limited 
   FRR solution (based on LSP stiching or LDPoRSVP) or using LDP (not 
   deploying FRR at all).

   This document proposes a new label for MPLS, allowing simultaneously 
   an amount of LSPs proportional to the amount of routers (instead of 
   proportional to its square) and a stateless fast local repair
   mechanism.

   Both goals are achieved using the following new elements: first, a 
   global hierarchical label in opposition to the local flat 20-bits 
   label; second, multipoint to point (mp2p) LSPs in opposition to point 
   to point (p2p) LSPs widely used in current MPLS deployments.

2. Forwarding plane

2.1 Label structure

   The proposed label has 2 fields: one that identifies the egress 
   router (destination ID) and another that identifies the path towards 
   it (path ID). 

                   +---------+----------------+
                   | path ID | destination ID |
                   +---------+----------------+ 





Eusebio                   Expires June 21, 2007                 [Page 2]
 

Internet Draft        draft-eusebio-mpls-els-00.txt        December 2006



   This label has a global scope since the destination ID MUST be unique 
   on the routing domain. The path ID has a scope limited to the 
   destination ID scope, so the same path ID can be used for different 
   destination IDs.

   Destination ID field has 48 bits and path ID field has 12 bits. This  
   makes the label lookup compatible with a VLAN + MAC lookup on a 
   regular Ethernet switch. Due to the fact that Ethernet tends to be 
   the standard interface used both for router interconnections and for 
   transmission solutions, this label will facilitate the integration of 
   both layers, as explained in section 3. 

2.2 Multipoint to point LSPs

   Since the label has a global meaning, all routers SHALL use the same 
   label for the primary path to a specific egress router, the same 
   label for the seconday path, and so forth.

   Using the same label for the same egress router results in multipoint 
   to point LSPs (mp2p LSPs). Irrespective of the ingress router the LSP 
   converges to the egress. From a transit router perspective, two 
   packets arriving on different interfaces with the same label (path ID 
   + destination ID) will be forwarded to the same interface. 

   In a scenario with 2 paths from any router to any other router, the 
   maximum number of labels used in the domain would be 2*2*N, N being 
   the number of edge routers. This means that the current LSP limits 
   per router would be enough for any kind of network, even for big 
   networks with a few thousand routers.

2.3 Forwarding

   The forwarding algorithm is the same as with the 20-bits label: 
   pop-swap-push with an exact lookup on the label forwarding table. 
   However, since the same label is used on every router for the same 
   path, the popped and pushed label are the same.   

   An exception would occur if the next hop link or router fails. As a 
   consequence, the label would be removed from the forwarding table and 
   the lookup would fail. However, assuming that a second label to the 
   same egress router had been distributed (different path ID but the
   same destination ID) and is active in the forwarding table, the 
   transit router would know about the second path to the same 



Eusebio                   Expires June 21, 2007                 [Page 3]
 

Internet Draft        draft-eusebio-mpls-els-00.txt        December 2006



   destination. In this case, the label swap MUST push the second label 
   and the packet would be forwarded along the second path towards the 
   egress router, providing a stateless mechanism for fast local repair.

3. Signalling

   All label distribution protocols being used today (such as LDP, RSVP 
   or BGP) can still be used with a few extensions. These are not the 
   focus of this document and should be defined in other documents.

   One extension would be needed for the new label. For that new TLVs or 
   objects would have to be defined.

   Other extensions would be needed for the label distribution 
   procedures, in order to support mp2p LSPs and seting up 2 paths for 
   each PE. 

   Optionally, a common control plane for routers and transmission 
   devices capable of switching VLANs (using PBT, G.709 or other), would 
   allow for a more efficient use of router and transmission resources.
   
4. IANA considerations

   IANA will assign two path IDs, one for the primary path and another 
   for the backup path.

5. Security considerations

   The new label and mp2p LSPs described in this document do not create 
   any new security issues for MPLS.


Author address

   Francisco Eusebio
   Portugal Telecom
   Praça Nuno Rodrigues dos Santos, 9
   1600-171 Lisboa
   Portugal
   email: francisco.m.eusebio@telecom.pt






Eusebio                   Expires June 21, 2007                 [Page 4]
 

Internet Draft        draft-eusebio-mpls-els-00.txt        December 2006



Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.































Eusebio                   Expires June 21, 2007                 [Page 5]
