







     Internet Engineering Task Force                       H.Cruickshank 
     Internet Draft                                           S. Iyengar 
     draft-ietf-ipdvb-sec-req-00.txt            University of Surrey, UK 
                                                            L. Duquerroy 
                                            Alcatel Alenia Space, France 
     Expires: June 8, 2007                                     P. Pillai 
                                              University of Bradford, UK 
     Category: Internet Draft                           December 8, 2006 
                                        
            Security requirements for the Unidirectional Lightweight 
                         Encapsulation (ULE) protocol 
                        draft-ietf-ipdvb-sec-req-00.txt 


    Status of this Draft 

       By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that       
       any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is       
       aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she       
       becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of       
       BCP 79. 

       Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
       Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
       other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
       Drafts. 

       Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
       months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
       documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
       Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work 
       in progress." 

       The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
            http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

       The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
            http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

       This Internet-Draft will expire on June 8, 2007. 

    Abstract 

       The MPEG-2 standard defined by ISO 13818-1 [ISO-MPEG2] supports a 
       range of transmission methods for a range of services. This 
       document provides a threat analysis and derives the security 
       requirements when using the Transport Stream, TS, to support an 
       Internet network-layer using Unidirectional Lightweight 
       Encapsulation (ULE) [RFC4326]. The document also provides the 
       motivation for link-level security for a ULE Stream. A ULE Stream 
       may be used to send IPv4 packets, IPv6 packets, and other 
     
     
    Cruickshank           Expires June 8, 2007          [Page 1] 
     
    Internet-Draft      Security Requirements for ULE     December 2006 
        

       Protocol Data Units (PDUs) to an arbitrarily large number of 
       Receivers supporting unicast and/or multicast transmission. 
         
    Table of Contents 

       1. Introduction..............................................2 
       2. Requirements notation......................................3 
       3. Threat Analysis...........................................5 
          3.1. System Components.....................................6 
          3.2. Threats..............................................8 
          3.3. Threat Scenarios.....................................10 
       4. Security Requirements for IP over MPEG-2 TS...............11 
       5. IPsec and MPEG-2 Transmission Networks....................12 
       6. Motivation for ULE link-layer security....................13 
          6.1. Link security below the Encapsulation layer..........13 
          6.2. Link security as a part of the Encapsulation layer....14 
       7. Summary..................................................15 
       8. Security Considerations...................................15 
       9. IANA Considerations......................................16 
       10. Acknowledgments.........................................16 
       11. References..............................................16 
          11.1. Normative References................................16 
          11.2. Informative References..............................16 
       Author's Addresses..........................................18 
       Intellectual Property Statement..............................19 
       Disclaimer of Validity......................................19 
       Copyright Statement.........................................19 
        
    1. Introduction 

       The MPEG-2 Transport Stream (TS) has been widely accepted not 
       only for providing digital TV services, but also as a subnetwork 
       technology for building IP networks. RFC 4326 [RFC4326] describes 
       the Unidirectional Lightweight Encapsulation (ULE) mechanism for 
       the transport of IPv4 and IPv6 Datagrams and other network 
       protocol packets directly over the ISO MPEG-2 Transport Stream as 
       TS Private Data.  ULE specifies a base encapsulation format and 
       supports an extension format that allows it to carry additional 
       header information to assist in network/Receiver processing. The 
       encapsulation satisfies the design and architectural requirement 
       for a lightweight encapsulation defined in RFC 4259 [RFC4259]. 

       Section 3.1 of RFC 4259 presents several topological scenarios 
       for MPEG-2 Transmission Networks. A summary of these scenarios 
       are presented below (for full detail, please refer to RFC 4259). 

       1. Broadcast TV and Radio Delivery.  
     
     
    Cruickshank           Expires June 8, 2007           [Page 2] 
        
    Internet-Draft      Security Requirements for ULE     December 2006 
        

       2. Broadcast Networks used as an ISP. This resembles to scenario 
          1, but includes the provision of IP services providing access 
          to the public Internet.  

       3. Unidirectional Star IP Scenario. It utilizes a Hub station to 
          provide a data network delivering a common bit stream to 
          typically medium-sized groups of Receivers.  

       4. Datacast Overlay. It employs MPEG-2 physical and link layers 
          to provide additional connectivity such as unidirectional 
          multicast to supplement an existing IP-based Internet service.  

       5. Point-to-Point Links.  

       6. Two-Way IP Networks. This can be typically satellite-based and 
          star-based utilising a Hub station to deliver a common bit 
          stream to medium- sized groups of receivers. A bidirectional 
          service is provided over a common air-interface.  

       RFC 4259 states that ULE must be robust to errors and security 
       threats. Security must also consider both unidirectional as well 
       as bidirectional links for the scenarios mentioned above.  

       An initial analysis of the security requirements in MPEG-2 
       transmission networks is presented in the security considerations 
       section of RFC 4259. For example, when such networks are not 
       using a wireline network, the normal security issues relating to 
       the use of wireless links for transport of Internet traffic 
       should be considered [RFC3819].  

       The security considerations of RFC 4259 recommends that any new 
       encapsulation defined by the IETF should allow Transport Stream 
       encryption and should also support optional link-level 
       authentication of the SNDU payload. In ULE [RFC4326], it is 
       suggested that this may be provided in a flexible way using 
       Extension Headers. This requires the definition of a mandatory 
       header extension, but has the advantage that it decouples 
       specification of the security functions from the encapsulation 
       functions.  

       This document extends the above analysis and derives a detailed 
       the security requirements for ULE in MPEG-2 transmission 
       networks. 

    2. Requirements notation 


     
     
    Cruickshank           Expires June 8, 2007           [Page 3] 
        
    Internet-Draft      Security Requirements for ULE     December 2006 
        

       The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL 
       NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and 
       "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in 
       RFC2119 [RFC2119]. 

       Other terms used in this document are defined below: 

       ATSC: Advanced Television Systems Committee. A framework and a 
       set of associated standards for the transmission of video, audio, 
       and data using the ISO MPEG-2 standard. 

       DVB: Digital Video Broadcast. A framework and set of associated 
       standards published by the European Telecommunications Standards 
       Institute (ETSI) for the transmission of video, audio, and data 
       using the ISO MPEG-2 Standard [ISO-MPEG2]. 

       Encapsulator: A network device that receives PDUs and formats 
       these into Payload Units (known here as SNDUs) for output as a 
       stream of TS Packets. 

       LLC: Logical Link Control [ISO-8802-2, IEEE-802.2].  A link-layer 
       protocol defined by the IEEE 802 standard, which follows the 
       Ethernet Medium Access Control Header. 

       MAC: Message Authentication Code. 

       MPE: Multiprotocol Encapsulation [ETSI-DAT].  A scheme that 
       encapsulates PDUs, forming a DSM-CC Table Section.  Each Section 
       is sent in a series of TS Packets using a single TS Logical 
       Channel. 

       MPEG-2: A set of standards specified by the Motion Picture 
       Experts Group (MPEG) and standardized by the International 
       Standards Organisation (ISO/IEC 13818-1) [ISO-MPEG2], and ITU-T 
       (in H.222 [ITU-H222]). 

       NPA: Network Point of Attachment.  In this document, refers to a 
       6-byte destination address (resembling an IEEE Medium Access 
       Control address) within the MPEG-2 transmission network that is 
       used to identify individual Receivers or groups of Receivers. 

       PDU: Protocol Data Unit.  Examples of a PDU include Ethernet 
       frames, IPv4 or IPv6 datagrams, and other network packets. 

       PID: Packet Identifier [ISO-MPEG2].  A 13-bit field carried in 
       the header of TS Packets.  This is used to identify the TS 
       Logical Channel to which a TS Packet belongs [ISO-MPEG2].  The TS 
     
     
    Cruickshank           Expires June 8, 2007           [Page 4] 
        
    Internet-Draft      Security Requirements for ULE     December 2006 
        

       Packets forming the parts of a Table Section, PES, or other 
       Payload Unit must all carry the same PID value.  The all-zeros 
       PID 0x0000 as well as other PID values is reserved for specific 
       PSI/SI Tables [ISO-MPEG2]. The all-ones PID value 0x1FFF 
       indicates a Null TS Packet introduced to maintain a constant bit 
       rate of a TS Multiplex.  There is no required relationship 
       between the PID values used for TS Logical Channels transmitted 
       using different TS Multiplexes. 

       Receiver: Equipment that processes the signal from a TS Multiplex 
       and performs filtering and forwarding of encapsulated PDUs to the 
       network-layer service (or bridging module when operating at the 
       link layer). 

       SI Table: Service Information Table [ISO-MPEG2].  In this 
       document, this term describes a table that is defined by another 
       standards body to convey information about the services carried 
       in a TS Multiplex. A Table may consist of one or more Table 
       Sections; however, all sections of a particular SI Table must be 
       carried over a single TS Logical Channel [ISO-MPEG2]. 

       SNDU: SubNetwork Data Unit. An encapsulated PDU sent as an MPEG-2 
       Payload Unit. 

       TS: Transport Stream [ISO-MPEG2], a method of transmission at the 
       MPEG-2 level using TS Packets; it represents layer 2 of the 
       ISO/OSI reference model.  See also TS Logical Channel and TS 
       Multiplex. 

       TS Multiplex: In this document, this term defines a set of MPEG-2 
       TS Logical Channels sent over a single lower-layer connection.  
       This may be a common physical link (i.e., a transmission at a 
       specified symbol rate, FEC setting, and transmission frequency) 
       or an encapsulation provided by another protocol layer (e.g., 
       Ethernet, or RTP over IP). The same TS Logical Channel may be 
       repeated over more than one TS Multiplex (possibly associated 
       with a different PID value) [RFC4259]; for example, to 
       redistribute the same multicast content to two terrestrial TV 
       transmission cells. 

       TS Packet: A fixed-length 188B unit of data sent over a TS 
       Multiplex [ISO-MPEG2].  Each TS Packet carries a 4B header, plus 
       optional overhead including an Adaptation Field, encryption 
       details, and time stamp information to synchronise a set of 
       related TS Logical Channels. 

    3. Threat Analysis 
     
     
    Cruickshank           Expires June 8, 2007           [Page 5] 
        
    Internet-Draft      Security Requirements for ULE     December 2006 
        

    3.1. System Components  
         +------------+                                  +------------+ 
         |  IP        |                                  |  IP        | 
         |  End Host  |                                  |  End Host  | 
         +-----+------+                                  +------------+ 
               |                                                ^ 
               +------------>+---------------+                  | 
                             +  IP           |                  | 
               +-------------+  Encapsulator |                  | 
       SI-Data |             +------+--------+                  | 
       +-------+-------+            |MPEG-2 TS Logical Channel  | 
       |  MPEG-2       |            |                           | 
       |  SI Tables    |            |                           | 
       +-------+-------+   ->+------+--------+                  | 
               |          -->|  MPEG-2       |                . . . 
               +------------>+  Multiplexor  |                  | 
       MPEG-2 TS             +------+--------+                  | 
       Logical Channel              |MPEG-2 TS Mux              | 
                                    |                           | 
                  Other    ->+------+--------+                  | 
                  MPEG-2  -->+  MPEG-2       |                  | 
                  TS     --->+  Multiplexor  |                  | 
                        ---->+------+--------+                  | 
                                    |MPEG-2 TS Mux              | 
                                    |                           | 
                             +------+--------+           +------+-----+ 
                             |Physical Layer |           |  MPEG-2    | 
                             |Modulator      +---------->+  Receiver  | 
                             +---------------+  MPEG-2   +------------+ 
                                                TS Mux 
        Figure 1 :An example configuration for a unidirectional Service 
                    for IP transport over MPEG-2 [RFC4259]. 

       As shown in Figure 1 above(from section 3.3 of [RFC4259]), there 
       are several entities within the MPEG-2 transmission network 
       architecture. These include: 

       o ULE Encapsulation Gateways (or Encapsulator or ULE source) 

       o SI-Table signalling generator (input to the multiplexor) 

       o Receivers 

     
     
    Cruickshank           Expires June 8, 2007           [Page 6] 
        
    Internet-Draft      Security Requirements for ULE     December 2006 
        

       o TS multiplexers (including re-multiplexers) 

       o Modulators 

       In an MPEG-2 network a set of signalling messages [ID-AR] may 
       need to be broadcast (e.g. by an Encapsulation Gateway or other 
       device) to form the L2 control plane. Examples of signalling 
       messages include the Program Association Table (PAT), Program Map 
       Table (PMT) and Network Information Table (NIT). In existing 
       MPEG-2 transmission networks, these messages are broadcast in the 
       clear (no encryption or integrity checks). The integrity as well 
       as authenticity of these messages is important for correct 
       working of the ULE network. Even though securing these messages 
       is an orthogonal issue, one method recently proposed [ID-EF] 
       encapsulates these messages using ULE. In such cases all the 
       security requirements of this draft apply in securing these 
       signalling messages.  

       ULE link security focuses only on the security between the ULE 
       Encapsulation Gateway (ULE source) and the Receiver. Securing the 
       ULE source and receivers eliminates the need to consider security 
       issues regarding the remaining system components, such as 
       multiplexers, re-multiplexers and modulators.  

       In a MPEG-2 TS transmission network, the originating source of TS 
       Packets is either a L2 interface device (media encoder, 
       encapsulation gateway, etc) or a L2 network device (TS 
       multiplexer, etc). These devices may, but do not necessarily, 
       have an associated IP address. In the case of an encapsulation 
       gateway (e.g. ULE sender), the device may operate at L2 or L3, 
       and is not normally the originator of an IP traffic flow, and 
       usually the IP source address of the packets that it forwards do 
       not correspond to an IP address associated with the device. When 
       authentication of the IP source is required this must be provided 
       by IPsec, TLS, etc. operating at a higher layer.  

       The TS Packets are carried to the Receiver over a physical layer 
       that usually includes Forward Error Correction (FEC) coding that 
       interleaves the bytes of several consecutive, but unrelated, TS 
       Packets. FEC coding and synchronisation processing makes 
       injection of single TS Packets very difficult. Replacement of a 
       sequence of packets is also difficult, but possible (see section 
       3.2 below).  

       A Receiver in a MPEG-2 TS transmission network needs to identify 
       a TS Logical Channel (or MPEG-2 Elementary Stream) to reassemble 
       the fragments of PDUs sent by a L2 source [RFC4259]. In an MPEG-2 
     
     
    Cruickshank           Expires June 8, 2007           [Page 7] 
        
    Internet-Draft      Security Requirements for ULE     December 2006 
        

       TS, this association is made via the Packet Identifier, PID [ISO-
       MPEG2]. At the sender, each source associates a locally unique 
       set of PID values with each stream it originates. However, there 
       is no required relationship between the PID value used at the 
       sender and that received at the Receiver. Network devices may re-
       number the PID values associated with one or more TS Logical 
       Channels (e.g. ULE Streams) to prevent clashes at a multiplexer 
       between input streams with the same PID carried on different 
       input multiplexes (updating entries in the PMT [ISO-MPEG2], and 
       other SI tables that reference the PID value). A device may also 
       modify and/or insert new SI data into the control plane (also 
       sent as TS Packets identified by their PID value).   

       The PID associated with an Elementary Stream can therefore be 
       modified (e.g. in some systems by reception of an updated SI 
       table, or in other systems until the next announcement/discovery 
       data is received). An attacker that is able to modify the content 
       of the received multiplex (e.g. replay data and/or control 
       information) could inject data locally into the received stream 
       with an arbitrary PID value. 

       One method to provide security is to secure the entire Stream at 
       the MPEG-2 TS level. This stream of TS Packets carried in a 
       multiplex are usually received by many Receivers. The approach is 
       well-suited to TV-transmission, data-push, etc, where the PID 
       carries one or a set of flows (e.g. video/audio Packetized 
       Elementary Stream (PES) Packets) with similar security 
       requirements. 

       Where a ULE Stream carries a set of IP traffic flows to different 
       destinations with a range of properties (multicast, unicast, 
       etc), it is often not appropriate to provide IP confidentiality 
       services for the entire ULE Stream. For many expected 
       applications of ULE, a finer-grain control is therefore required, 
       at least permitting control of data confidentiality/authorisation 
       at the level of a single MAC/NPA address. However there is only 
       one valid source of data for each MPEG-2 Elementary Stream, bound 
       to a PID value. This observation could simplify the requirement 
       for authentication of the source of a ULE Stream. 

    3.2. Threats 






     
     
    Cruickshank           Expires June 8, 2007           [Page 8] 
        
    Internet-Draft      Security Requirements for ULE     December 2006 
        

       The simplest type of network threat is a passive threat. This 
       includes eavesdropping or monitoring of transmissions, with a 
       goal to obtain information that is being transmitted. In 
       broadcast networks (especially those utilising widely available 
       low-cost physical layer interfaces, such as DVB) passive threats 
       are considered the major threats. An example of such a threat is 
       an intruder monitoring the MPEG-2 transmission broadcast and then 
       extracting traffic information concerning the communication 
       between IP hosts using a link. Another example is of an intruder 
       trying to gain information about the communication parties by 
       monitoring their ULE Receiver NPA addresses; an intruder can gain 
       information by determining the layer 2 identity of the 
       communicating parties and the volume of their traffic. This is a 
       well-known issue in the security field; however it is more of a 
       problem in the case of broadcast networks such as MPEG-2 
       transmission networks because of the easy availability of 
       receiver hardware and the wide geographical span of the networks.  

       Active threats (or attacks) are, in general, more difficult to 
       implement successfully than passive threats, and usually require 
       more sophisticated resources and may require access to the 
       transmitter. Within the context of MPEG-2 transmission networks, 
       examples of active attacks are: 

       o Masquerading: An entity pretends to be a different entity. 
          This includes masquerading other users and subnetwork control 
          plane messages.  

       o Modification of messages in an unauthorised manner.  

       o Replay attacks: When an intruder sends some old (authentic) 
          messages to the Receiver. In the case of a broadcast link, 
          access to previous broadcast data is easy.  

       o Denial of Service attacks: When an entity fails to perform its 
          proper function or acts in a way that prevents other entities 
          from performing their proper functions. 

       The active threats mentioned above are major security concerns 
       for the Internet community [BELLOVIN]. Masquerading and 
       modification of IP packets are comparatively easy in an Internet 
       environment whereas such attacks are in fact much harder for 
       broadcast links. This could for instance motivate the use of 
       sequence numbers in IPsec, but not the mandatory use of them on 
       synchronous links and this is further reflected in the security 
       requirements for Case 2 and 3 in section 4 below. 

     
     
    Cruickshank           Expires June 8, 2007           [Page 9] 
        
    Internet-Draft      Security Requirements for ULE     December 2006 
        

    3.3. Threat Scenarios 

       Analysing the topological scenarios for MPEG-2 Transmission 
       Networks in section 1, the security threat cases can be 
       abstracted into three cases: 

       o Case 1: Monitoring (passive threat). Here the intruder 
          monitors the ULE broadcasts to gain information about the ULE 
          data and/or tracking the communicating parties identities (by 
          monitoring the destination NPA). In this scenario, measures 
          must be taken to protect the ULE data and the identity of ULE 
          Receivers. 

       o Case 2: Local hijacking of the MPEG-TS multiplex (active 
          threat). Here an intruder is assumed to be sufficiently 
          sophisticated to over-ride the original transmission from the 
          ULE Encapsulation Gateway and deliver a modified version of 
          the MPEG-TS transmission to a single ULE Receiver or a small 
          group of Receivers (e.g. in a single company site). The MPEG 
          transmission network operator might not be aware of such 
          attacks. Measures must be taken to ensure ULE source 
          authentication and preventing replay of old messages. 

       o Case 3: Global hijacking of the MPEG-TS multiplex (active 
          threat). Here we assume an intruder is very sophisticated and 
          able to hijack the whole MPEG transmission multiplex. The 
          requirements here are similar to scenario 2. The MPEG 
          transmission network operator can usually identify such 
          attacks and may resort to some means to restore the original 
          transmission. 

       For both cases 2 and 3, there can be two sub cases: 

       o Insider attacks i.e. active attacks from adversaries in the 
       known of secret material. 

       o Outsider attacks i.e. active attacks from outside of a virtual 
       private network. 

       In terms of priority, case 1 is considered the major threat in 
       MPEG transmission systems. Case 2 is likely to a lesser degree 
       within certain network configurations, especially when there are 
       insider attacks. Hence, protection against such active actives 
       should be used only when such a threat is a real possibility. 
       Case 3 is envisaged to be less practical, because it will be very 
       difficult to pass unnoticed by the MPEG transmission operator. It 
       will require restoration of the original transmission. The 
     
     
    Cruickshank           Expires June 8, 2007           [Page 10] 
        
    Internet-Draft      Security Requirements for ULE     December 2006 
        

       assumption being here is that physical access to the network 
       components (multiplexors, etc) and/or connecting physical media 
       is secure. Therefore case 3 is not considered further in this 
       document. 
        
    4. Security Requirements for IP over MPEG-2 TS 

       From the threat analysis in section 3, the following security 
       requirements can be derived: 

       o Data confidentiality is the major requirement to mitigate 
          passive threats in MPEG-2 broadcast networks. 

       o Protection of Layer 2 NPA address. In broadcast networks this 
          protection can be used to prevent an intruder tracking the 
          identity of ULE Receivers and the volume of their traffic. 

       o Integrity protection and authentication of the ULE source is 
          required against active attacks described in section 3.2. 

       o Protection against replay attacks. This is required for the 
          active attacks described in section 3.2. 

       o Layer L2 ULE Source and Receiver authentication: This is 
          normally performed during the initial key exchange and 
          authentication phase, before the ULE Receiver can join a 
          secure session with the ULE Encapsulator (ULE source). 

       Other general requirements are:  

       o Decoupling of ULE key management functions from ULE security 
          services such as encryption and source authentication. This 
          allows the independent development of both systems. 

       o Support for automated as well as manual insertion of keys and 
          policy into the relevant databases. 

       o Algorithm agility is needed. Changes in crypto algorithms, 
          hashes as they become obsolete should be updated without 
          affecting the overall security of the system. 

       o Traceability: To monitor transmission network using log files 
          to record the activities in the network and detect any 
          intrusion. 

       o Authentication of control and management messages in MPEG-2 
          transmission networks such as the SI tables (see Figure 1). 
     
     
    Cruickshank           Expires June 8, 2007           [Page 11] 
        
    Internet-Draft      Security Requirements for ULE     December 2006 
        

       o Secure Policy management 

       o Compatibility with other networking functions such as NAT 
          Network Address Translation (NAT) [RFC3715] or TCP 
          acceleration can be used in a wireless broadcast networks. 

       o Compatibility and operational with ULE extension headers i.e. 
          allow encryption of a compressed SNDU payload. 

       Examining the threat cases in section 3.3, the security 
       requirements for each case can be summarised as: 

       o Case 1: Data confidentiality MUST be provided to prevent 
          monitoring of the ULE data (such as user information and IP 
          addresses). Protection of NPA addresses MUST be provided to 
          prevent tracking ULE Receivers and their communications. 

       o Case 2: In addition to case 1 requirements, new measures need 
          to be implemented such as authentication schemes using Message 
          Authentication Codes, digital signatures or TESLA [RFC4082] 
          and using sequence numbers to prevent replay attacks in terms 
          of insider attacks. In terms of outsider attacks group 
          authentication using Message Authentication Codes should 
          provide the same level of security. This will significantly 
          reduce the ability of intruders to inject their own data into 
          the MPEG-TS stream. However, scenario 2 threats apply only in 
          specific service cases and therefore source authentication and 
          protection against replay attacks are OPTIONAL. Such measures 
          incur extra link transmission and processing overheads.  

       o Case 3: The requirements here are similar to Case 2. In 
          addition, intrusion detection is also desirable by the MPEG-2 
          network operator. 

    5. IPsec and MPEG-2 Transmission Networks  

       The security architecture for the Internet Protocol [RFC4301] 
       describes security services for traffic at the IP layer. This 
       architecture primarily defines services for the Internet Protocol 
       (IP) unicast packets, as well as manually configured IP multicast 
       packets.  

       It is possible to use IPsec to secure ULE links. The major 
       advantage of IPsec is its wide implementation in IP routers and 
       hosts. IPsec in transport mode can be used for end-to-end 
       security transparently over MPEG-2 transmission links with little 
       impact.  
     
     
    Cruickshank           Expires June 8, 2007           [Page 12] 
        
    Internet-Draft      Security Requirements for ULE     December 2006 
        

       In the context of MPEG-2 transmission links, if IPsec is used to 
       secure a ULE link, then the ULE Encapsulator and Receivers are 
       equivalent to the security gateways in IPsec terminology. A 
       security gateway implementation of IPsec uses tunnel mode. Such 
       usage has the following disadvantages: 

       o There is an extra transmission overhead associated with using 
          IPsec in tunnel mode, i.e. the extra IP header (IPv4 or IPv6). 

       o There is a need to protect the identity (NPA) of ULE Receivers 
          over the ULE broadcast medium; IPsec is not suitable for 
          providing this service. In addition, the interfaces of these 
          devices do not necessarily have IP addresses (they can be L2 
          devices). 

       o Multicast is considered a major service over ULE links. The 
          current IPsec specifications [RFC4301] only define a pairwise 
          tunnel between two IPsec devices with manual keying. Work is 
          in progress in defining the extra detail needed for multicast 
          and to use the tunnel mode with address preservation to allow 
          efficient multicasting. For further details refer to [WEIS06]. 

    6. Motivation for ULE link-layer security 

       Examination of the threat analysis and security requirements in 
       sections 3 and 4 has shown that there is a need to provide link-
       layer (L2) security in MPEG-2 transmission networks employing 
       ULE.  

       ULE link security (between a ULE Encapsulation Gateway to 
       Receivers) is therefore considered an additional security 
       mechanism to IPsec, TLS, and application layer security, not a 
       replacement. It allows a network operator to provide similar 
       functions to that of IPsec [RFC4301], but in addition provides 
       MPEG-2 transmission link confidentiality and protection of ULE 
       Receiver identity (NPA).  

       A modular design to ULE Security may allow it to use and benefit 
       from IETF key management protocols, such as the Multicast 
       Security group (MSEC) GSAKMP [RFC4535] and GDOI [RFC3547] 
       protocols. This does not preclude the use of other key management 
       methods in scenarios where this is more appropriate.  

    6.1. Link security below the Encapsulation layer  

       Link layer security can be provided at the MPEG-TS level (below 
       ULE. MPEG-TS encryption encrypts all TS Packets sent with a 
     
     
    Cruickshank           Expires June 8, 2007           [Page 13] 
        
    Internet-Draft      Security Requirements for ULE     December 2006 
        

       specific PID value. However, MPEG-TS may typically multiplex 
       several IP flows, belonging to different users, using a common 
       PID. Therefore all multiplexed traffic will share the same 
       security keys.  

       This has the following advantages: 

       o The bit stream sent on the broadcast network does not expose 
          any L2 or L3 headers, specifically all addresses, type fields, 
          and length fields are encrypted prior to transmission.  

       o This method does not preclude the use of IPsec, or any other 
          form of higher-layer security.  

       However it has the following disadvantages:  

       o Each ULE Receiver needs to decrypt all MPEG-2 TS Packets with 
          a matching PID, possibly including those that are not required 
          to be forwarded. Therefore it does not have the flexibility to 
          separately secure individual IP flows.  

       o ULE Receivers will have access to private traffic destined to 
          other ULE Receivers, since they share a common PID and key.  

       o Encryption of the MPE NPA address is not permitted in such 
          systems.  

       o IETF-based key management are not used in existing systems. 
          Existing access control mechanisms have limited flexibility in 
          terms of controlling the use of key and rekeying. Therefore if 
          the key is compromised, then this will impact several ULE 
          Receivers.  

       In practice there are few L2 security systems for MPEG 
       transmission networks. Conditional access for digital TV 
       broadcasting is one example. However, this approach is optimised 
       for TV services and is not well-suited to IP packet transmission. 
       Some other systems are specified in standards such as MPE [ETSI-
       DAT], but there are currently no known implementations. 

    6.2. Link security as a part of the Encapsulation layer  

       Examining the threat analysis in section 3 has shown that 
       protection of ULE link from eavesdropping and ULE Receiver 
       identity are major requirements.  

       There are several major advantages in using ULE link level 
     
     
    Cruickshank           Expires June 8, 2007           [Page 14] 
        
    Internet-Draft      Security Requirements for ULE     December 2006 
        

       security: 

       o The protection of the complete ULE Protocol Data Unit (PDU) 
          including IP addresses. The protection can be applied either 
          per IP flow or per Receiver NPA address.  

       o Ability to protect the identity of the Receiver within the 
          MPEG-2 transmission network.  

       o Efficient protection of IP multicast over ULE links.  

       o Transparency to the use of Network Address Translation (NATs) 
          [RFC3715] and TCP Performance Enhancing Proxies (PEP) 
          [RFC3135], which require the ability to inspect and modify the 
          packets sent over the ULE link.  

       This method does not preclude the use of IPsec at L3 (or TLS 
       [RFC4346] at L4). IPsec and TLS provide strong authentication of 
       the end-points in the communication. This authentication is 
       desirable in many scenarios to ensure that the correct 
       information is being exchanged between the trusted entities, 
       whereas Layer 2 methods cannot provide this guarantee. 

       IPsec /TLS also provides a proven security architecture defining 
       key exchange mechanisms and the ability to use a range of 
       cryptographic algorithms. ULE security can make use of these 
       established mechanisms and algorithms but the advantages are 
       distinct from those when using IPsec or TLS. 

    7. Summary 

       This document analyses a set of threats and security 
       requirements. It also defines the requirements for ULE security 
       and states the motivation for link security as a part of the 
       Encapsulation layer.   

       This includes a need to provide L2 encryption and ULE Receiver    
       identity protection. There is an optional requirement for L2 
       authentication and integrity assurance as well as protection 
       against insertion of old (duplicated) data into the ULE stream 
       (i.e. replay protection). This is optional because of the 
       associated overheads for the extra features and they are only 
       required for specific service cases 

    8. Security Considerations 

       Link-level (L2) encryption of IP traffic is commonly used in 
     
     
    Cruickshank           Expires June 8, 2007           [Page 15] 
        
    Internet-Draft      Security Requirements for ULE     December 2006 
        

       broadcast/radio links to supplement End-to-End security (e.g. 
       provided by TLS [RFC4346], SSH [RFC4251], IPsec [RFC4301). A 
       common objective is to provide the same level of privacy as wired 
       links. An ISP or User may also wish to provide end-to-end 
       security services to the end-users (based on well known 
       mechanisms such as IPsec or TLS). 

       This document provides a threat analysis and derives the security 
       requirements to provide optional link encryption and link-level 
       integrity / authentication of the SNDU payload. 

    9. IANA Considerations 

       This document does not define any protocol and does not require 
       any IANA assignments. 

    10. Acknowledgments 

       The authors acknowledge the help and advice from Gorry Fairhurst 
       (University of Aberdeen). The authors also acknowledge 
       contributions from Stephane Coombes (ESA) and Yim Fun Hu 
       (University of Bradford). 

    11. References 

    11.1. Normative References 

       [ISO-MPEG2] "Information technology -- generic coding of moving 
                   pictures and associated audio information systems, 
                   Part I", ISO 13818-1, International Standards 
                   Organisation (ISO), 2000. 

       [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key Words for Use in RFCs to Indicate 
                   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, 1997. 

    11.2. Informative References 

       [ID-AR]    G. Fairhurst, M-J Montpetit "Address Resolution 
                   Mechanisms for IP Datagrams over MPEG-2 Networks", 
                   Work in Progress <draft-ietf-ipdvb-ar-05.txt. 

       [IEEE-802.2]"Local and metropolitan area networks-Specific 
                   requirements Part 2: Logical Link Control", IEEE 
                   802.2, IEEE Computer Society, (also ISO/IEC 8802-2), 
                   1998. 


     
     
    Cruickshank           Expires June 8, 2007           [Page 16] 
        
    Internet-Draft      Security Requirements for ULE     December 2006 
        

       [ISO-8802-2]ISO/IEC 8802.2, "Logical Link Control", International 
                   Standards Organisation (ISO), 1998. 

       [ITU-H222] H.222.0, "Information technology, Generic coding of 
                   moving pictures and associated audio information 
                   Systems", International Telecommunication Union, 
                   (ITU-T), 1995. 

       [RFC4259]  Montpetit, M.-J., Fairhurst, G., Clausen, H., 
                   Collini-Nocker, B., and H. Linder, "A Framework for 
                   Transmission of IP Datagrams over MPEG-2 Networks", 
                   IETF RFC 4259, November 2005. 

       [RFC4326]  Fairhurst, G. and B. Collini-Nocker, "Unidirectional 
                   Lightweight Encapsulation (ULE) for Transmission of 
                   IP Datagrams over an MPEG-2 Transport Stream (TS)", 
                   IETF RFC 4326, December 2005. 

       [ETSI-DAT] EN 301 192, "Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); DVB 
                   Specifications for Data Broadcasting", European 
                   Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI). 

       [BELLOVIN]  S.Bellovin, "Problem Area for the IP Security 
                   protocols", Computer Communications Review 2:19, pp. 
                   32-48, April 989. http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~smb/ 

       [RFC4082]  A. Perrig, D. Song, " Timed Efficient Stream Loss-
                   Tolerant Authentication (TESLA): Multicast Source 
                   Authentication Transform Introduction", IETF RFC 
                   4082, June 2005. 

       [RFC4535]  H Harney, et al, "GSAKMP: Group Secure Association 
                   Group Management Protocol", IETF RFc 4535, June 2006. 

       [RFC3547]  M. Baugher, et al, "GDOI: The Group Domain of 
                   Interpretation", IETF RFC 3547.   

       [WEIS06]   Weis B., et al, "Multicast Extensions to the Security 
                   Architecture for the Internet", <draft-ietf-msec-
                   ipsec-extensions-02.txt>, June 2006, IETF Work in 
                   Progress.   

       [RFC3715]  B. Aboba and W Dixson, "IPsec-Network Address 
                   Translation (NAT) Compatibility Requirements" IETF 
                   RFC 3715, March 2004.  


     
     
    Cruickshank           Expires June 8, 2007           [Page 17] 
        
    Internet-Draft      Security Requirements for ULE     December 2006 
        

       [RFC4346]  T. Dierks, E. Rescorla, "The Transport Layer Security 
                   (TLS) Protocol Version 1.1", IETF RFC 4346, April 
                   2006. 

       [RFC3135]  J. Border, M. Kojo, eyt. al., "Performance Enhancing 
                   Proxies Intended to Mitigate Link-Related 
                   Degradations", IETF RFC 3135, June 2001.   

       [RFC4301]  Kent, S. and Seo K., "Security Architecture for the 
                   Internet Protocol", IETF RFC 4301, December 2006. 

       [RFC3819]  Karn, P., Bormann, C., Fairhurst, G., Grossman, D., 
                   Ludwig, R., Mahdavi, J., Montenegro, G., Touch, J., 
                   and L. Wood, "Advice for Internet Subnetwork 
                   Designers", BCP 89, IETF RFC 3819, July 2004. 

       [RFC4251]  T. Ylonen, C. Lonvick, Ed., "The Secure Shell (SSH) 
                   Protocol Architecture", IETF RFC 4251, January 2006. 

       [ID-EF]    G. Fairhurst " Extension Formats for the ULE 
                   Encapsulation to support the Generic Stream 
                   Encapsulation (GSE)", Work in Progress < draft-
                   fairhurst-ipdvb-ule-ext-00.txt>. 

        

    Author's Addresses 

       Haitham Cruickshank    
       Centre for Communications System Research (CCSR)    
       University of Surrey   
       Guildford, Surrey, GU2 7XH    
       UK    
       Email: h.cruickshank@surrey.ac.uk    
         
       Sunil Iyengar    
       Centre for Communications System Research (CCSR)    
       University of Surrey   
       Guildford, Surrey, GU2 7XH    
       UK    
       Email: S.Iyengar@surrey.ac.uk    
         
       Laurence Duquerroy    
       Research Department/Advanced Telecom Satellite Systems   
       Alcatel Space, Toulouse   
       France   
       E-Mail: Laurence.Duquerroy@space.alcatel.fr 
     
     
    Cruickshank           Expires June 8, 2007           [Page 18] 
        
    Internet-Draft      Security Requirements for ULE     December 2006 
        

        
       Prashant Pillai    
       Mobile and Satellite Communications Research Centre 
       School of Engineering, Design and Technology 
       University of Bradford   
       Richmond Road, Bradford BD7 1DP    
       UK    
       Email: P.Pillai@bradford.ac.uk 
        

    Intellectual Property Statement 

       The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
       Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be 
       claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology 
       described in this document or the extent to which any license 
       under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it 
       represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any 
       such rights.  Information on the procedures with respect to 
       rights in RFC documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

       Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
       assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
       attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the 
       use of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
       specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR 
       repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

       The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention 
       any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other 
       proprietary rights that may cover technology that may be required 
       to implement this standard.  Please address the information to 
       the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

    Disclaimer of Validity 

       This document and the information contained herein are provided 
       on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
       REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
       IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
       WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
       WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
       ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR 
       FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

    Copyright Statement 

     
     
    Cruickshank           Expires June 8, 2007           [Page 19] 
        
    Internet-Draft      Security Requirements for ULE     December 2006 
        

       Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2006). 

       This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
       contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
       retain all their rights. 

       >>> NOTE to RFC Editor: Please remove this appendix prior to 
       publication]  
            
       Document History   
            
       WG-ID-00 

       o This draft is intended as a study item for proposed future 
          work by the IETF in this area. 

       o Major security concerns from Steve Bellovin who also agreed 
          that Layer 2 Address hiding is a necessary security service. 

       o Motivation for security over ULE was not clear (Joerg Ott) 

       o Not sure where this was leading for Non -IP traffic and key 
          management (Margaret Wasserman). 

       o It was recommended that a separate requirements draft was 
          first needed before suggesting any solutions (Bellovin) 

       Issues to be resolved in next revision (01): 

       o Title change (inserted "security requirements " rather than 
          "security extension") 

       o Separate security requirements draft 

       o Threat Analysis    

       WG-ID-01 

       o Load of discussion on the mailing lists regarding signalling 
          traffic security and the threats involved (Gorry, Montpetit 
          and Art) 

       o Benefits of IPSec over ULE as well as the fact the document 
          was not easy to read (Gerrard Gessler and Wolfgang Fritche) 

       o What were the benefits of NPA protection? 

     
     
    Cruickshank           Expires June 8, 2007           [Page 20] 
        
    Internet-Draft      Security Requirements for ULE     December 2006 
        

       o Threats in broadcast networks was raised by Gorry 

       Issues to be resolved in next revision (02): 

       o Add section 3 on threats 

       o Address Signalling threats 

       o Make the document easy to read 

       WG-ID-02 

       o Merged draft with the one proposed by Prashant and included 
          him as an author. 

       o Define the threat scenarios and the security requirement for 
          these scenarios. 

       o English fixed 

       Issues to be resolved in next revision (03):  

       o Include subsection 3.1 Threat Scenarios and the requirements 
          for these scenarios 

       o English Fixed 

       WG-ID-03 

       o Major comments and suggestions (Michael Noistering) regarding 
          authentication and integrity assurance. He also suggested that 
          the threat scenarios (section 3.2) should be expanded. 

       o Elaborate the impact of threats for IP as opposed to Layer 2 
          (Gorry Fairhurst) 

       Issues to be resolved in next revision (04):  

       o Expanded the threat scenarios. 

       o Algorithm Agility added as a requirement (gorry) 

       o Nits have been taken care of and addressed. 

       o English Fixed 

       WG-ID-04 
     
     
    Cruickshank           Expires June 8, 2007           [Page 21] 
        
    Internet-Draft      Security Requirements for ULE     December 2006 
        

       o Minor comment from Michael regarding replay protection 

       o Minor comments form Gorry. 

       Issues to be resolved in next revision (05):  

       o Nits have been taken care of and addressed. 

       o English Fixed 

       [>>> NOTE to RFC Editor: End of appendix]  

        

































     
     
    Cruickshank           Expires June 8, 2007           [Page 22] 
        
