


Network Working Group                                             Y. Lee
Internet-Draft                                 Huawei Technologies (USA)
Intended status: Standards Track                                 D. King
Expires: April 14, 2007                                    Aria Networks
                                                                  E. Oki
                                                                     NTT
                                                        October 11, 2006


Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCECP) Requirements for
               Support of Global Concurrent Optimization
          draft-lee-pce-global-concurrent-optimization-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 14, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).










Lee, et al.              Expires April 14, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     PCE Global Concurrent Optimization       October 2006


Abstract

   The Path Computation Element (PCE) is a network component,
   application, or node that is capable of performing path computations
   at the request of Path Computation Clients (PCCs).  The PCE is
   applied in Multiprotocol Label Switching Traffic Engineering
   (MPLS-TE) networks and in Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) networks to
   determine the routes of Label Switched Paths (LSPs) through the
   network.

   The Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCECP) is
   specified for communications between PCCs and PCEs, and between
   cooperating PCEs.  This document provides application-specific
   requirements for the PCECP in support of a large-scale concurrent
   path computation application.


Table of Contents

   1.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Applicability for Global Concurrent Path Computation . . . . .  6
     3.1.  Greenfield Traffic Engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  Re-optimization of Existing Networks . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       3.2.1.  Traffic Migration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.3.  Multi-layer Traffic Engineering  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.4.  Reconfiguration of the Virtual Network Topology (VNT)  . .  7
     3.5.  The PCE Application Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  PCECP Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 17














Lee, et al.              Expires April 14, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     PCE Global Concurrent Optimization       October 2006


1.  Terminology

   The terminology explained herein complies with [RFC4655].

   PCC: Path Computation Client: Any client application requesting a
   path computation to be performed by a Path Computation Element.

   PCE: Path Computation Element: An entity (component, application or
   network node) that is capable of computing a network path or route
   based on a network graph and applying computational constraints.

   TED: Traffic Engineering Database which contains the topology and
   resource information of the domain.  The TED may be fed by IGP
   extensions or potentially by other means.

   PCECP: The PCE Communications Protocol that is used to communicate
   path computation requests from PCCs to a PCE, and to return computed
   paths from the PCE to the PCCs.  The PCECP can also be used between
   cooperating PCEs.

   Although this is not a protocol specification, the key words "MUST",
   "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
   "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be
   interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119] for clarity of
   specification of requirements.


























Lee, et al.              Expires April 14, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     PCE Global Concurrent Optimization       October 2006


2.  Introduction

   [RFC4655] defines the PCE Architecture and explains how a PCE may
   compute the paths of Multiprotocol Label Switching Traffic
   Engineering (MPLS-TE) and Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) Label Switched
   Paths (LSPs) at the request of PCCs.  A PCC is shown to be any
   network component that makes such a request and may be a Label
   Switching Router (LSR) or a Network Management Station (NMS).  The
   PCE, itself, is shown to be located anywhere within the network, and
   may be within an LSR, an NMS or Operational Support System (OSS), or
   may be an independent network server.

   The PCECP is the communications protocol used between PCC and PCE,
   and may also be used between cooperating PCEs.  [RFC4657] sets out
   the common protocol requirements for the PCECP.  Additional
   application-specific requirements for PCECP are deferred to separate
   documents.

   This document provides the PCECP extension requirements in support of
   a large-scale concurrent path computation application that may arise
   during network operations.  A large-scale concurrent path computation
   is a path computation application where a large number of TE paths
   need to be computed concurrently in order to efficiently utilize
   network resources.  The computation method involved with a large-
   scale concurrent path computation is referred to as global concurrent
   optimization in this document.  Appropriate computation algorithms to
   perform this type of optimization are out of scope of this document.

   As new LSPs are added sequentially or removed from the network over
   time, the global network resources become fragmented and the network
   no longer provides the optimal use of the available capacity.  A
   large-scale global concurrent path computation would be able to
   simultaneously consider the entire topology of the network and the
   complete set of existing LSPs, and their respective constraints, and
   look to re-optimize the entire network to satisfy all constraints for
   all LSPs.

   The need for large-scale concurrent path computation may also arise
   when network operators need to set up a large number of TE LSPs in
   their network planning process.  All large-scale path computation is
   typically an off-line computation.  This document does not exclude
   the possibility that network operators might require on-line
   computation for large-scale concurrent path computation in the event
   of catastrophic network failures, where large numbers of TE LSPs need
   to be optimally rerouted in real-time.

   The off-line computation requirements to support a large number of TE
   LSPs are quite different from on-line path computation requirements.



Lee, et al.              Expires April 14, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     PCE Global Concurrent Optimization       October 2006


   While on-line path computation is focused on finding a single best
   path in a timely manner given the prevailing network conditions, a
   large-scale off-line path computation application involves finding
   paths for a large number of TE LSPs concurrently to meet a global
   objective.  While off-line computation may not require such stringent
   time constraints as on-line path computation, the key objective
   associated with large-scale off-line computation is to efficiently
   allocate network resources from a global network perspective.  While
   on-line path computation is tactical, off-line large-scale path
   computation is strategic.

   As the PCE is envisioned to provide solutions in all path computation
   matters, it is anticipated that the PCE would provide solutions for
   large-scale global concurrent path computation needs.

   Specific algorithms that the PCE may employ are beyond the scope of
   this document.  The main focus of this document is to highlight the
   PCC-PCE communication needs in support of a large-scale concurrent
   path computation application.

   The PCE-PCC requirements addressed herein are specific to the context
   where the PCE is a specialized PCE that is capable of solving large-
   scale concurrent path computation applications.  Discovery of such
   capabilities might be desirable and could be achieved through
   extensions to the PCE discovery mechanisms [PCE-DISCO], but that is
   out of the scope of this document.

























Lee, et al.              Expires April 14, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     PCE Global Concurrent Optimization       October 2006



3.  Applicability for Global Concurrent Path Computation

   This section discusses scenarios for which global concurrent path
   computation may be applied.  It also discusses how these scenarios
   apply to the PCE architecture.

3.1.  Greenfield Traffic Engineering

   When a new TE network needs to be provisioned from a green-field
   perspective, large numbers of TE LSPs need to be created based on
   traffic demand, network topology, service constraints, and network
   resources.  Under this scenario, concurrent computation ability is
   highly desirable, or required, to utilize network resources in an
   optimal manner.  Sequential path computation could potentially result
   in sub-optimal use of network resources.

3.2.  Re-optimization of Existing Networks

   The need for global concurrent path computation may also arise in
   existing networks.  When an existing TE LSP network experiences sub-
   optimal use of its resources, the need for re-optimization or
   reconfiguration may arise.  The scope of re-optimization and
   reconfiguration may vary depending on particular situations.  The
   scope of re-optimization may be limited to bandwidth modification to
   an existing TE LSP.  However, it could well be that a large number of
   TE LSPs may need to be re-optimized concurrently.  In an extreme
   case, the TE LSPs may need to be globally re-optimized.  Note that
   sequential re-optimization of such TE LSPs is unlikely to produce
   substantial improvements in overall network optimization except in
   very sparsely utilized networks.

3.2.1.  Traffic Migration

   When migrating from one set of TE LSPs to a reoptimized set of TE
   LSPs it is important that the traffic be moved without causing
   disruption.  Various techniques exist in MPLS and GMPLS, such as make
   before break [RFC3209], to establish the new LSPs before tearing down
   the old LSPs.  When multiple LSP routes are changed according to the
   computed results, some of LSPs may be disrupted due to the resource
   constraints.  Make-before-break action can be considered.  PCE may be
   able to give NMS the orders of LSP rerouting action so that make-
   before-break can be performed within the limited resources.

   However, it may be the case that the reoptimization is radical.  This
   could mean that it is not possible to apply make before break in
   order to migrate from the old LSPs to the new LSPs.  In this case a
   migration strategy is required.  A PCE might indicate the order in
   which reoptimized LSPs must be established and take over from the old



Lee, et al.              Expires April 14, 2007                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     PCE Global Concurrent Optimization       October 2006


   LSP, or the PCE might perform the global reoptimization as a series
   of sub-reoptimizations.

3.3.  Multi-layer Traffic Engineering

   When an optical transport layer provides lower-layer traffic
   engineered LSPs for upper-layer client LSPs via the Hierarchical LSP
   (H-LSP) mechanism, the operator may desire to pre-establish optical
   LSPs in the optical transport network [MLN-REQ], this whole
   multilayer network can be managed using PCE [PCE-MLN].  In this
   scenario, it is anticipated that a large number of H-LSPs would be
   created concurrently in such a way as to efficiently utilize network
   resources in the lower-layer network.  Again, concurrent path
   computation capability would result in more efficient network
   resource utilization than sequential path computation.

3.4.  Reconfiguration of the Virtual Network Topology (VNT)

   A set of one or more of lower-layer LSPs providing information for
   efficient path handling in upper-layer(s) can be described as a
   virtual network topology (VNT)[MLN-REQ].

   Reconfiguration of the VNT [MLN-REQ] is another application scenario
   where global concurrent path computation may be applicable.  Triggers
   for VNT reconfiguration, such as traffic demand changes, network
   failures, and topological configuration changes, may require a large
   set of existing LSPs to be re-computed.  Again, concurrent path
   computation capability would result in more efficient network
   resource utilization than sequential path computation.

3.5.  The PCE Application Architecture

   Figure 1 shows how the aforementioned functionality applies to the
   PCE architecture.  It must be observed that the PCC is not
   necessarily an LSR [RFC4655].  Although Figure 1 shows the PCE as
   remote from the NMS, it might be collocated with the NMS.

   Upon receipt of an application request (e.g., traffic demand matrix
   is provided to the NMS by operator's planning procedure), the NMS
   requests a global concurrent path computation to the PCE.  The PCE
   would then compute the requested paths concurrently applying some
   algorithm(s).  When the requested path computation completes, the PCE
   would then send the resulting paths back to the NMS.  The NMS would
   supply the the head-end LSR with a fully computed explicit path for
   each TE LSP that needs to be established.






Lee, et al.              Expires April 14, 2007                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     PCE Global Concurrent Optimization       October 2006


                                        -----------
                 Application           |   -----   |
                   Request             |  | TED |  |
                      |                |   -----   |
                      v                |     |     |
                ------------- Request/ |     v     |
               |             | Response|   -----   |
               |     NMS     |<--------+> | PCE |  |
               |             |         |   -----   |
                -------------           -----------
              Service |
              Request |
                      v
                 ----------  Signaling   ----------
                | Head-End | Protocol   | Adjacent |
                |  Node    |<---------->|   Node   |
                 ----------              ----------




                             Figure 1





























Lee, et al.              Expires April 14, 2007                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     PCE Global Concurrent Optimization       October 2006


4.  PCECP Requirements

   This section provides the PCECP requirements in support of a large-
   scale concurrent path computation application.  The requirements
   specified herein should be regarded as application-specific
   requirements and are justifiable based on the extensibility clause
   found in section 6.1.14 of [RFC4657]:

   The PCECP MUST support the requirements specified in the application-
   specific requirements documents.  The PCECP MUST also allow
   extensions as more PCE applications will be introduced in the future.

   It is also to be noted that some of the requirements discussed in
   this section have discussed in the PCECP requirement document
   [RFC4657].  For example, Section 5.1.16 in [RFC4657] provides a list
   of generic constraints while Section 5.1.17 in [RFC4657] provides a
   list of generic objective functions that MUST be supported by the
   PCECP.  While using such generic requirements as the baseline, this
   section provides application-specific requirements in the context of
   global concurrent path computation.

   The PCECP SHOULD support the following capabilities either via
   creation of new objects and/or modification of existing objects where
   applicable.

   o  An indicator to convey that the request is a global concurrent
      path computation.  This indicator is necessary to ensure
      consistency in applying global objectives and global constraints
      in all path computations.

   o  Global Objective Function (GOF) field in which to specify the
      global objective function.  The global objective function is the
      overarching objective function to which all individual path
      computation requests are subjected in order to find a globally
      optimal solution.  A list of available global objective functions
      SHOULD include the following objective functions at the minimum
      and SHOULD be expandable for future addition:

      *  Minimize the sum of all TE LSP costs (min cost)

      *  Minimize the most utilized TE LSP (min max utilization)

   o  Global Constraints (GC) field in which to specify the list of
      global constraints to which all the requested path computations
      should be subjected.  This list SHOULD include the following
      constraints at the minimum and SHOULD be expandable for future
      addition:




Lee, et al.              Expires April 14, 2007                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft     PCE Global Concurrent Optimization       October 2006


      *  Maximum link utilization parameter indicators for all links
         (Note: to avoid floating point number, indicators may be
         integer values that indicate maximum link utilization to which
         all links should be subjected.  Granularity and other details
         are subject to further study)

      *  Minimum link utilization parameter indicators for all links
         (Note: same as above)

      *  Maximum number of hops for all the LSPs

      *  Exclusion of links/nodes in all LSP path computation (i.e., All
         LSPs should not include the specified links/nodes in the path)

      *  An indication should be available in a path computation
         response that further reoptimization may only become available
         once existing traffic has been moved to the new LSPs.

      *  A list of existing or known TE LSPs should be kept intact
         without any modification, i.e.  LSPs that are not subject to
         reoptimization computation.  This capability would be useful in
         minimizing disruption when a global reconfiguration may need to
         takes place.

   o  Global Concurrent Vector (GCV) field in which to specify all the
      individual path computation requests that are subject to
      concurrent path computation and subject to the global objective
      function and all of the global constraints.

   o  An indicator field in which to indicate the outcome of the
      request.  When the PCE could not find a feasible solution with the
      initial request, the reason for infeasibility SHOULD be indicated.
      The following indicators SHOULD be supported at the minimum:

      *  no feasible solution found

      *  memory overflow

      *  PCE too busy

      *  PCE not capable of concurrent reoptimization

      *  no data migration path available

      *  administrative privileges do not allow global reoptimization






Lee, et al.              Expires April 14, 2007                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft     PCE Global Concurrent Optimization       October 2006


   o  Multi-Session Indicator field in the case where the original
      request is sub-divided into multiple sessions.  This case may
      arise when the reason for infeasibility of the original request is
      due to mathematically infeasible, or due to memory overflow, the
      PCC may follow up with subsequent actions under a local policy.
      The PCC may decide to scale down the original request into several
      sessions and make requests to the PCE in several sessions.  The
      reason for this is to find a partial feasible solution in the
      absence of optimal solution.

      *  Multi-Session Indicator

      *  The list of existing TE LSPs that should be kept without any
         modification.  Note that this may be indicated in the
         aforementioned Global Constraints (GC) field.  During multiple
         sessions of path computation, the successfully computed paths
         from the PCE to the PCC in a session should be indicated as the
         constraint (i.e., as the TE LSPs that should be kept) in the
         next session computation by the PCE so that the PCE may avoid
         double booking.  If the PCE is stateless PCE, this indication
         is essential.






























Lee, et al.              Expires April 14, 2007                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft     PCE Global Concurrent Optimization       October 2006


5.  Security Considerations

   When global re-optimization is applied to an active network, it could
   be extremely disruptive.  Although the real security and policy
   issues apply at the NMS, if the wrong results are returned to the
   NMS, the wrong actions may be taken in the network.  Therefore, it is
   very important that the operator issuing the commands has sufficient
   authority and is authenticated, and that the computation request is
   subject to appropriate policy.










































Lee, et al.              Expires April 14, 2007                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft     PCE Global Concurrent Optimization       October 2006


6.  Acknowledgements

   We would like to thank Adrian Farrel, Jerry Ash and Lucy Yong for
   their useful comments and suggestions.















































Lee, et al.              Expires April 14, 2007                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft     PCE Global Concurrent Optimization       October 2006


7.  IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA actions requested in this specification.
















































Lee, et al.              Expires April 14, 2007                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft     PCE Global Concurrent Optimization       October 2006


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3209]  Awduche, D., Berger, L., Gan, D., Li, T., Srinivasan, V.,
              and G. Swallow, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP
              Tunnels", RFC 3209, December 2001.

   [RFC4655]  Farrel, A., Vasseur, J., and J. Ash, "A Path Computation
              Element (PCE)-Based Architecture", RFC 4655, August 2006.

   [RFC4657]  Ash, J. and J. Le Roux, "Path Computation Element (PCE)
              Communication Protocol Generic Requirements", RFC 4657,
              September 2006.

8.2.  Informative References

   [MLN-REQ]  Shiomoto, K., Ed., "Requirements for GMPLS-based multi-
              region and multi-layer networks (MRN/MLN)",
              draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-mln-reqs, work in progress.

   [PCE-DISCO]
              Le Roux, J., "Requirements for Path Computation Element
              (PCE) Discovery", draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs, work in
              progress.

   [PCE-MLN]  Oki, E., Le Roux, J., and A. Farrel, "Framework for PCE-
              based inter-layer  MPLS and GMPL traffic engineering",
              draft-ietf-pce-inter-layer-frwk, work in progress.



















Lee, et al.              Expires April 14, 2007                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft     PCE Global Concurrent Optimization       October 2006


Authors' Addresses

   Young Lee
   Huawei Technologies (USA)
   1700 Alma Drive, Suite 100
   Plano, TX  75075
   US

   Phone: +1 972 509 5599 x2240
   Fax:   +1 469 229 5397
   Email: ylee@huawei.com


   Daniel King
   Aria Networks
   44/45 Market Place
   Chippenham  SN15 3HU
   United Kingdom

   Phone: +44 7790 775187
   Fax:   +44 1249 446530
   Email: daniel.king@aria-networks.com


   Eiji Oki
   NTT
   Midori 3-9-11
   Musashino, Tokyo  180-8585
   JAPAN

   Email: oki.eiji@lab.ntt.co.jp




















Lee, et al.              Expires April 14, 2007                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft     PCE Global Concurrent Optimization       October 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).


   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Lee, et al.              Expires April 14, 2007                [Page 17]


