
   ENUM Working Group                                                J. Yu 
   Internet Draft                                                  NeuStar 
   Document: draft-yu-enumservice-sms-smpp-01.txt               April 2008 
   Category: Standards Track                                               
    
    
                  RFC 4355 Update for Enumservice "sms:smpp"  
                    and IANA Registration for "smpp:" URI 
                     draft-yu-enumservice-sms-smpp-01.txt 
    
   Status of this Memo 
    
      By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any   
      applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware   
      have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes   
      aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
       
      Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering   
      Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that   
      other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-   
      Drafts. 
       
      Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
      months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
      at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
      reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
       
      The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at   
      http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
       
      The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at   
      http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
       
      This Internet-Draft will expire on October 14, 2008. 
       
      Copyright Notice 
       
         Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 
       
       
   Abstract 
       
      This document updates RFC 4355 by registering a new enumservice 
      subtype "smpp" under the existing type "sms" using the URI scheme 
      "smpp" as per the IANA registration process defined in RFC 3761 and 
      draft-ietf-enum-enumservices-guide-07 and registers a new URI type 
      "smpp" according to the URI registration procedure in RFC 4395. 
       
      This enumservice subtype indicates that the remote resource 
      identified by the URI scheme can receive short messages using the 
      Short Message Peer-to-Peer Protocol (SMPP). 
       


     
   Yu             Standards Track - Expires October 14, 2008           1 

                  RFC 4355 Update for Enumservice "sms:smpp"    April 2008   
                     and IANA Registration for "smpp:" URI 
    
   Table of Contents 
    
      1.   Conventions Used in this Document  . . . . . . . . . . . .  2 
      2.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2 
      3.   Abbreviations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3 
      4.   Formal Syntax  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4 
      5.   Use of "smpp:" URI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4 
      6.   Example  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6 
      7.   Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6 
      8.   IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6 
      8.1  IANA Enumservice Registration for "smpp" . . . . . . . . .  7 
      8.2  IANA Registration Information for "smpp:" URI  . . . . . .  8 
      9.   References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9 
      9.1  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9 
      9.2  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 
      10.  Change History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 
      10.1 Changes from Version 00  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 
    
    
   1. Conventions Used in this Document 
       
      The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
      "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
      document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, RFC 2119 [1]. 
       
       
   2. Introduction 
       
      ENUM (E.164 Number Mapping) [2] is a system that transforms 
      E.164 [3] telephone numbers into domain names and then uses 
      the Domain Name System (DNS) [4] and Naming Authority Pointer 
      (NAPTR) [5] resource records to query for the services or 
      resources that are available for a specific domain name.  
       
      This document updates RFC 4355 [6] by registering a new enumservice 
      subtype "smpp" under the existing type "sms" using the URI scheme 
      "smpp" as per the IANA registration process defined in RFC 3761 [2] 
      and draft-ietf-enum-enumservices-guide-07 [7] and registers a new 
      URI type "smpp" according to the URI registration procedure in RFC 
      4395 [8]. 
       
      This enumservice subtype indicates that the remote resource 
      identified by the URI scheme can receive short messages using the 
      Short Message Peer-to-Peer Protocol (SMPP) [9]. 
          
      The purpose of the registered enumservice subtype and URI 
      scheme is to enable service providers to exchange the short 
      message traffic over IP using the widely supported SMPP.  
        
      SMPP sessions can be established over TCP/IP or X.25 connections.  
      This document discusses only the TCP/IP case.  Several radio access 
     
   Yu             Standards Track - Expires October 14, 2008           2 
                  RFC 4355 Update for Enumservice "sms:smpp"    April 2008   
                     and IANA Registration for "smpp:" URI 
    
      technologies are used by the mobile networks worldwide, the way the 
      Global system for Mobile Communications (GSM) systems handle the 
      short message delivery [10,11] is used in this document to simplify 
      the discussions.   
       
      For a mobile-originated short message, the Mobile-services 
      Switching Center (MSC) or Serving GPRS Support Node (SGSN) that 
      serves the sender submits the short message to the Service Center 
      (SC) in the sender's home network via the Interworking MSC for 
      Short Message Service (SMS-IWMSC).  A successful short message 
      delivery to a mobile user involves the SC and Gateway MSC for Short 
      Message Service (SMS-GMSC) in the sender's home network that 
      queries the Home Location Register (HLR) in the receiver's home 
      network via Signaling System Number 7 (SS7) to retrieve information 
      about the MSC and/or SGSN that currently serve(s) the receiver 
      followed by the short message delivery to the MSC or SGSN via SS7.  
      This document uses the Short Message Service Center (SMSC) to avoid 
      mentioning the SMS-GMSC, SMS-IWMSC and SC to simplify the 
      discussions. 
       
       
   3. Abbreviations 
       
      3GPP      3rd Generation Partnership Project 
      BNF       Backus-Naur Form 
      DNS       Domain Name System 
      GPRS      General Packet Radio Service 
      GSM       Global System for Mobile communications 
      GW        Gateway 
      HLR       Home Location Register 
      ID        Identifier; Identity 
      IM        Immediate Messaging; Instant Messaging 
      ITU-T     International Telecommunication Union-Telecommunication 
      MNP       Mobile Number Portability 
      MSC       Mobile-services Switching Center 
      NAPTR     Naming Authority Pointer 
      SC        Service Center 
      SGSN      Serving GPRS Support Node 
      SMPP      Short Message Peer-to-Peer Protocol 
      SMS       Short Message Service 
      SMS-GMSC  Gateway MSC for SMS 
      SMS-IWMSC Interworking MSC for SMS 
      SMSC      Short Message Service Center 
      SS7       Signaling System Number 7 
      URI       Uniform Resource Identifier 
      VPN       Virtual Private Network 
       
    
    
    
     
   Yu             Standards Track - Expires October 14, 2008           3 

                  RFC 4355 Update for Enumservice "sms:smpp"    April 2008   
                     and IANA Registration for "smpp:" URI 
    
   4. Formal Syntax 
       
      RFC 4355 [6] allows subtypes be defined under the type "sms".  This 
      document proposes a new subtype "smpp" so the enumservice value is 
      "sms:smpp". 
       
      The syntax specification using the augmented Backus-Naur Form (BNF) 
      as described in RFC 2234 [12] for the "smpp:" URI can be found in 
      Section 8.2. 
       
    
   5. Use of "smpp:" URI 
       
      There are at least five cases where some network entities in the 
      mobile networks that deal with short message submission or delivery 
      may want to retrieve the "smpp:" URI via ENUM queries so as to 
      deliver the short messages via SMPP/IP instead of SS7. 
         
      a. An SMS hub provider that receives a short message from the 
        originating network can send an ENUM query to retrieve the 
        "smpp:" URI for the destination mobile telephone number.   If 
        the destination mobile telephone number is served by a mobile 
        operator (identified by the information in the host part of the 
        URI) that uses this SMS hub provider's service, the SMS hub 
        provider can use the information in the "smpp:" URI to terminate 
        the short message via SMPP/IP.   If the destination mobile 
        telephone number is served by a mobile operator that does not 
        use this SMS hub provider's service, the SMS hub provider simply 
        forwards the short message to the SMS hub provider that can 
        reach the destination mobile operator. 
       
      b. The SMSC in the sender's home network that receives a short 
        message from the sender can send an ENUM query to see if the 
        home operator that serves the destination mobile telephone 
        number has an SMS Gateway (GW) (e.g., SMS Router [13] or IP-SM-
        GW in [14,15,16]) that can receive all the mobile-terminated 
        short messages via SMPP/IP.  If the "smpp:" URI is found and 
        SMPP sessions with the remote resource are allowed, the short 
        message is delivered to the SMS Gateway via SMPP/IP.  Otherwise, 
        the SMSC handles the short message as is done today except that 
        it may send the ENUM query as is described in case #c after it 
        receives the positive response from the HLR. 
       
      c. The SMSC in the sender's home network that has queried the HLR 
        associated with the destination mobile telephone number and 
        received the E.164 number associated with the MSC and/or SGSN 
        that currently serve(s) the destination mobile telephone number 
        can send an ENUM query to see if the MSC or SGSN can receive the 
     
   Yu             Standards Track - Expires October 14, 2008           4 
                  RFC 4355 Update for Enumservice "sms:smpp"    April 2008   
                     and IANA Registration for "smpp:" URI 
    
        short messages via SMPP/IP.  If the "smpp:" URI is found and 
        SMPP sessions with the remote resource are allowed, the short 
        message is delivered via SMPP/IP.  Otherwise, the short message 
        is delivered via SS7. 
       
      d. The SMS GW mentioned in case #b above that receives an incoming 
        short message via SS7 or IP and wants to send the short message 
        to the MSC or SGSN that currently serves the destination mobile 
        telephone number can send an ENUM query to see if that MSC or 
        SGSN can receive the short messages via SMPP/IP.  If the "smpp:" 
        URI is found and SMPP sessions with the remote resource are 
        allowed, the short message is delivered via SMPP/IP.  Otherwise, 
        the short message is delivered via SS7.  Certainly, the SMS GW 
        can deliver the message via IP if the destination device 
        supports the capabilities specified in [14,15,16].  
       
      e. The MSC or SGSN serving the sender can use the E.164 number 
        associated with the sender's home SMSC to send an ENUM query to 
        see if that SMSC can receive short messages via SMPP/IP.  If the 
        "smpp:" URI is found and SMPP sessions with the remote resource 
        are allowed, the short message is delivered via SMPP/IP.  
        Otherwise, the short message is delivered via SS7. 
    
      ENUM queries may not be needed for countries that do not support 
      mobile number portability (MNP) because the prefix of the 
      destination mobile telephone number or the E.164 numbers associated 
      with the MSC, SGSN and SMSC and locally provisioned data may be 
      sufficient to identify the remote entity/resource and whether the 
      remote entity/resource supports SMPP/IP.  When the destination 
      mobile telephone number is subject to MNP and ENUM provides MNP-
      corrected responses, the querier can use ENUM query to see if the 
      response contains the "smpp:" URI. 
       
      For the five cases above, case #a is the most likely case to happen 
      because the SMS hub providers currently use SMPP to communicate 
      with the originating SMSC, with each other, and/or with the 
      destination SMS GW.  But they currently use local or remote 
      databases and/or other operator-specific information to identify 
      the destination operator and the destination SMS GW. 
       
      More and more operators may deploy the SMS GWs to receive all 
      incoming mobile-terminated short messages for reasons stated in 
      [13] or for delivering the message over IP [14,15,16].  When that 
      happens, more SMSCs may send ENUM queries to see if they can 
      retrieve the "smpp:" URI in the ENUM responses so as to deliver the 
      short messages via SMPP/IP without querying the HLR and delivering 

     
   Yu             Standards Track - Expires October 14, 2008           5 
                  RFC 4355 Update for Enumservice "sms:smpp"    April 2008   
                     and IANA Registration for "smpp:" URI 
    
      the short messages via SS7.  [14,15,16] discuss and specify how 
      short messages can be delivered to the terminating device over IP 
      when the terminating devices support SMS over IP or Immediate 
      Messaging (IM) after the SMS GW (e.g., IP-SM-GW) receives the short 
      messages from the SMSCs over SS7.  Since the SMSCs are more likely 
      to support SMPP rather than Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [17], 
      the SMS GW can advertise its ability to receive short messages over 
      SMPP/IP via ENUM.  Using SIP to receive the short messages from the 
      SMSCs at the SMS GW that can deliver the messages via SIP is 
      outside the scope of this document. 
       
      Cases #c, #d and #e may happen when many MSCs and SGSNs support 
      SMPP/IP. 
       
      An SMPP message is acknowledged immediately when received; 
      therefore, the SMPP mechanism that requests for notification on 
      actual message delivery should be used so as not to impact the 
      message delivery status reporting mechanism that is available when 
      the short message is delivered via SS7. 
         
    
   6. Example 
       
      $ORIGIN 4.3.2.1.4.3.4.1.7.5.1.e164enum.net. 
          NAPTR 10 100 "u" "E2U+sms:smpp" 
               "!^.*!smpp:smsgw1.mnoX.3gppnetwork.org!" . 
       
      In this example, a "smpp:" URI is returned in the ENUM response.  
      The querying node, if supporting SMPP and having established 
      business relationship and prior exchange of security information 
      (e.g., system ID and password for SMPP session setup) for sending 
      the short messages via SMPP with the remote domain, can retrieve the 
      IP address for "smsgw1.mnoX.3gppnetwork.org" via DNS, establish the 
      SMPP session over TCP/IP if not yet established, and send the short 
      message via SMPP to that IP address.  
       
       
   7. Security Considerations 
    
      Please see the discussions on security considerations for the 
      Enumservice "sms:smpp" and "smpp:" URI in Sections 8.1 and 8.2 
      respectively.   
       
       
   8. IANA Considerations 
       
      This document registers the "smpp" Enumservice using the subtype  
      "smpp" under the existing type "sms" in the Enumservice registry 
      described in the IANA considerations in RFC 3761 [2] and draft-ietf-

     
   Yu             Standards Track - Expires October 14, 2008           6 
                  RFC 4355 Update for Enumservice "sms:smpp"    April 2008   
                     and IANA Registration for "smpp:" URI 
    
      enum-enumservices-guide-07 [6].   This document also registers with 
      the IANA the "smpp:" URI per RFC 4395 [8].  Details of the two 
      registrations can be found in the Sections 8.1 and 8.2 below. 
          
       
   8.1. IANA Enumservice Registration for "smpp" 
       
      Enumservice Name: "smpp" 
       
      Enumservice Class: Application 
       
      Enumservice Type: "sms" 
       
      Enumservice subtype: "smpp" 
       
      URI scheme: "smpp:" 
       
      Functional Specification: This Enumservice indicates that the 
        resource identified by the associated URI scheme is capable of 
        receiving a short message using the SMPP protocol [9].   
         
      Security Considerations: Use of the "sms:smpp" Enumservice shall 
        either be within a service provider's internal network, or on a 
        private basis between one or more parties.  It is assumed that 
        this Enumservice value defined in this document is used in an 
        environment where entities are trusted and general public or 
        attackers are not supposed to have access to the DNS resource 
        records containing the "smpp:" URI. 
       
        The initial purpose of this Enumservice value and the "smpp:" URI 
        is to indicate that the remote resource can receive short messages 
        using SMPP, it is recommended that only the "hostpart" appears in 
        the URI.  If the "user" part is present, it is recommended that it 
        contains the international telephone number with the leading "+" 
        so as not to convey user-specific information in the "smpp:" URI. 
       
        The entity that has the authoritative answer to an ENUM query may 
        execute the access control based on the source IP address of the 
        ENUM query and return an appropriate error code (e.g., "refused") 
        if the querier is not authorized to establish an SMPP session with 
        the remote resource. 
       
      Intended Usage: COMMON 
       
      Registration Document: This document contains all the information 
        needed for the registration of this enumservice subtype value. 
       
      Author: James Yu (see Author's Address Section for author contact 
        detail) 
       
      Further Information: See Section 5 of this document. 
     
   Yu             Standards Track - Expires October 14, 2008           7 

                  RFC 4355 Update for Enumservice "sms:smpp"    April 2008   
                     and IANA Registration for "smpp:" URI 
    
       
    
   8.2. IANA Registration Information for "smpp:" URI 
       
      URI scheme name: The name of the URI is "smpp:". 
       
      Status: The intended status is Permanent.   
       
        SMPP is used by network entities operated by the 
        carriers/operators, inter-carrier vendors and the service 
        providers.  Use of this URI should be either be within a service 
        provider's or carrier's/operator's internal network, or on a 
        private basis between one or more parties using a variety of 
        security mechanisms to prevent the general public access.   The 
        records described herein should not be part of the e164.arpa or 
        any other portion of the Internet DNS tree when returned in the 
        ENUM response. 
         
      URI scheme syntax: 
         
        smpp-uri       = "smpp:" [user "@" ] hostpart *(";" parameter)  
                           [headers] 
        user           = userid / telephone-subscriber 
        userid         = *urlchar 
        parameter      = attribute ["=" value] 
         
        "hostpart" and "headers" are imported from RFC 3261 [17], 
        "telephone-subscriber" is imported from RFC 3966 [18], "urlchar" 
        is imported from RFC 3986 [19], and "attribute" and "value" are 
        imported from RFC 2045 [20]. 
         
      URI scheme semantics: The initial purpose of defining the "smpp:" 
        URI is to return the host information in the "smpp:" URI of the 
        ENUM response to identify the remote resource that can receive 
        short messages via SMPP/IP.   This URI is not intended to be used 
        in other protocols (e.g., SIP Request-URI) for addressing and 
        routing purposes, at least for the purpose of this document.  The 
        URI scheme syntax provides the extension mechanism to add 
        parameters and headers in the future for other uses of this URI. 
       
      Encoding considerations: US-ASCII characters are included in the URI 
        without any conversion.   Non-US-ASCII characters MUST be percent-
        encoded as described in Section 2.1 of RFC 3986 [19]. 
         
      Intended usage: The "smpp:" URI identifies an entity that can 
        receive short messages using the SMPP protocol.  The "host" part 
        of the URI can be used to locate the IP address of that entity. 
       
      Applications and/or protocols which may use this URL scheme name: 
        The "smpp:" URI is intended to be used by entities that 
        communicate with each other using the SMPP protocol.  An entity 
        that has a short message to deliver and wants to find out if the 
        remote entity that deals with the destination telephone number can 
     
   Yu             Standards Track - Expires October 14, 2008           8 
                  RFC 4355 Update for Enumservice "sms:smpp"    April 2008   
                     and IANA Registration for "smpp:" URI 
    
        make an ENUM query to see if such a URI is returned in the ENUM 
        response. 
       
      Interoperability considerations:  The URI is designed to be used 
        specifically for nodes in the trusted systems that query private 
        ENUM implementations (e.g., Carrier ENUM). 
         
      Security considerations: The initial use of the "smpp:" URI is for 
        Enumservice "sms:smpp" where the "hostpart" in the "smpp:" URI 
        identifies the remote resource that can receive short messages 
        over SMPP/IP.  It is recommended that only the "hostpart" appears 
        in the URI.  If the "user" part is present, it is recommended that 
        it contains the international telephone number with the leading 
        "+" so as not to convey user-specific information in the "smpp:" 
        URI. 
       
        Frame Relay and Virtual Private Network (VPN) connections are 
        usually used to establish the SMPP sessions and each SMPP session 
        is authorized by verifying the System ID and password at the 
        session setup time.   Those security related measures should be 
        used.   
       
      Person and email address to contact for further information: See the 
        Author's Address Section of this document for author's contact 
        information. 
       
      Author/change controller: This scheme is registered under the IETF 
        tree.  As such, the IETF maintains change control. 
       
      References: See Sections 5 and 8.1 of this document and [9] and [10] 
      in Section 9 of this document. 
         
    
   9. References 
         
    
   9.1. Normative References 
       
       [1] S. Bradner, "Key Words for Use in RFC's to Indicate Requirement 
           Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
       
       [2] P. Faltstrom and M. Mealling, "The E.164 to Uniform Resource 
           Identifiers (URI) Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) 
           Application (ENUM)", RFC 3761, April 2004. 
       
       [3] ITU-T, "The International Public Telecommunication Numbering 
           Plan", Recommendation E.164, May 1997. 
       
       [4] P. Mockapetris, "Domain Names - Concepts and Facilities", RFC 
           1034, November 1987. 
       

     
   Yu             Standards Track - Expires October 14, 2008           9 
                  RFC 4355 Update for Enumservice "sms:smpp"    April 2008   
                     and IANA Registration for "smpp:" URI 
    
       [5] M. Mealling, "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part 
           Four: The Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI)", RFC 3404, 
           October 2002.  
       
       [6] R. Brandner, et al., "IANA Registration for Enumservices email, 
           fax, mms, ems, and sms", RFC 4355, January 2006. 
       
       [8] T. Hansen, et al., "Guidelines and Registration Procedures for 
           New URI Schemes", RFC 4395, February 2006. 
       
       [9] SMS Forum, "Short Message Peer-to-Peer Protocol (SMPP) 
           Specification Version 5.0 ", February 19, 2003. 
       
       
      [12] D. Crocker and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax 
           Specifications: ABNF", RFC 5234, January 2008. 
       
      [17] J. Rosenberg, et al., RFC3261, "SIP: Session Initiation 
           Protocol", June 2002. 
       
      [18] H. Schulzrinne, "The tel URI for Telephone Numbers", RFC 3966, 
           December 2004. 
       
      [19] T. Berners-Lee, et al., "Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI): 
           Generic Syntax", RFC 3986, January 2005. 
       
      [20] N. Freed and N.S. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail 
           Extensions (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message Bodies", 
           RFC 2045, November 1996. 
       
       
   9.2. Informative References 
       
       [7] B. Hoeneisen, et al., "IANA Registration of Enumservices: 
           Guide, Template and IANA Considerations", draft-ietf-enum-
           enumservices-guide-08, March 2008.                    
       
      [10] 3GPP TS 23.040 v7.0.1, "3rd Generation Partnership Project; 
           Technical Specification Group Core Network and Terminals; 
           Technical realization of the Short Message Service (SMS) 
           (Release 7)", March 2007. 
       
      [11] 3GPP TS 29.002 v7.9.0, "3rd Generation Partnership Project; 
           Technical Specification Group Core Network and Terminals; 
           Mobile Application Part (MAP specification; (Release 7)", 
           September 2007. 
       
      [13] 3GPP TS 23.840 v7.1.0, "3rd Generation Partnership Project; 
           Technical Specification Group Core Network and Terminals; Study 
           into routeing of MT-SMs via the HPLMN; (Release 7)", March 
           2007. 
       

     
   Yu             Standards Track - Expires October 14, 2008          10 
                  RFC 4355 Update for Enumservice "sms:smpp"    April 2008   
                     and IANA Registration for "smpp:" URI 
    
      [14] 3GPP TS 24.341 v7.2.0, "3rd Generation Partnership Project; 
           Technical Specification Group Core Network and Terminals; 
           Support of SMS over IP networks; Stage 3 (Release 7)", December 
           2007. 
       
      [15] 3GPP TR 23.811 v8.0.0, "3rd Generation Partnership Project; 
           Technical Specification Group Core Network and Terminals; 
           Service Level Interworking for Messaging Services; Stage 2 
           (Release 8)", March 2008. 
       
      [16] 3GPP TS 23.204 v7.5.0, "3rd Generation Partnership Project; 
           Technical Specification Group Services and System Aspects; 
           Support of Short Message Service (SMS) over generic 3GPP 
           Internet Protocol (IP) access; Stage 2 (Release 7)", March 
           2008. 
       
       
   10. Change History (to be removed) 
    
    
   10.1 Changes from Version 00 
       
     - Change the title to reflect that this I-D updates RFC 4355. 
     - Make the title shorter. 
     - Add RFC 4355 in the Normative References section. 
     - Add "TS 23.204 v7.5.0" in the Informative References section. 
     - Change "TS 23.811 v1.2.1" to "TR 23.811 v8.0.0". 
     - Use "SMS Forum's SMPP v5.0" for referencing SMPP. 
     - Make a better separation between Enumservice registration and URI 
        registration. 
     - Clarify that the SMS GW (e.g., IP-SM-GW) that can deliver messages 
        to the terminating device via SIP/IP still receives the short 
        messages from the SMSCs via SS7 so an operator can make an 
        implementation decision to have the SMS GW receive incoming SMS 
        traffic from the SMSCs via SMPP/IP instead of SS7. 
       
    
   Author's Address 
       
      James Yu 
      NeuStar, Inc. 
      46000 Center Oak Plaza 
      Sterling, VA 20166 
      U.S.A. 
      Phone: +1-571-434-5572 
      Email: james.yu@neustar.biz 
    
       
       


     
   Yu             Standards Track - Expires October 14, 2008          11 
                  RFC 4355 Update for Enumservice "sms:smpp"    April 2008   
                     and IANA Registration for "smpp:" URI 
    
       
   Full Copyright Statement 
       
      Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 
       
      This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
      contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
      retain all their rights. 
       
      This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
      an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
      REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
      IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
      WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
      WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
      ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
      FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
       
       
   Intellectual Property 
       
      The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any   
      Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
      to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
      in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
      rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
      it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
      Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
      documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
       
      Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
      assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
      attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
      of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
      specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
      at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
       
      The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
      copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
      rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
      this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
      ipr@ietf.org. 
       
       
   Acknowledgment 
       
      Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF 
      Administrative Support Activity (IASA). 





     
   Yu             Standards Track - Expires October 14, 2008          12 