
Network Working Group                                      H. Alvestrand
Internet-Draft                                             March 6, 2004
Expires: September 4, 2004


             The IESG and RFC Editor documents: Procedures
                   draft-iesg-rfced-documents-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed,
   and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3667.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 4, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document gives the IESG's procedures for handling documents
   submitted for RFC publication via the RFC Editor, subsequent to the
   changes proposed by the IESG at the Seoul IETF, March 2004.

   NOTE IN DRAFT: These guidelines are proposed, not adopted. Comments
   are welcome - please send them to iesg@ietf.org.

1. Introduction and history

   For several years years, the IESG has reviewed all documents
   submitted by individuals for RFC publication ("RFC Editor documents")



Alvestrand             Expires September 4, 2004                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             IESG & RFCEd Docs                  March 2004


   before publication. In 2003, this review was often a full scale
   review of technical content, with the ADs attempting to clear points
   with the authors, stimulate revisions of the documents, encourage the
   authors to contact appropriate working groups and so on. This was a
   considerable drain on the resources of the IESG, and since this is
   not the highest priority task the IESG members do, it often resulted
   in significant delays.

   In March 2004, the IESG decided to make a major change in this review
   model. The new review model will have the IESG take responsibility
   for checking for conflicts between the work of the IETF and the
   documents submitted ONLY; soliciting technical review is deemed to be
   the responsibility of the RFC Editor. If an IESG member has issues
   with the technical content of the document, that member will
   communicate these issues to the RFC Editor, where they will be
   treated the same way as comments on the documents from other sources.

2. Background material

   The review of independent submissions by the IESG was prescribed by
   RFC 2026 [1] section 4.2.3 and RFC 2418 [2] section 8. RFC 3710 [3]
   section 5.2.2 describes the spring 2003 review process; with the
   publication of this document, that section is no longer relevant to
   documents submitted via the RFC Editor.

3. Detailed description of IESG review

   The IESG will review all documents submitted through the RFC Editor
   for conflicts with the IETF standards process or work done in the
   IETF community. The review is initiated by a note from the RFC Editor
   specifying the draft name, the RFC Editor's belief about the
   document's present suitability for publication, and (if possible) the
   list of people who have reviewed the document for the RFC Editor.

   The IESG may return five different responses, all of which may be
   accompanied by an IESG note to be put on the document if the RFC
   Editor wishes to publish.

   o  The IESG has not found any conflict between this document and IETF
      work.
   o  The IESG thinks that this work is related to IETF work done in WG
      <X>, but this does not prevent publishing.
   o  The IESG thinks that publication is harmful to the IETF work done
      in WG <X>, and recommends not publishing the document at this
      time.
   o  The IESG thinks that this document violates IETF procedures for
      <X>, and should therefore not be published without IETF review.




Alvestrand             Expires September 4, 2004                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             IESG & RFCEd Docs                  March 2004


   o  The IESG thinks that this document extends an IETF protocol in a
      way that requires IETF review, and should therefore not be
      published without IETF review.

   The last two cases are included for the case where a document
   attempts to do things (such as URI scheme definition) that require
   IETF consensus or IESG approval, and the case where an IETF protocol
   is proposed to be changed or extended in an unanticipated way that
   may be harmful to the normal usage of the protocol, but where the
   protocol documents do not explicitly say that this type of extension
   requires IETF review. (NOTE IN DRAFT - the examples section should
   have an example of this case.)

   In the case of a document requiring IETF review, the IESG will offer
   the author the opportunity to ask for publication as an AD-sponsored
   individual document, which is subject to full IESG review including
   possible assignment to a WG or rejection. (NOTE IN DRAFT: it's unfair
   to say "you can't publish it there, and we refuse to take it there" -
   so if we reject publication without IETF review, we have to offer the
   opportunity for IETF review....)

   The IESG will attempt to have review done within 4 weeks from the RFC
   Editor's notification. In the case of a possible conflict, the IESG
   may contact a WG or a WG chair for an outside opinion of whether
   publishing the document is harmful to the work of the WG, and in the
   case of a possible conflict with an IANA registration procedure, the
   IESG may contact the IANA expert for that registry; in these cases up
   to 8 weeks may be required, and the RFC Editor will be sent a note
   saying that the IESG is consulting with <X> about the document.

   Note that judging the technical merits of submissions, including
   considerations of possible harm to the Internet, will become solely
   the responsbility of the RFC Editor. The IESG assumes that the RFC
   Editor will create its own mechanisms for additional technical
   review.

4. Standard IESG note

   One of the following IESG notes will be sent to the RFC Editor for
   all documents, unless the IESG decides otherwise:
   o  For documents that have been considered in the IETF at one time:
      This document was at one time considered by the IETF, and
      therefore it may resemble a current IETF work in progress or a
      published IETF work. This document is not a candidate for any
      level of Internet Standard. The IETF disclaims any knowledge of
      the fitness of this document for any purpose, and in particular
      notes that it is not known to have had IETF review for security,
      congestion control or inappropriate interaction with deployed



Alvestrand             Expires September 4, 2004                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             IESG & RFCEd Docs                  March 2004


      protocols.  The RFC Editor has chosen to publish this document at
      its discretion. Readers of this document should exercise caution
      in evaluating its value for implementation and deployment.
   o  For documents that are independent of the IETF process:
      This document is not a candidate for any level of Internet
      Standard. The IETF disclaims any knowledge of the fitness of this
      document for any purpose, and in particular notes that it is not
      known to have had IETF review for security, congestion control or
      inappropriate interaction with deployed protocols.  The RFC Editor
      has chosen to publish this document at its discretion. Readers of
      this document should exercise caution in evaluating its value for
      implementation and deployment.

5. Examples of cases where publication is harmful

   This section gives a couple of examples where it might be appropriate
   to delay or prevent publishing of a document due to conflict with
   IETF work. It forms part of the background material, not a part of
   the procedure.

   Publish While Waiting: In 2003, the V6OPS WG was working on
   establishing evaluation criteria for the family of mechanisms known
   as "IPv6 transition mechanisms". The author of one of these
   mechanisms asked for publication as Experimental. The judgment of the
   WG chairs at the time was that publication of this document would
   remove sufficient energy from the group that the evaluation criteria
   work would not be finished, and the IETF would be unable to make a
   well thought out choice between mechanisms to pursue. Thus, the WG
   asked for this document not to be published at that time.

   Rejected Alternative Bypass: A WG is working on a solution to a
   problem, and a participant decides to ask for publication of a
   solution that the WG has rejected. Publication of the document will
   give the publishing party an RFC number to refer to before the WG is
   finished. It seems better to have the WG product published first, and
   have the non-adopted document published later, with a clear
   disclaimer note saying that "the IETF technology for this function is
   X". Example: Photuris (RFC 2522), which was published after IKE (RFC
   2409).

   Inappropriate Reuse of "free" Bits: In 2003, a proposal for an
   experimental RFC was published that wanted to reuse the high bits of
   the "fragment offset" part of the IP header for another purpose.
   There is no IANA consideration saying how these bits can be
   repurposed - but the standard defines a meaning for them. The IESG
   concluded that implementations of this experiment risked causing
   hard-to-debug interoperability problems, and recommended not
   publishing the document in the RFC series. The RFC Editor accepted



Alvestrand             Expires September 4, 2004                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             IESG & RFCEd Docs                  March 2004


   the recommendation.

   Note: in general, the IESG has no problem with rejected alternatives
   being made available to the community; such publications can be a
   valuable contribution to the technical literature.  However, it is
   necessary to avoid confusion with the alternatives the working group
   did adopt.

   The RFC series is one of many available publication channels; this
   document takes no position on the question of which documents the RFC
   series is appropriate for - this is a matter for discussion in the
   IETF community.

6. Security Considerations

   The process change described in this memo has no bearing on the
   security of the Internet.

References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP
        9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [2]  Bradner, S., "IETF Working Group Guidelines and Procedures", BCP
        25, RFC 2418, September 1998.

   [3]  Alvestrand, H., "An IESG Charter", February 2004.


Author's Address

   Harald Alvestrand

   EMail: harald@alvestrand.no

















Alvestrand             Expires September 4, 2004                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             IESG & RFCEd Docs                  March 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights. Information
   on the IETF's procedures with respect to rights in IETF Documents can
   be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Alvestrand             Expires September 4, 2004                [Page 6]


