

   Network Working Group                 Eric Mannie (Ebone) - Editor 
   Internet Draft                                                     
   Expiration date: Dec. 2001            Peter Ashwood-Smith (Nortel) 
                                               Daniel Awduche (Movaz) 
                                              Ayan Banerjee (Calient) 
                                           Debashis Basak (Accelight) 
                                                   Lou Berger (Movaz) 
                                               Greg Bernstein (Ciena) 
                                                 John Drake (Calient) 
                                                 Yanhe Fan (Axiowave) 
                                                   Don Fedyk (Nortel) 
                                               Gert Grammel (Alcatel) 
                                           Kireeti Kompella (Juniper) 
                                             Alan Kullberg (NetPlane) 
                                           Jonathan P. Lang (Calient) 
                                                  Fong Liaw (Zaffire) 
                                             Thomas D. Nadeau (Cisco) 
                                      Dimitri Papadimitriou (Alcatel) 
                                       Dimitrios Pendarakis (Tellium) 
                                           Bala Rajagopalan (Tellium) 
                                              Yakov Rekhter (Juniper) 
                                              Debanjan Saha (Tellium) 
                                                 Hal Sandick (Nortel) 
                                             Vishal Sharma (Metanoia) 
                                               George Swallow (Cisco) 
                                                 Z. Bo Tang (Tellium) 
                                                    John Yu (Zaffire) 
                                                   Alex Zinin (Cisco) 
                                                                      
                                                            June 2001 
    
    
      Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) Architecture 
    
                draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt 
    
    
    
 
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
    
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001                1 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Abstract........................................................4 
   1.1 List of open issues............................................4 
   2. Conventions used in this document...............................4 
   3. Introduction....................................................4 
   3.1. Acronyms & abbreviations......................................5 
   3.2. Multiple Types of Switching and Forwarding Hierarchies........5 
   3.3. Extension of the MPLS Control Plane...........................7 
   3.4. Key Differences Between MPLS-TE and GMPLS....................10 
   4. Routing and addressing model...................................11 
   4.1 Addressing of PSC and non-PSC layers..........................12 
   4.2 GMPLS scalability enhancements................................12 
   4.3 Extensions to IP TE routing protocols.........................13 
   5. Unnumbered links...............................................14 
   5.1 Unnumbered Forwarding Adjacencies.............................15 
   6. Link bundling..................................................15 
   6.1 Restrictions on bundling......................................16 
   6.2 Routing considerations for bundling...........................16 
   6.3 Signaling considerations......................................17 
   6.3.1 Mechanism 1: Implicit Indication............................17 
   6.3.2 Mechanism 2: Explicit Indication by IP Address..............17 
   6.3.3 Mechanism 3: Explicit Indication by Component Interface ID..17 
   6.4 Unnumbered Bundled Link.......................................18 
   6.5 Forming TE links..............................................18 
   7. UNI and NNI....................................................19 
   7.1 OIF UNI versus GMPLS..........................................19 
   7.2 Routing at the UNI............................................20 
   8. Link Management................................................20 
   8.1 Control channel and control channel management................21 
   8.2 Link property correlation.....................................22 
   8.3 Link connectivity verification................................22 
   8.4 Fault management..............................................23 
   9. Generalized Signaling..........................................23 
   9.1. Overview: How to Request an LSP..............................25 
   9.2. Generalized Label Request....................................26 
   9.3. SONET/SDH Traffic Parameters.................................27 
   9.4. Bandwidth Encoding...........................................28 
   9.5. Generalized Label............................................28 
   9.6. Waveband Switching...........................................29 
   9.7. Label Suggestion by the Upstream.............................29 
   9.8. Label Restriction by the Upstream............................29 
   9.9. Bi-directional LSP...........................................30 
   9.10. Bi-directional LSP Contention Resolution....................31 
   9.11. Rapid Notification of Failure...............................31 
   9.12. Link Protection.............................................31 
   9.13. Explicit Routing and Explicit Label Control.................32 
   9.14. LSP modification and LSP re-routing.........................33 
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001                2 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   9.15. Route recording.............................................33 
   10. Forwarding Adjacencies (FA)...................................34 
   10.1 Routing and Forwarding Adjacencies...........................34 
   10.2. Signaling aspects...........................................35 
   10.3 Cascading of Forwarding Adjacencies..........................35 
   11.1 Network Management Systems (NMS).............................36 
   12. Security considerations.......................................38 
   13. Acknowledgements..............................................39 
   14. References....................................................39 
   15. Author's Addresses............................................41 
   Full Copyright Statement..........................................43 
   Appendix 1 Brief overview of the ITU-T work on G.ASTN/G.ASON......45 
   A.1 Terminology issues............................................45 
   A.2 Common Equipment Management [G.cemr]..........................45 
   A.3 Data Communications Network [G.dcn]...........................46 
   A.4 Distributed Connection Management [G.dcm].....................46 
   A.5 Generalized Automatic Neighbor Discovery [G.ndisc]............47 
   A.6 Generalized Automatic Service Discovery [G.sdisc].............47 
   A.7 OTN routing [G.rtg]...........................................47 
   A.8 OTN Connection Admission Control [G.cac]......................47 
   A.9 OTN Link Management [G.lm]....................................48 
 
































 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001                3 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

1. Abstract 
    
   Future data and transmission networks will consist of elements such 
   as routers, switches, DWDM systems, Add-Drop Multiplexors (ADMs), 
   photonic cross-connects (PXCs), optical cross-connects (OXCs), etc 
   that will use Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) to dynamically provision 
   resources and to provide network survivability using protection and 
   restoration techniques. 
    
   This document describes the architecture of GMPLS. GMPLS extends 
   MPLS to encompass time-division (e.g. SDH/SONET, PDH, G.709), 
   wavelength (lambdas), and spatial switching (e.g. incoming port or 
   fiber to outgoing port or fiber). The main focus of GMPLS is on the 
   control plane of these various layers since each of them can use 
   physically diverse data or forwarding planes. The intention is to 
   cover both the signaling and the routing part of that control plane. 
    
1.1 List of open issues 
    
   This section lists several open issues on which the various people 
   are currently working. 
    
   - Inter-domain operations (e.g. routing with BGP-4). 
   - Protection and restoration for GMPLS. 
   - Multicasting in GMPLS. 
   - Extensions for new technologies like G.709. 
   - VPN support. 
    
2. Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2]. 
    
3. Introduction 
 
   The architecture presented in this document covers the main building 
   blocks needed to build a consistent control plane for multiple 
   switching layers. It does not restrict the way that these layers 
   work together. Different models can be applied: e.g. overlay, 
   augmented or integrated. Moreover, each pair of contiguous layer may 
   work jointly in a different way, resulting in a number of possible 
   combinations, at the discretion of manufacturers and operators. 
    
   This document is a generalization of the MPLS architecture [MPLS-
   ARCH], and in some cases may differ slightly from that architecture 
   since non packet-based forwarding planes are now considered. It is 
   not the intention of this document to describe concepts already 
   described in the current MPLS architecture. The goal is to describe 
   specific concepts of Generalized MPLS (GMPLS). 
    
   However, some of the concepts explained hereafter are not part of 
   the current MPLS architecture and are applicable to both MPLS and 
   GMPLS (i.e. link bundling, unnumbered links, and LSP hierarchy). 
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001                4 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   Since these concepts were introduced together with GMPLS and since 
   they are of paramount importance for an operational GMPLS network, 
   they will be discussed here. 
    
   The organization of the remainder of this draft is as follows.  We 
   begin with an introduction of GMPLS.  We then present the specific 
   GMPLS building blocks and explain how they can be combined together 
   to build an operational GMPLS networks.  Specific details of the 
   separate building blocks can be found in the corresponding 
   documents. 
 
3.1. Acronyms & abbreviations 
    
   ABR          Area Border Router 
   AS           Autonomous System 
   ASBR         Autonomous System Boundary Router 
   BGP          Border Gateway Protocol  
   CR-LDP       Constraint-based Routing LDP 
   CSPF         Constraint-based Shortest Path First 
   DWDM         Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing 
   FA           Forwarding Adjacency 
   GMPLS        Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching  
   IGP          Interior Gateway Protocol 
   LDP          Label Distribution Protocol 
   LMP          Link Management Protocol 
   LSA          Link State Advertisement 
   LSR          Label Switching Router 
   LSP          Label Switched Path 
   MIB          Management Information Base      
   MPLS         Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
   NMS          Network Management System 
   OXC          Optical Cross-Connect 
   PXC          Photonic Cross-Connect 
   RSVP         ReSource reserVation Protocol 
   SDH          Synchronous Digital Hierarchy 
   STM(-N)      Synchronous Transport Module (-N) 
   STS(-N)      Synchronous Transport Signal-Level N (SONET) 
   TE           Traffic Engineering 
 
3.2. Multiple Types of Switching and Forwarding Hierarchies 
    
   Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) differs from traditional MPLS in that it 
   supports multiple types of switching, i.e. the addition of support 
   for TDM, lambda, and fiber (port) switching. The support for the 
   additional types of switching has driven GMPLS to extend certain 
   base functions of traditional MPLS and, in some cases, to add 
   functionality.  These changes and additions impact basic LSP 
   properties, how labels are requested and communicated, the 
   unidirectional nature of LSPs, how errors are propagated, and 
   information provided for synchronizing the ingress and egress LSRs. 
    
   The MPLS architecture [MPLS-ARCH] was defined to support the 
   forwarding of data based on a label. In this architecture, Label 
   Switching Routers (LSRs) were assumed to have a forwarding plane 
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001                5 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   that is capable of (a) recognizing either packet or cell boundaries, 
   and (b) being able to process either packet headers (for LSRs 
   capable of recognizing packet boundaries) or cell headers (for LSRs 
   capable of recognizing cell boundaries). 
    
   The original MPLS architecture is here being extended to include 
   LSRs whose forwarding plane recognizes neither packet, nor cell 
   boundaries, and therefore, can't forward data based on the 
   information carried in either packet or cell headers. Specifically, 
   such LSRs include devices where the forwarding decision is based on 
   time slots, wavelengths, or physical ports. So, the new set of LSRs, 
   or more precisely interfaces on these LSRs, can be subdivided into 
   the following classes: 
    
   1. Packet Switch Capable (PSC) interfaces: 
    
   Interfaces that recognize packet boundaries and can forward data 
   based on the content of the packet header. Examples include 
   interfaces on routers that forward data based on the content of the 
   IP header and interfaces on routers that forward data based on the 
   content of the MPLS "shim" header. 
    
   2. Layer-2 Switch Capable (L2SC) interfaces: 
    
   Interfaces that recognize frame/cell boundaries and can forward data 
   based on the content of the frame/cell header. Examples include 
   interfaces on Ethernet bridges that forward data based on the 
   content of the MAC header and interfaces on ATM-LSRs that forward 
   data based on the ATM VPI/VCI. 
    
   3. Time-Division Multiplex Capable (TDM) interfaces: 
    
   Interfaces that forward data based on the data's time slot in a 
   repeating cycle.  An example of such an interface is that of a 
   SDH/SONET Cross-Connect (XC), Terminal Multiplexer (TM), or Add-Drop 
   Multiplexer (ADM). Other examples include interfaces implementing 
   G.709 (the "digital wrapper") and PDH interfaces. 
          
   4. Lambda Switch Capable (LSC) interfaces: 
    
   Interfaces that forward data based on the wavelength on which the 
   data is received.  An example of such an interface is that of a 
   Photonic Cross-Connect (PXC) or Optical Cross-Connect (OXC) that can 
   operate at the level of an individual wavelength. Additional 
   examples include PXC interfaces that can operate at the level of a 
   group of wavelengths, i.e. a waveband. 
    
   5. Fiber-Switch Capable (FSC) interfaces: 
    
   Interfaces that forward data based on a position of the data in the 
   real world physical spaces.  An example of such an interface is that 
   of a PXC or OXC that can operate at the level of a single or 
   multiple fibers. 
    
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001                6 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   A circuit can be established only between, or through, interfaces of 
   the same type. Depending on the particular technology being used for 
   each interface, different circuit names can be used, e.g. SDH 
   circuit, optical trail, light path, etc. In the context of GMPLS, 
   all these circuits are referenced by a common name: Label Switched 
   Path (LSP). 
    
   The concept of nested LSP (LSP within LSP), already available in the 
   traditional MPLS, facilitates building a forwarding hierarchy, i.e. 
   a hierarchy of LSPs. This hierarchy of LSPs can occur on the same 
   interface, or between different interfaces. 
    
   For example, a hierarchy can be built if an interface is capable of 
   multiplexing several LSPs from the same technology (layer), e.g. a 
   lower order SDH/SONET LSP (VC-12) nested in a higher order SDH/SONET 
   LSP (VC-4). Several levels of signal (LSP) nesting are defined in 
   the SDH/SONET multiplexing hierarchy. 
    
   The nesting can also occur between interfaces. At the top of the 
   hierarchy are FSC interfaces, followed by LSC interfaces, followed 
   by TDM interfaces, followed by L2SC, and followed by PSC interfaces. 
   This way, an LSP that starts and ends on a PSC interface can be 
   nested (together with other LSPs) into an LSP that starts and ends 
   on a L2SC interface. This LSP, in turn, can be nested (together with 
   other LSPs) into an LSP that starts and ends on an TDM interface, 
   which in turn can be nested (together with other LSPs) into an LSP 
   that starts and ends on a LSC interface, which in turn can be nested 
   (together with other LSPs) into an LSP that starts and ends on a FSC 
   interface. 
    
3.3. Extension of the MPLS Control Plane 
    
   The establishment of LSPs that span only Packet Switch Capable (PSC) 
   or Layer-2 Switch Capable (L2SC) interfaces is defined for the 
   original MPLS and/or MPLS-TE control planes. GMPLS extends these 
   control planes to support each of the five classes of interfaces 
   (i.e. layers) defined in the previous section. 
    
   Note that the GMPLS control plane supports an overlay model, an 
   augmented model, and a peer (integrated) model. In the near term, 
   GMPLS is very suitable for controlling each layer independently. 
   This elegant approach will facilitate the future deployment of other 
   models. 
    
   The GMPLS control plane is made of several building blocks are 
   described in more detail in the following sections. These building 
   blocks are based on well-known signaling and routing protocols that 
   have been extended and/or modified to support GMPLS. They use IPv4 
   and/or IPv6 addresses. Only one new specialized protocol is required 
   to support the operations of GMPLS, a signaling protocol for link 
   management [LMP]. 
    
    
    
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001                7 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   GMPLS is indeed based on the Traffic Engineering (TE) extensions to 
   MPLS, a.k.a. MPLS-TE. This is because most of the technologies that 
   can be used below the PSC level require some traffic engineering. 
   The placement of LSPs at these levels needs in general to take 
   several constraints into consideration (such as framing, bandwidth, 
   protection capability, etc) and to bypass the legacy Shortest-Path 
   First (SPF) algorithm. Note, however, that this is not mandatory and 
   that in some cases SPF routing can be applied. 
    
   In order to facilitate constrained-based SPF routing of LSPs, the 
   nodes performing LSP establishment need more information about the 
   links in the network than standard intra-domain routing protocols 
   provide. These TE attributes are distributed using the transport 
   mechanisms already available in IGPs (e.g. flooding) and taken into 
   consideration by the LSP routing algorithm. Optimization of the LSP 
   trajectories may also require some external simulations using 
   heuristics that serve as input for the actual path calculation and 
   LSP establishment process. 
    
   Extensions to traditional routing protocols and algorithms are 
   needed to uniformly encode and carry TE link information, and 
   explicit routes (e.g. source routes) are required in the signaling. 
   In addition, the signaling must now be capable of transporting the 
   required circuit (LSP) parameters such as the bandwidth, the type of 
   signal, the desired protection, the position in a particular 
   multiplex, etc. Most of these extensions have already been defined 
   for PSC and L2SC traffic engineering with MPLS. GMPLS primarily adds 
   additional extensions for TDM, LSC, and FSC traffic engineering. 
   Only a very few elements are technology specific. 
    
   Thus, GMPLS extends the two signaling protocols defined for MPLS-TE 
   signaling, i.e. RSVP-TE and CR-LDP. However, GMPLS does not specify 
   which one of these two signaling protocols must be used. It is the 
   role of manufacturers and operators to evaluate the two possible 
   solutions for their own interest. 
    
   Since GMPLS is based on RSVP-TE and CR-LDP, it mandates a 
   downstream-on-demand label allocation and distribution, with an 
   ingress initiated ordered control. Liberal label retention is 
   normally used, but conservative label retention mode could also be 
   used. Furthermore, there is no restriction on the label allocation 
   strategy, it can be request/signaling driven (obvious for circuit 
   switching technologies), traffic/data driven, or even topology 
   driven. There is also no restriction on the route selection; 
   explicit routing is normally used (strict or loose) but hop-by-hop 
   routing could be used as well. 
    
   GMPLS also extends two traditional intra-domain link-state routing 
   protocols already extended for TE, i.e. OSPF-TE and IS-IS-TE. 
   However, if explicit (source) routing is used, the routing 
   algorithms used by these protocols no longer need to be 
   standardized. Extensions for inter-domain routing (e.g. BGP) are for 
   further study. 
    
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001                8 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   The use of technologies like DWDM (Dense Wavelength Division 
   Multiplexing) implies that we can now have a very large number of 
   parallel links between two directly adjacent nodes (hundreds of 
   wavelengths, or even thousands of wavelengths if multiple fibers are 
   used). Such a large number of links was not originally considered 
   for an IP or MPLS control plane. Some slight adaptations of that 
   control plane are thus required if we want to reuse it in the GMPLS 
   context.  
    
   For instance, the traditional IP routing model assumes the 
   establishment of a routing adjacency over each link connecting two 
   adjacent nodes. Having such a large number of adjacencies does not 
   scale well. Each node needs to maintain each of its adjacencies one 
   by one, and link state routing information must be flooded 
   throughout the network. 
    
   To solve this issue the concept of link bundling was introduced. 
   Moreover, the manual configuration and control of these links, even 
   if they are unnumbered, becomes impractical. The Link Management 
   Protocol (LMP) was specified to solve these issues. 
    
   LMP runs between data-plane adjacent nodes and is used to manage TE 
   links.  Specifically, LMP provides mechanisms to maintain control 
   channel connectivity, verify the physical connectivity of the data-
   bearing links, correlate the link property information, and manage 
   link failures. A unique feature of LMP is that it is able to 
   localize faults in both opaque and transparent networks, independent 
   of the encoding scheme and bit rate used for the data. 
    
   LMP is defined in the context of GMPLS, but is specified 
   independently of the GMPLS signaling specification since it is a 
   local protocol run between data-plane adjacent nodes. As a result, 
   LMP can be reused in other contexts with non-GMPLS signaling 
   protocols. 
    
   The MPLS signaling and routing protocols require at least one bi-
   directional control channel to communicate even if two adjacent 
   nodes are connected by unidirectional links. Several control 
   channels can be used. LMP can be used to establish, maintain and 
   manage these control channels. 
    
   GMPLS does not specify how these control channels must be 
   implemented, but GMPLS requires IP to transport the signaling and 
   routing protocols over them. Control channels can be either in-band 
   or out-of-band, and several solutions can be used to carry IP. Note 
   also that one type of LMP message is used in-band in the data plane 
   and may not be transported over IP, but this is a particular case, 
   needed to verify connectivity in the data plane. 
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001                9 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

3.4. Key Differences Between MPLS-TE and GMPLS 
    
   Some key differences between MPLS-TE and GMPLS are highlighted in 
   the following. Some of them are key advantages of GMPLS to control 
   TDM, LSC and FSC layers. 
    
   - In MPLS-TE, links traversed by an LSP can include an intermix of 
   links with heterogeneous label encoding (e.g. links between routers, 
   links between routers and ATM-LSRs, and links between ATM-LSRs. 
   GMPLS extends this by including links where the label is encoded as 
   a time slot, or a wavelength, or a position in the real world 
   physical space. 
    
   - In MPLS-TE, an LSP that carries IP has to start and end on a 
   router. GMPLS extends this by requiring an LSP to start and end on 
   similar type of LSR. 
    
   - The type of a payload that can be carried in GMPLS by an LSP is 
   extended to allow such payloads as SONET/SDH, G.709, 1 or 10Gb 
   Ethernet, etc. 
    
   - For TDM, LSC and FSC interfaces, bandwidth allocation for an LSP 
   can be performed only in discrete units. 
    
   - It is expected to have (much) fewer labels on TDM, LSC or FSC 
   links than on PSC or L2SC links. 
    
   - The use of Forwarding Adjacencies (FA), provides a mechanism that 
   can improve bandwidth utilization, when bandwidth allocation can be 
   performed only in discrete units, as well as a mechanism to 
   aggregate forwarding state, thus allowing the number of required 
   labels to be reduced 
    
   - GMPLS allows for a label to be suggested by an upstream node to 
   reduce the setup latency. This suggestion may be overridden by a 
   downstream node but, in some cases, at the cost of higher LSP setup 
   time. 
    
   - GMPLS extends on the notion of restricting the range of labels 
   that may be selected by a downstream node. In GMPLS, an upstream 
   node may restrict the labels for an LSP along either a single hop or 
   along the entire LSP path. This feature is useful in photonic 
   networks where wavelength conversion may not be available. 
    
   - While traditional TE-based (and even LDP-based) LSPs are 
   unidirectional, GMPLS supports the establishment of bi-directional 
   LSPs. 
    
   - GMPLS supports the termination of an LSP on a specific egress 
   port, i.e. the port selection at the destination side. 
    
   - GMPLS with RSVP-TE supports an RSVP specific mechanism for rapid 
   failure notification. 
    
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               10 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

4. Routing and addressing model  
    
   GMPLS is based on the IP routing and addressing models. This assumes 
   that IPv4 and/or IPv6 addresses are used to identify interfaces and 
   that traditional (distributed) IP routing protocols are also reused. 
   Indeed, the discovery of the topology and the resource state of all 
   links in a routing domain is achieved via these routing protocols. 
    
   Since control and data planes are de-coupled in GMPLS, one cannot do 
   anymore the assumption that control-plane neighbors (i.e. IGP-learnt 
   neighbors) are data-plane neighbors, hence mechanisms like LMP are 
   needed to associate TE links with neighboring nodes. 
    
   IP addresses are not used only to identify interfaces of IP hosts 
   and routers, but more generally to identify any PSC and non-PSC 
   interfaces. Similarly, IP routing protocols are used to find routes 
   for IP datagrams with a SPF algorithm, and are also used to find 
   routes for non-PSC circuits by using a CSPF algorithm. 
    
   However, some additional mechanisms are needed to increase the 
   scalability of these models and to deal with specific traffic 
   engineering requirements of non-PSC layers. These mechanisms will be 
   introduced in the following. 
    
   Re-using existing IP routing protocols allows for non-PSC layers to 
   take advantages of all the valuable developments that took place 
   since years for IP routing, in particular in the context of intra-
   domain routing (link-state routing) and inter-domain routing (policy 
   routing). 
    
   Each particular non-PSC layer can be seen as a set of Autonomous 
   Systems (ASs) interconnected in an arbitrary way. Similarly to the 
   traditional IP routing, each AS is managed by a single 
   administrative authority. For instance, an AS can be an SDH/SONET 
   network operated by a given carrier. The set of interconnected ASs 
   being an SDH/SONET Internetwork. 
    
   Exchange of routing information between ASs can be done via an 
   inter-domain routing protocol like BGP-4. There is obviously a huge 
   value of re-using well-known policy routing facilities provided by 
   BGP in a non-PSC context. Extensions for BGP traffic engineering in 
   the context of non-PSC layers are for further study. 
 
   Each AS can be subdivided in different routing domains, and each can 
   run a different intra-domain routing protocol. In turn, each 
   routing-domain can be divided in areas. 
 
   A routing domain is made of GMPLS nodes. These nodes can be either 
   edge nodes (i.e. hosts, ingress LSRs or egress LSRs), or internal 
   LSRs. An example of non-PSC host is an SDH/SONET Terminal 
   Multiplexer (TM). Another example, is an SDH/SONET interface card 
   within an IP router or ATM switch. 
    

 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               11 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   Note that traffic engineering in the intra-domain requires the use 
   of link-state routing protocols like OSPF or IS-IS. 
    
   GMPLS defines extensions to these protocols. These extensions are 
   needed to disseminate specific TDM, LSC and FSC static and dynamic 
   characteristics related to nodes and links. The current focus is on 
   intra-area traffic engineering. However, inter-area traffic 
   engineering is also under investigation. 
    
4.1 Addressing of PSC and non-PSC layers 
    
   The fact that IPv4 and/or IPv6 addresses are used doesn't imply at 
   all that they should be allocated in the same addressing space than 
   public IPv4 and/or IPv6 addresses used for the Internet. Each layer 
   could have a different addressing authority responsible for address 
   allocation and re-using the full addressing space, completely 
   independently. 
    
   Private IP addresses can be used if they don't require to be 
   exchanged with any other operator, public IP addresses are otherwise 
   required. Of course, if an integrated model is used, two layers 
   could share the same addressing space. 
    
   Note that there is a benefit of using public IPv4 and/or IPv6 
   Internet addresses for non-PSC layers if an integrated model with 
   the IP layer is foreseen. 
    
   If we consider the scalability enhancements proposed in the next 
   section, the IPv4 (32 bits) and the IPv6 (128 bits) addressing 
   spaces are both more than sufficient to accommodate any non-PSC 
   layer. We can reasonably expect to have much less non-PSC devices 
   (e.g. SDH/SONET nodes) than we have today IP hosts and routers. 
    
   Other kinds of addressing schemes (e.g. NSAP) are not considered 
   here since this would imply a modification of the already existing 
   signaling and routing protocols that uses IPv4 and/or IPv6 
   addresses. This would be incompatible to our objectives of re-using 
   existing IP protocols. 
    
4.2 GMPLS scalability enhancements 
    
   TDM, LSC and FSC layers introduce new constraints on the IP 
   addressing and routing models since several hundreds of parallel 
   physical links (e.g. wavelengths) can now connect two nodes. Most of 
   the carriers already have today several tens of wavelengths per 
   fiber between two nodes. New generation of DWDM systems will allow 
   several hundreds of wavelengths per fiber. 
    
   It becomes rather impractical to associate an IP address with each 
   end of each physical link, to represent each link as a separate 
   routing adjacency, and to advertise and to maintain link states for 
   each of these links. For that purpose, GMPLS enhances the MPLS 
   routing and addressing models to increase their scalability. 
    
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               12 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   Two optional mechanisms can be used to increase the scalability of 
   the addressing and the routing: unnumbered links and link bundling. 
   These two mechanisms can also be combined. They require extensions 
   to signaling (RSVP-TE and CR-LDP) and routing (OSPF-TE and IS-IS-TE) 
   protocols. 
 
4.3 Extensions to IP TE routing protocols 
    
   Traditionally, a TE link is advertised as an adjunct to a "regular" 
   OSPF or IS-IS link, i.e., an adjacency is brought up on the link, 
   and when the link is up, both the regular IGP properties of the link 
   (basically, the SPF metric) and the TE properties of the link are 
   then advertised. 
    
   However, GMPLS challenges this notion in three ways: 
    
   - First, links that are non-PSC may yet have TE properties; however, 
   an OSPF adjacency cannot be brought up directly on such links. 
    
   - Second, an LSP can be advertised as a point-to-point TE link in 
   the routing protocol, i.e. as a Forwarding Adjacency (FA); thus, an 
   advertised TE link need no longer be between two OSPF direct 
   neighbors. Forwarding Adjacencies (FA) are further described in a 
   separate section. 
    
   - Third, a number of links may be advertised as a single TE link 
   (e.g. for improved scalability), so again, there is no longer a one-
   to-one association of a regular adjacency and a TE link. 
    
   Thus we have a more general notion of a TE link. A TE link is a 
   logical link that has TE properties, some of which may be configured 
   on the advertising LSR, others which may be obtained from other LSRs 
   by means of some protocol, and yet others which may be deduced from 
   the component(s) of the TE link. 
    
   An important TE property of a TE link is related to the bandwidth 
   accounting for that link. GMPLS will define different accounting 
   rules for different non-PSC layers. Generic bandwidth attributes are 
   however defined by the TE routing extensions and by GMPLS, such as 
   the unreserved bandwidth, the maximum reservable bandwidth, the 
   maximum LSP bandwidth. 
    
   It is expected in a dynamic environment to have frequent changes of 
   bandwidth accounting information. A flexible policy for triggering 
   link state updates based on bandwidth thresholds and link-dampening 
   mechanism can be implemented. 
    
   TE properties associated with a link should also capture protection 
   and restoration related characteristics. For instance, shared 
   protection can be elegantly combined with bundling. Protection and 
   restoration are mainly generic mechanisms also applicable to MPLS. 
   It is expected that they will first be developed for MPLS and later 
   on generalized to GMPLS. 
    
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               13 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   A TE link between a pair of LSRs doesn't imply the existence of an 
   IGP adjacency between these LSRs. A TE link must also have some 
   means by which the advertising LSR can know of its liveness (e.g. by 
   using LMP hellos). When an LSR knows that a TE link is up, and can 
   determine the TE link's TE properties, the LSR may then advertise 
   that link to its GMPLS enhanced OSPF or IS-IS neighbors using the TE 
   objects/TLVs. We call the interfaces over which GMPLS enhanced OSPF 
   or ISIS adjacencies are established "control channels". 
  
5. Unnumbered links 
    
   Unnumbered links (or interfaces) are links (or interfaces) that do 
   not have IP addresses. Using such links involves two capabilities: 
   the ability to specify unnumbered links in MPLS TE signaling, and 
   the ability to carry (TE) information about unnumbered links in IGP 
   TE extensions of ISIS-TE and OSPF-TE. 
 
   A. The ability to specify unnumbered links in MPLS TE signaling 
   requires extensions to RSVP-TE and CR-LDP. The MPLS-TE signaling 
   doesn't provide support for unnumbered links, because it doesn∆t 
   provide a way to indicate an unnumbered link in its Explicit Route 
   Object/TLV and in its Record Route Object (there is no such TLV for 
   CR-LDP). GMPLS defines simple extensions to indicate an unnumbered 
   link in these two Objects/TLVs, using a new Unnumbered Interface ID 
   sub-object/sub-TLV. 
    
   Since unnumbered links are not identified by an IP address, then for 
   the purpose of MPLS TE each end need some other identifier, local to 
   the LSR to which the link belongs. Note that links are directed, 
   i.e., a link l is from some LSR A to some other LSR B. LSR A chooses 
   the interface identifier for link l, we call this the "outgoing 
   interface identifier from LSR A's point of view". If there is a 
   reverse link from LSR B to LSR A, B chooses the outgoing interface 
   identifier for the reverse link, we call this the link∆s "incoming 
   interface identifier" from LSR A∆s point of view. There is no a 
   priori relationship between the two interface identifiers. Both ends 
   must also agree on each of these identifiers. 
    
   The new Unnumbered Interface ID sub-object/sub-TLV for the ER 
   Object/TLV contains the Router ID of the LSR at the upstream end of 
   the unnumbered link and the outgoing interface identifier with 
   respect to that upstream LSR. 
    
   The new Unnumbered Interface ID sub-object/sub-TLV for the RR Object 
   contains the outgoing interface identifier with respect to the LSR 
   that adds it in the RR Object. 
    
   B. The ability to carry (TE) information about unnumbered links in 
   IGP TE extensions requires new sub-TLVs for the extended IS 
   reachability TLV defined in ISIS-TE and for the TE LSA (which is an 
   opaque LSA) defined in OSPF-TE. An Outgoing Interface Identifier 
   sub-TLV and an Incoming Interface Identifier sub-TLV are defined. 
    
    
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               14 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

5.1 Unnumbered Forwarding Adjacencies 
    
   If an LSR that originates an LSP advertises this LSP as an 
   unnumbered FA in IS-IS or OSPF, the LSR must allocate an Interface 
   ID to that FA. If the LSP is bi-directional, the tail end LSR 
   advertises the reverse LSP as an unnumbered FA, the tail end LSR 
   must allocate an Interface ID to the reverse FA. 
    
   Signaling has been enhanced to carry the Interface ID. When an LSP 
   is created which will be advertised as an FA, the head-end LSR 
   includes its Interface ID in the Path/REQUEST. The tail end LSR 
   responds by including its reverse LSP∆s Interface ID in the 
   Resv/MAPPING. 
    
   The Interface ID is transported in the new LSP Tunnel Interface ID 
   object/TLV called the Forward Interface ID when it appears in a 
   Path/REQUEST message, and the Reverse Interface ID when it appears 
   in the Resv/MAPPING message. 
    
   The LSP Tunnel Interface ID object/TLV contains the Router ID of the 
   LSR that generates it, and the Interface ID. Note that if the 
   forward or reverse LSP is part of a bundled link, the Interface ID 
   is set to the Component Interface ID of that LSP (as defined in the 
   next section). 
 
6. Link bundling 
 
   The concept of link bundling is essential in certain networks 
   employing the GMPLS control plane. A typical example is an optical 
   meshed network where adjacent optical cross-connects (LSRs) are 
   connected by several hundreds of parallel wavelengths. In this 
   network, consider the application of link state routing protocols, 
   like OSPF or IS-IS, with suitable extensions for resource discovery 
   and dynamic route computation. Each wavelength must be advertised 
   separately in order to be used, except if link bundling is used. 
    
   When a pair of LSRs is connected by multiple links, it is possible 
   to advertise several (or all) of these links as a single link into 
   OSPF and/or IS-IS. This process is called link bundling, or just 
   bundling. The resulting logical link is called a bundled link as its 
   physical links are called component links. 
 
   The purpose of link bundling is to improve routing scalability by 
   reducing the amount of information that has to be handled by OSPF 
   and/or IS-IS. This reduction is accomplished by performing 
   information aggregation/abstraction. As with any other information 
   aggregation/abstraction, this results in losing some of the 
   information. To limit the amount of losses one need to restrict the 
   type of the information that can be aggregated/abstracted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               15 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

6.1 Restrictions on bundling 
 
   The following restrictions are required for bundling links. All 
   component links in a bundle must begin and end on the same pair of 
   LSRs; and share some common characteristics or properties, i.e. they 
   must have the same: 
    
   - Link Type (i.e. point-to-point or multi-access) [OSPF-TE/ISIS-TE], 
   - TE Metric (i.e. an administrative cost) [OSPF- TE/ISIS-TE], 
   - Set of Resource Classes (i.e. colors) [OSPF-TE/ISIS-TE], 
   - Link Multiplex Capability (e.g. FSC, LSC or TDM) [HIERARCHY]. 
    
   Note that bundling may be applied recursively; a component link may 
   itself be a bundled link. An FA may also be a component link. In 
   fact, a bundle can consist of a mix of point-to-point links, FAs, 
   and bundled links, but all sharing some common properties. 
 
6.2 Routing considerations for bundling 
 
   A bundled link is just another kind of TE link such as those defined 
   by OSPF-TE or IS-IS-TE. The liveness of the bundled link is 
   determined by the liveness of each of the component links within the 
   bundled link. The liveness of a component link can be determined by 
   any of several means: IS-IS or OSPF hellos over the component link, 
   or RSVP Hello (hop local), or LMP hellos (link local), or from layer 
   1 or layer 2 indications. 
    
   Note that according to the RSVP-TE Tunnel specification the RSVP 
   Hello mechanism is intended to be used when notification of link 
   layer failures is not available and unnumbered links are not used, 
   or when the failure detection mechanisms provided by the link layer 
   are not sufficient for timely node failure detection. 
    
   Once a bundled link is determined to be alive, it can be advertised 
   as a TE link and the TE information can be flooded.  If IS-IS/OSPF 
   hellos are run over the component links, IS-IS/OSPF flooding can be 
   restricted to just one of the component links. 
    
   Note that advertising a (bundled) TE link between a pair of LSRs 
   doesn't imply that there is an IGP adjacency between these LSRs that 
   is associated with just that link. In fact, in certain cases a TE 
   link between a pair of LSRs could be advertised even if there is no 
   IGP adjacency at all between the LSR (e.g. when the TE link is an 
   FA). 
    
   Forming a bundled link consist in aggregating the identical TE 
   parameters of each individual component link to produce aggregated 
   TE parameters. A TE link as defined by [OSPF-TE-GMPLS] and [ISIS-TE-
   GMPLS] has many parameters, adequate aggregation rules must be 
   defined for each one. 
    
   Some parameters can be sums of component characteristics such as the 
   unreserved bandwidth and the maximum reservable bandwidth. Bandwidth 

 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               16 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   information is an important part of a bundle advertisement and it 
   must be clearly defined since an abstraction is done. 
    
   A GMPLS node with bundled links must apply admission control on a 
   per-component link basis. 
    
6.3 Signaling considerations 
    
   Typically, an LSP's explicit route (contained in an explicit route) 
   will choose the bundled link to be used for the LSP, but not the 
   component link(s), since information about the bundled link is 
   flooded, but information about the component links is kept local to 
   the LSR. 
    
   The choice of the component link to use is always made by an 
   upstream node. If the LSP is bidirectional, the upstream node 
   chooses a component link in each direction. 
    
   Three mechanisms for indicating this choice to the downstream node 
   are possible. 
    
6.3.1 Mechanism 1: Implicit Indication 
    
   This mechanism requires that each component link has a dedicated 
   signaling channel (e.g. the link is a Sonet/SDH link using the DCC 
   for in-band signaling). The upstream node tells the receiver which 
   component link to use by sending the message over the chosen 
   component link's dedicated signaling channel. Note that this 
   signaling channel can be in-band or out-of-band. In this last case, 
   the association between the signaling channel and that component 
   link need to be explicitly configured. 
 
6.3.2 Mechanism 2: Explicit Indication by IP Address 
    
   This mechanism requires that each component link has a unique remote 
   IP address. The upstream node can either send messages addressed to 
   the remote IP address for the component link or encapsulate messages 
   in an IP header whose destination address is the remote IP address. 
   This mechanism does not require each component link to have its own 
   control channel. In fact, it doesn't even require the whole 
   (bundled) link to have its own control channel. 
    
6.3.3 Mechanism 3: Explicit Indication by Component Interface ID 
    
   With this mechanism, each component link in unnumbered and is 
   assigned a unique Component Interface Identifier (32 bits value). 
   The two LSRs at each end of the bundled link exchange these 
   identifiers. An upstream node indicates the choice of a component 
   link by including the corresponding identifier in signaling 
   messages. 
    
   Discovering Component Interface Identifiers at bootstrap may be 
   accomplished by configuration, by means of a protocol such as LMP 
   (preferred solution), by means of RSVP/CR-LDP (especially in the 
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               17 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   case where a component link is a Forwarding Adjacency), or by means 
   of IS-IS or OSPF extensions. 
    
   New objects are needed to indicate Component Interface Identifiers 
   in signaling. GMPLS defines one Component Upstream Interface ID 
   object/TLV used to indicate the component interface to be used for 
   traffic flowing in the upstream direction; and one Component 
   Downstream Interface ID object/TLV used to indicate the component 
   interface to be used for traffic flowing in the downstream 
   direction. Since the choice of the component link to use is always 
   made by an upstream node, these objects/TLVs are included in the 
   Path/REQUEST message send downstream. With RSVP-TE they are included 
   in the sendor descriptor of the Path message. 
 
6.4 Unnumbered Bundled Link 
    
   A bundled link may itself be numbered or unnumbered independent of 
   whether the component links are numbered or not. This affects how 
   the bundled link is advertised in IS-IS/OSPF, and the format of LSP 
   EROs that traverse the bundled link. Furthermore, unnumbered 
   Interface Identifiers for all unnumbered outgoing links of a given 
   LSR (whether component links, Forwarding Adjacencies or bundled 
   links) MUST be unique in the context of that LSR. 
    
6.5 Forming TE links 
    
   The generic rule for bundling component links is to place those 
   links that are correlated in some manner in the same bundle. If 
   links may be correlated based on multiple properties then the 
   bundling may be applied sequentially based on these properties. For 
   instance, links may be first grouped based on the first property. 
   Each of these groups may be then divided into smaller groups based 
   on the second property and so on. The main principle followed in 
   this process is that the properties of the resulting bundles should 
   be concisely summarizable. Link bundling may be done automatically 
   or by configuration. Automatic link bundling can apply bundling 
   rules sequentially to produce bundles. 
 
   For instance, the first property on which component links may be 
   correlated could be the Link Multiplex Capability, the second 
   property could be the Link Type, the third property could be the 
   Administrative Weight (cost), the fourth property could be the 
   Resource Classes and finally links may be correlated based on other 
   metrics such as SRLG (Shared Risk Link Groups) or delay. 
    
   When routing an alternate path for protection purposes, the general 
   principle followed is that the alternate path is not routed over any 
   link belonging to an SRLG that some link in the primary path belongs 
   to. Thus, the rule to be followed is to group links belonging to 
   exactly the same set of SRLGs. 
 
   This type of sequential sub-division may result in a number of 
   bundles between two adjacent nodes. In practice, however, the link 
   properties may not be very heterogeneous among component links 
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               18 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   between two adjacent nodes. Thus, the number of bundles in practice 
   may not be large. 
 
7. UNI and NNI 
 
   The interface between an edge GMPLS node and a GMPLS LSR on the 
   network side may be referred to as a User to Network Interface 
   (UNI), while the interface between two network side LSRs may be 
   referred to as a Network to Network Interface (NNI). 
    
   GMPLS does not specify separately a UNI and an NNI. Edge nodes are 
   connected to LSRs on the network side, and these LSRs are in turn 
   connected between them. Of course, the behavior of an edge node is 
   not exactly the same as the behavior of an LSR on the network side. 
   Note also, that an edge node may run a routing protocol, however it 
   is expected that in most of the cases it will not (see also section 
   7.2 and the section about signaling with an explicit route). 
 
   Conceptually, a difference between UNI and NNI make sense either if 
   both interface uses completely different protocols, or if they use 
   the same protocols but with some outstanding differences. In the 
   first case, separate protocols are often defined successively, with 
   more or less success. 
    
   The GMPLS approach consisted in building a consistent model from day 
   one, considering both the UNI and NNI interfaces at the same time. 
   For that purpose a very few specific UNI particularities have been 
   ignored in a first time. GMPLS is being enhanced to support such 
   particularities at the UNI by some other standardization bodies, 
   like the OIF. 
    
7.1 OIF UNI versus GMPLS  
    
   The current OIF UNI specification [OIF-UNI] defines an interface 
   between a client SDH/SONET equipment and an SDH/SONET network, each 
   belonging to a distinct administrative authority. The OIF UNI 
   defines additional mechanisms on the top of GMPLS for the UNI. 
    
   For instance, the OIF service discovery procedure is a precursor to 
   obtaining UNI services. Service discovery allows a client to 
   determine the static parameters of the interconnection with the 
   network, including the UNI signaling protocols, the type of 
   concatenation, the transparency levels as well as the type of 
   diversity (node, link, SRLG) supported by the network.  
    
   Since the current OIF UNI interface does not cover photonic 
   networks, G.709 Digital Wrapper, etc, it is a sub-set of the GMPLS 
   Architecture. 
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               19 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

7.2 Routing at the UNI 
    
   This section discusses the selection of an explicit route by an edge 
   node. The selection of the first LSR by an edge node connected to 
   multiple LSRs is part of that problem. 
    
   An edge node (host or LSR) can participate more or less deeply in 
   the GMPLS routing. Four different routing models can be supported at 
   the UNI: configuration based, partial peering, silent listening and 
   full peering. 
       
   - Configuration based: this routing model requires the manual or 
   automatic configuration of an edge node with a list of neighbor LSRs 
   sorted by preference order. Automatic configuration can be achieved 
   using DHCP for instance. No routing information is exchanged at the 
   UNI, except maybe the ordered list of LSRs. The only routing 
   information used by the edge node is that list. The edge node sends 
   by default an LSP request to the preferred LSR. ICMP redirects could 
   be send by this LSR to redirect some LSP requests to another LSR 
   connected to the edge node. GMPLS does not preclude that model. 
    
   - Partial peering: limited routing information (mainly reachability) 
   can be exchanged across the UNI using some extensions in the 
   signaling plane. The reachability information exchanged at the UNI 
   may be used to initiate edge node specific routing decision over the 
   network. GMPLS does not have any capability to support this model 
   today. 
    
   - Silent listening: the edge node can silently listen to routing 
   protocols and take routing decisions based on the information 
   obtained. An edge node receives the full routing information, 
   including traffic engineering extensions. One LSR should forward 
   transparently all routing pdus to the edge node. An edge node can 
   now compute a complete explicit route taking into consideration all 
   the end-to-end routing information. GMPLS does not preclude this 
   model. 
    
   - Full peering: In addition to silent listening, the edge node 
   participates within the routing, establish adjacencies with its 
   neighbors and advertises LSAs. This is useful only if there are 
   benefits for edge nodes to advertise themselves traffic engineering 
   information. GMPLS does not preclude this model. 
 
8. Link Management 
    
   In the context of GMPLS, a pair of nodes (e.g., a photonic switch) 
   may be connected by tens of fibers, and each fiber may be used to 
   transmit hundreds of wavelengths if DWDM is used. Multiple fibers 
   and/or multiple wavelengths may also be combined into one or more 
   bundled links for routing purposes. Furthermore, to enable 
   communication between nodes for routing, signaling, and link 
   management, control channels must be established between a node 
   pair. 
    
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               20 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   Link management is a collection of useful procedures between 
   adjacent nodes that provide local services such as control channel 
   management, link connectivity verification, link property 
   correlation, and fault management. The Link Management Protocol 
   (LMP) has been defined to fulfill these operations. LMP was 
   initiated in the context of GMPLS but is a generic toolbox that can 
   be also used in other contexts. 
    
   Control channel management and link property correlation are 
   mandatory procedures of LMP. Link connectivity verification and 
   fault management are optional procedures. 
 
8.1 Control channel and control channel management 
    
   LMP control channel management is used to establish and maintain 
   control channels between nodes. Control channels exist independently 
   of TE links, and can be used to exchange MPLS control-plane 
   information such as signaling, routing, and link management 
   information. 
    
   An "LMP adjacency" is formed between two nodes that support the same 
   LMP capabilities. Multiple control channels may be active 
   simultaneously for each adjacency. A control channel can be either 
   explicitly configured or automatically selected, however, LMP 
   currently assume that control channels are explicitly configured. 
 
   For the purposes of LMP, the exact implementation of the control 
   channel is left unspecified. The control channel(s) between two 
   adjacent nodes is no longer required to use the same physical medium 
   as the data-bearing links between those nodes. For example, a 
   control channel could use a separate wavelength or fiber, an 
   Ethernet link, or an IP tunnel through a separate management 
   network. 
    
   A consequence of allowing the control channel(s) between two nodes 
   to be physically diverse from the associated data-bearing links is 
   that the health of a control channel does not necessarily correlate 
   to the health of the data-bearing links, and vice-versa. Therefore, 
   new mechanisms must be developed to manage links, both in terms of 
   link provisioning and fault isolation. 
    
   LMP does not specify how control channels are implemented, however 
   it states that messages transported over a control channel must be 
   IP encoded. Furthermore, since the messages are IP encoded, the link 
   level encoding is not part of LMP. A 32-bit non-zero integer control 
   channel identifier (CCId) is assigned to each direction of a control 
   channel. 
    
   Each control channel individually negotiates its control channel 
   parameters and maintains connectivity using a fast Hello protocol. 
   The latter is required if lower-level mechanisms are not available 
   to detect link failures. 
    

 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               21 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   The Hello protocol of LMP is intended to be a lightweight keep-alive 
   mechanism that will react to control channel failures rapidly so 
   that IGP Hellos are not lost and the associated link-state 
   adjacencies are not removed unnecessarily. 
    
   The Hello protocol consists of two phases: a negotiation phase and a 
   keep-alive phase. The negotiation phase allows negotiation of some 
   basic Hello protocol parameters, like the Hello frequency. The keep-
   alive phase consists of a fast lightweight bi-directional Hello 
   message exchange. 
    
   If a group of control channels share a common node pair and support 
   the same LMP capabilities, then LMP control channel messages (except 
   Configuration messages, and Hello) may be transmitted over any of 
   the active control channels without coordination between the local 
   and remote nodes. 
    
   For LMP, it is essential that at least one control channel is always 
   available. In the event of a control channel failure, it may be 
   possible to use an alternate active control channel without 
   coordination. 
 
8.2 Link property correlation 
    
   As part of LMP, a link property correlation exchange is defined.  
   The exchange is used to aggregate multiple data-bearing links (i.e. 
   component links) into a bundled link and exchange, correlate, or 
   change TE link parameters. The link property correlation exchange 
   may be done at any time a link is up and not in the Verification 
   process (see next section). 
    
   It allows for instance to add component links to a link bundle, 
   change a link's protection mechanism, change port identifiers, or 
   change component identifiers in a bundle. This mechanism is 
   supported by an exchange of link summary messages. 
    
8.3 Link connectivity verification 
    
   Link connectivity verification is an optional procedure that may be 
   used to verify the physical connectivity of data-bearing links as 
   well as to exchange the link identifiers that are used in the GMPLS 
   signaling.   
    
   The use of this procedure is negotiated as part of the configuration 
   exchange that take place during the negotiation phase of the Hello 
   protocol. This procedure should be done initially when a data-
   bearing link is first established, and subsequently, on a periodic 
   basis for all unallocated (free) data-bearing links. 
    
   The verification procedure consists of sending Test messages in-band 
   over the data-bearing links. This requires that the unallocated 
   links must be opaque; however, multiple degrees of opaqueness (e.g., 
   examining overhead bytes, terminating the payload, etc.), and hence 
   different mechanisms to transport the Test messages, are specified.  
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               22 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   Note that the Test message is the only LMP message that is 
   transmitted over the link, and that Hello messages continue to be 
   exchanged over the control channel during the link verification 
   process. Data-bearing links are tested in the transmit direction as 
   they are unidirectional. As such, it is possible for both nodes to 
   exchange the Test messages simultaneously. 
    
   To initiate the link verification procedure, a node must first 
   notify the adjacent node that it will begin sending Test messages 
   over a particular data-bearing link, or over the component links of 
   a particular bundled link. The node must also indicate the number of 
   data-bearing links that are to be verified; the interval at which 
   the test messages will be sent; the encoding scheme, the transport 
   mechanism that are supported, data rate for Test messages; and, in 
   the case where the data-bearing links correspond to fibers, the 
   wavelength over which the Test messages will be transmitted. 
   Furthermore, the local and remote bundled link identifiers are 
   transmitted at this time to perform the component link association 
   with the bundled link identifiers. 
    
8.4 Fault management 
    
   Fault management is an important requirement from the operational 
   point of view. When a failure occurs an operator needs to know 
   exactly where it happened. It can also be used to support some 
   specific local protection/restoration mechanisms. Logically, fault 
   localization can occur only after a fault is detected. LMP provides 
   a fault notification procedure that can be used to rapidly localize 
   link failures. 
    
   In new technologies such as transparent photonic switching currently 
   no method is defined to locate a fault, and the mechanism by which 
   the fault information is propagated must be sent "out of band" (via 
   the control plane). 
    
   As part of the fault notification procedure, the downstream LMP 
   neighbor that detects data link failures will send an LMP message to 
   its upstream neighbor notifying it of the failure.  When an upstream 
   node receives a failure notification, it can correlate the failure 
   with the corresponding input ports to determine if the failure is 
   between the two nodes. Once the failure has been localized, the 
   signaling protocols can be used to initiate span or path 
   protection/restoration procedures.  
    
9. Generalized Signaling 
    
   The GMPLS signaling extends certain base functions of the RSVP-TE 
   and CR-LDP signaling and, in some cases, adds functionality. These 
   changes and additions impact basic LSP properties, how labels are 
   requested and communicated, the unidirectional nature of LSPs, how 
   errors are propagated, and information provided for synchronizing 
   the ingress and egress. 
    
    
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               23 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   The core GMPLS signaling specification is available in three parts: 
    
      1. A signaling functional description [GMPLS-SIG]. 
      2. RSVP-TE extensions [RSVP-TE-GMPLS]. 
      3. CR-LDP extensions [CR-LDP-GMPLS]. 
    
   In addition, independent parts are available per technology: 
    
      1. GMPLS extensions for SONET and SDH control [SONETSDH-GMPLS]. 
    
   The following MPLS profile applies to GMPLS: 
    
      - Downstream-on-demand label allocation and distribution. 
      - Ingress initiated ordered control. 
      - Liberal (typical), or conservative (could) label retention  
        mode. 
      - Request, traffic/data, or topology driven label allocation  
        strategy. 
      - Explicit routing (typical), or hop-by-hop routing (could). 
    
   The GMPLS signaling defines the following new building blocks on the 
   top of MPLS-TE: 
    
      1. A new generic label request format. 
      2. Labels for TDM, LSC and FSC interfaces, generically known as  
         Generalized Label. 
      3. Waveband switching support. 
      4. Label suggestion by the upstream for optimization purposes  
         (e.g. latency). 
      5. Label restriction by the upstream to support some optical  
         constraints. 
      6. Bi-directional LSP establishment with contention  
         resolution. 
      7. Rapid failure notification to ingress node. 
      8. Protection information currently focusing on link protection, 
         plus primary and secondary LSP indication. 
      9. Explicit routing with explicit label control for a fine  
         degree of control. 
     10. Specific traffic parameters per technology. 
    
   These building blocks will be described in mode details in the 
   following. A complete specification can be found in the 
   corresponding documents. 
    
   Note that GMPLS is highly generic and has many options. Only 
   building blocks 1, 2 and 10 are mandatory, and only within the 
   specific format that is needed. Typically building blocks 6 and 9 
   should be implemented. Building blocks 3, 4, 5, 7 and 8 are 
   optional. 
    
   A typical SDH/SONET switching network would implement building 
   blocks: 1, 2 (the SDH/SONET label), 6, 9 and 10. Building blocks 7 
   and 8 are optional since the protection/restoration can be achieved 
   using SDH/SONET overhead bytes. 
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               24 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

    
   A typical wavelength switching network would implement building 
   blocks: 1, 2 (the generic format), 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9. Building 
   block 3 is only needed in the particular case of waveband switching. 
    
   A typical fiber switching network would implement building blocks: 
   1, 2 (the generic format), 6, 7, 8 and 9. 
    
   A typical MPLS-IP network would not implement any of these building 
   blocks, since the absence of building block 1 would indicate regular 
   MPLS-IP. Note however that building block 1 and 8 can be used to 
   signal MPLS-IP as well. In that case, the MPLS-IP network can 
   benefit from the link protection type (not available in CR-LDP, some 
   very basic form being available in RSVP-TE). Building block 2 is 
   here a regular MPLS label and no new label format is required. 
    
   GMPLS does not specify any profile for RSVP-TE and CR-LDP 
   implementations that have to support GMPLS - except for what is 
   directly related to GMPLS procedures. It is to the manufacturer to 
   decide which are the optional elements and procedures of RSVP-TE and 
   CR-LDP that need to be implemented. Some optional MPLS-TE elements 
   can be useful for TDM, LSC and FSC layers, for instance the setup 
   and holding priorities that are inherited from MPLS-TE. 
    
9.1. Overview: How to Request an LSP 
    
   A TDM, LSC or FSC LSP is established by sending a PATH/Label Request 
   message downstream to the destination. This message contains a 
   Generalized Label Request with the type of LSP (i.e. the layer 
   concerned), and its payload type. An Explicit Route (ERO) is also 
   normally added to the message, but this can be added and/or 
   completed by the first/default LSR. 
    
   The requested bandwidth is encoded in the RSVP-TE SENDER_TSPEC 
   object, or in the CR-LDP Traffic Parameters TLV. Specific parameters 
   for a given technology are given in these traffic parameters, such 
   as the type of signal, concatenation and/or transparency for a 
   SDH/SONET LSP. For some other technology there could just one 
   bandwidth parameter indicating the bandwidth as a floating-point 
   value. 
    
   The requested local protection per link may be requested using the 
   Protection Information Object/TLV. The end-to-end protection type is 
   for further study. 
 
   If the LSP is a bi-directional LSP, an Upstream Label is also 
   specified in the Path/Label request message. This label will be the 
   one to use in the downstream to upstream direction. 
    
   Additionally, a Suggested Label, a Label Set and a Waveband Label 
   can also be included in the message. Other operations are defined in 
   MPLS-TE. 
    

 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               25 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   The downstream node will send back a Resv/Label Mapping message 
   including one Generalized Label object/TLV that can contain several 
   Generalized Labels. For instance, if a concatenated SDH/SONET signal 
   is requested, several labels can be returned. 
    
   In case of SDH/SONET virtual concatenation, a list of labels is 
   returned. Each label identifying one element of the virtual 
   concatenated signal. This limits virtual concatenation to remain 
   within a single (component) link. 
    
   In case of any type of SDH/SONET contiguous concatenation, only one 
   label is returned. That label is the lowest signal of the contiguous 
   concatenated signal (given an order specified in [SONETSDH-GMPLS]). 
    
   In case of SDH/SONET "multiplication", i.e. co-routing of circuits 
   of the same type but without concatenation but all belonging to the 
   same LSP, the explicit list of all signals that take part in the LSP 
   is returned. 
    
9.2. Generalized Label Request 
    
   The Generalized Label Request is a new object/TLV to be added in an 
   RSVP-TE Path message instead of the regular Label Request, or in a 
   CR-LDP Request message in addition to the already existing TLVs. 
   Only one label request can be used per message, so a single LSP can 
   be requested at a time per signaling message. 
    
   The Generalized Label Request gives two major characteristics 
   (parameters) required to support the LSP being requested: the LSP 
   encoding type, and the LSP payload type called Generalized PID (G-
   PID). 
    
   The LSP encoding type indicates the encoding type that will be used 
   with the data associated with the LSP, i.e. the type of technology 
   being considered. For instance, it can be SDH, SONET, Ethernet, ANSI 
   PDH, etc. It represents the nature of the LSP, and not the nature of 
   the links that the LSP traverses. This is used hop-by-hop by each 
   node. 
    
   A link may support a set of encoding formats, where support means 
   that a link is able to carry and switch a signal of one or more of 
   these encoding formats. 
    
   The LSP payload type (G-PID) identifies the payload carried by the 
   LSP, i.e. an identifier of the client layer of that LSP. For some 
   technologies it also indicates the mapping used by the client layer, 
   e.g. byte synchronous mapping of E1. This must be interpreted 
   according to the LSP encoding type of the LSP and is used by the 
   nodes at the endpoints of the LSP to know to which client layer a 
   request is destined, and in some cases by the penultimate hop. 
    
   Other technology specific parameters are not transported in the 
   Generalized Label Request but in technology specific traffic 

 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               26 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   parameters as explained hereafter. Currently, only one specific set 
   of traffic parameters is defined, for SONET/SDH. 
    
   Note that it is expected than specific traffic parameters will be 
   defined in the future for photonic (all optical) switching. 
     
9.3. SONET/SDH Traffic Parameters 
    
   The SDH/SONET traffic parameters [SONETSDH-GMPLS] specify indeed a 
   powerful set of capabilities for SONET (ANSI T1.105) and SDH (ITU-T 
   G.707). Optional non-standard capabilities are also available. 
    
   The first traffic parameter specifies the type of the elementary 
   SONET/SDH signal that comprises the requested LSP, e.g. VC-11, VT6, 
   VC-4, STS-3c, etc. Several transforms can then be applied 
   successively on the elementary Signal to build the final signal 
   being actually requested for the LSP. 
    
   These transforms are the contiguous concatenation, the virtual 
   concatenation, the transparency and the multiplication. Each one is 
   optional. They must be applied strictly in the following order: 
    
   - First, contiguous concatenation can be optionally applied on the 
     Elementary Signal, resulting in a contiguously concatenated 
     signal. 
   - Second, virtual concatenation can be optionally applied either 
     directly on the elementary Signal, or on the contiguously 
     concatenated signal obtained from the previous phase. 
   - Third, some transparency can be optionally specified when 
     requesting a frame as signal rather than a container. Several 
     transparency packages are defined. 
   - Fourth, a multiplication can be optionally applied either directly 
     on the elementary Signal, or on the contiguously concatenated 
     signal obtained from the first phase, or on the virtually 
     concatenated signal obtained from the second phase, or on these 
     signals combined with some transparency. 
    
   For RSVP-TE, the SONET/SDH traffic parameters are carried in a new 
   SENDER-TSPEC and FLOWSPEC. The same format is used for both. There 
   is no Adspec associated with the SENDER_TSPEC, either it is omitted 
   or a default value is used. The content of the FLOWSPEC object 
   received in a Resv message must be identical to the content of the 
   SENDER_TSPEC of the corresponding Path message. In other words, the 
   receiver is not allowed to change the values of the traffic 
   parameters. However some level of negotiation may be achieved as 
   explained in [SONETSDH-GMPLS] 
    
   For CR-LDP, the SONET/SDH traffic parameters are simply carried in a 
   new TLV. 
    
    
    
    
    
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               27 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

9.4. Bandwidth Encoding 
    
   Some technologies that do not have (yet) specific traffic parameters 
   just require a bandwidth encoding transported in a generic form. 
   Bandwidth is carried in 32-bit number in IEEE floating-point format 
   (the unit is bytes per second). Values are carried in a per protocol 
   specific manner. For non-packet LSPs, it is useful to define 
   discrete values to identify the bandwidth of the LSP.  
    
   It should be noted that this bandwidth encoding do not apply to 
   SONET/SDH, for which bandwidth the traffic parameters fully defined 
   the requested SONET/SDH signal. 
    
   The bandwidth is coded in the Peak Data Rate field of Int-Serv 
   objects for RSVP-TE and in the Peak and Committed Data Rate fields 
   of the CR-LDP Traffic Parameters TLV. 
    
9.5. Generalized Label 
    
   The Generalized Label extends the traditional MPLS label by allowing 
   the representation of not only labels that travel in-band with 
   associated data packets, but also (virtual) labels that identify 
   time-slots, wavelengths, or space division multiplexed positions. 
    
   For example, the Generalized Label may identify (a) a single fiber 
   in a bundle, (b) a single waveband within fiber, (c) a single 
   wavelength within a waveband (or fiber), or (d) a time-slot within a 
   wavelength (or fiber). It may also be a generic MPLS label, a Frame 
   Relay label, or an ATM label (VCI/VPI). The format of a label can be 
   as simple as an integer value such as a wavelength label or can be 
   more elaborated such as an SDH/SONET label. 
    
   SDH and SONET define each a multiplexing structure. These 
   multiplexing structures will be used as naming trees to create 
   unique labels. Such a label will identify the exact position (times-
   lot(s)) of a signal in a multiplexing structure. Since the SONET 
   multiplexing structure may be seen as a subset of the SDH 
   multiplexing structure, the same format of label is used for SDH and 
   SONET. 
    
   Since the nodes sending and receiving the Generalized Label know 
   what kinds of link they are using, the Generalized Label does not 
   identify its type, instead the nodes are expected to know from the 
   context what type of label to expect. 
    
   A Generalized Label only carries a single level of label, i.e. it is 
   non-hierarchical. When multiple levels of labels (LSPs within LSPs) 
   are required, each LSP must be established separately. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               28 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

9.6. Waveband Switching 
    
   A special case of wavelength switching is waveband switching. A 
   waveband represents a set of contiguous wavelengths, which can be 
   switched together to a new waveband. For optimization reasons it may 
   be desirable for a photonic cross-connect to optically switch 
   multiple wavelengths as a unit. This may reduce the distortion on 
   the individual wavelengths and may allow tighter separation of the 
   individual wavelengths. A Waveband label is defined to support this 
   special case. 
    
   Waveband switching naturally introduces another level of label 
   hierarchy and as such the waveband is treated the same way all other 
   upper layer labels are treated. As far as the MPLS protocols are 
   concerned there is little difference between a waveband label and a 
   wavelength label except that semantically the waveband can be 
   subdivided into wavelengths whereas the wavelength can only be 
   subdivided into time or statistically multiplexed labels. 
    
9.7. Label Suggestion by the Upstream 
    
   GMPLS allows for a label to be optionally suggested by an upstream 
   node. This suggestion may be overridden by a downstream node but in 
   some cases, at the cost of higher LSP setup time. The suggested 
   label is valuable when establishing LSPs through certain kinds of 
   optical equipment where there may be a lengthy (in electrical terms) 
   delay in configuring the switching fabric. For example micro mirrors 
   may have to be elevated or moved, and this physical motion and 
   subsequent damping takes time. If the labels and hence switching 
   fabric are configured in the reverse direction (the norm) the 
   MAPPING/Resv message may need to be delayed by 10's of milliseconds 
   per hop in order to establish a usable forwarding path. It can be 
   important for restoration purposes where alternate LSPs may need to 
   be rapidly established as a result of network failures. 
    
9.8. Label Restriction by the Upstream 
    
   An upstream node can optionally restrict (limit) the choice of label 
   of a downstream node to a set of acceptable labels. Giving lists 
   and/or ranges of inclusive (acceptable) or exclusive (unacceptable) 
   labels in a Label Set provides this restriction. If not applied, all 
   labels from the valid label range may be used. There are four cases 
   where a label restriction is useful in the "optical" domain. 
    
   1. The first case is where the end equipment is only capable of 
   transmitting and receiving on a small specific set of 
   wavelengths/bands. 
    
   2. The second case is where there is a sequence of interfaces, which 
   cannot support wavelength conversion and require the same wavelength 
   be used end-to-end over a sequence of hops, or even an entire path. 
    


 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               29 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   3. The third case is where it is desirable to limit the amount of 
   wavelength conversion being performed to reduce the distortion on 
   the optical signals. 
    
   4. The last case is where two ends of a link support different sets 
   of wavelengths. 
    
   The receiver of a Label Set must restrict its choice of labels to 
   one that is in the Label Set. A Label Set may be present across 
   multiple hops. In this case each node generates it's own outgoing 
   Label Set, possibly based on the incoming Label Set and the node's 
   hardware capabilities. This case is expected to be the norm for 
   nodes with conversion incapable interfaces. 
    
9.9. Bi-directional LSP 
    
   GMPLS allows establishment of bi-directional symmetric LSPs (not of 
   asymmetric LSPs). A symmetric bi-directional LSP has the same 
   traffic engineering requirements including fate sharing, protection 
   and restoration, LSRs, and resource requirements (e.g., latency and 
   jitter) in each direction. 
    
   In the remainder of this section, the term "initiator" is used to 
   refer to a node that starts the establishment of an LSP and the term 
   "terminator" is used to refer to the node that is the target of the 
   LSP. For a bi-directional LSPs, there is only one initiator and one 
   terminator. 
    
   Normally to establish a bi-directional LSP when using [RSVP-TE] or 
   [CR-LDP] two unidirectional paths must be independently established. 
   This approach has the following disadvantages: 
    
   1. The latency to establish the bi-directional LSP is equal to one 
   round trip signaling time plus one initiator-terminator signaling 
   transit delay. This not only extends the setup latency for 
   successful LSP establishment, but it extends the worst-case latency 
   for discovering an unsuccessful LSP to as much as two times the 
   initiator-terminator transit delay. These delays are particularly 
   significant for LSPs that are established for restoration purposes. 
    
   2. The control overhead is twice that of a unidirectional LSP. This 
   is because separate control messages (e.g. Path and Resv) must be 
   generated for both segments of the bi-directional LSP. 
    
   3. Because the resources are established in separate segments, route 
   selection is complicated. There is also additional potential race 
   for conditions in assignment of resources, which decreases the 
   overall probability of successfully establishing the bi-directional 
   connection. 
    
   4. It is more difficult to provide a clean interface for SDH/SONET 
   equipment that may rely on bi-directional hop-by-hop paths for 
   protection switching. Note that existing SDH/SONET gear transmits 
   the control information in-band with the data. 
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               30 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

    
   5. Bi-directional optical LSPs (or lightpaths) are seen as a 
   requirement for many optical networking service providers. 
    
   With bi-directional LSPs both the downstream and upstream data 
   paths, i.e. from initiator to terminator and terminator to 
   initiator, are established using a single set of signaling messages. 
   This reduces the setup latency to essentially one initiator-
   terminator round trip time plus processing time, and limits the 
   control overhead to the same number of messages as a unidirectional 
   LSP. 
    
   For bi-directional LSPs, two labels must be allocated. Bi-
   directional LSP setup is indicated by the presence of an Upstream 
   Label in the appropriate signaling message. 
    
9.10. Bi-directional LSP Contention Resolution 
    
   Contention for labels may occur between two bi-directional LSP setup 
   requests traveling in opposite directions. This contention occurs 
   when both sides allocate the same resources (ports) at effectively 
   the same time. The GMPLS signaling defines a procedure to resolve 
   that contention, basically the node with the higher node ID will win 
   the contention. To reduce the probability of contention, some 
   mechanisms are also suggested. 
    
9.11. Rapid Notification of Failure 
    
   GMPLS defines three signaling extensions for RSVP-TE that enable 
   expedited notification of failures and other events to nodes 
   responsible for restoring failed LSPs, and modify error handling. 
   For CR-LDP there is not currently a similar mechanism. 
    
   The first extension identifies where event notifications are to be 
   sent. The second provides for general expedited event notification. 
   Such extensions can be used by fast restoration mechanisms. 
    
   The final extension is an RSVP optimization to allow the faster 
   removal of intermediate states in some cases. 
 
9.12. Link Protection 
    
   Protection information is carried in the new optional Protection 
   Information Object/TLV. It currently indicates the desired link 
   protection for each link of an LSP. If a particular protection type, 
   i.e., 1+1, or 1:N, is requested, then a connection request is 
   processed only if the desired protection type can be honored. Note 
   that GMPLS advertises the protection capabilities of a link in the 
   routing protocols. Path computation algorithms may take this 
   information into account when computing paths for setting up LSPs. 
    
   Protection information also indicates if the LSP is a primary or 
   secondary LSP. A secondary LSP is a backup to a primary LSP. The 
   resources of a secondary LSP are normally not used until the primary 
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               31 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   LSP fails, but they may be used by other LSPs until the primary LSP 
   fails over the secondary LSP. At that point, any LSP that is using 
   the resources for the secondary LSP must be preempted. 
    
   Six link protection types are currently defined as individual flags 
   and can be combined: enhanced, dedicated 1+1, dedicated 1:1, shared, 
   unprotected, extra traffic. See [GMPLS-SIG] section 7.1 for a 
   precise definition of each. 
    
9.13. Explicit Routing and Explicit Label Control 
    
   Using an explicit route can control the path taken by an LSP more or 
   less precisely. Typically, the node at the head-end of an LSP finds 
   a more or less precise explicit route and builds an Explicit Route 
   Object (ERO)/ Explicit Route (ER) TLV that contains that route. 
   Possibly, the edge node doesn∆t build any explicit route, and just 
   transmit a signaling request to a default neighbor LSR (as IP hosts 
   today). For instance, an explicit route could be added to a 
   signaling message by the first switching node, on behalf of the edge 
   node. Note also that an explicit route is altered by intermediate 
   LSRs during its progression towards the destination. 
    
   The explicit route is originally defined by MPLS-TE as a list of 
   abstract nodes (i.e. groups of nodes) along the explicit route. Each 
   abstract node can be an IPv4 address prefix, an IPv6 address prefix, 
   or an AS number. This capability allows the generator of the 
   explicit route to have imperfect information about the details of 
   the path. In the simplest case, an abstract node can be a full IP 
   address (32 bits) that identifies a specific node (called a simple 
   abstract node). 
    
   MPLS-TE allows strict and loose abstract nodes. The path between a 
   strict node and its preceding node must include only network nodes 
   from the strict node and its preceding abstract node. The path 
   between a loose node and its preceding node may include other 
   network nodes that are not part of the strict node or its preceding 
   abstract node. 
    
   This explicit route was extended to include interface numbers as 
   abstract nodes to support unnumbered interfaces; and further 
   extended by GMPLS to include labels as abstract nodes. Having labels 
   in an explicit route is an important feature that allows controlling 
   the placement of an LSP with a very fine granularity. This is more 
   likely to be used for TDM, LSC and FSC links. 
    
   In particular, the explicit label control in the explicit route 
   allows terminating an LSP on a particular outgoing port to an egress 
   node. 
    
   This can also be used when it is desirable to "splice" two LSPs 
   together, i.e. where the tail of the first LSP would be "spliced" 
   into the head of the second LSP. 
    

 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               32 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   Another use is when an optimization algorithm is used for an 
   SDH/SONET network. This algorithm can provide very detailed explicit 
   routes, including the label (time-slot) to use on a link, in order 
   to minimize the fragmentation of the SDH/SONET multiplex on the 
   corresponding interface. 
    
   Another use is when the label indicates a particular component in a 
   bundle in order to stay diverse with other components of that 
   bundle, i.e. to control the usage of components in a bundle for 
   different LSPs. 
    
9.14. LSP modification and LSP re-routing 
    
   LSP modification and re-routing are two features already available 
   in MPLS-TE. GMPLS does not add anything new. Elegant re-routing is 
   possible with the concept of "make-before-break" whereby an old path 
   is still used while a new path is set up by avoiding double 
   reservation of resources. Then, the node performing the re-routing 
   can swap on the new path and close the old path. This feature is 
   supported with RSVP-TE (using shared explicit filters) and CR-LDP 
   (using the action indicator flag). 
    
   LSP modification consists in changing some LSP parameters, but 
   normally without changing the route. It is supported using the same 
   mechanism as re-routing. However, the semantic of LSP modification 
   will differ from one technology to the other. For instance, further 
   studies are required to understand the impact of dynamically 
   changing some SDH/SONET circuit characteristics such as the 
   bandwidth, the protection type, the transparency, the concatenation, 
   etc. 
    
9.15. Route recording  
    
   In order to improve the reliability and the manageability of the LSP 
   being established, the concept of the route recording was introduced 
   in RSVP-TE to function as: 
    
   - First, a loop detection mechanism to discover L3 routing loops, or 
   loops inherent in the explicit route (this mechanism is strictly 
   exclusive with the use of explicit routing objects). 
    
   - Second, a route recording mechanism collects up-to-date detailed 
   path information on a hop-by-hop basis during the LSP setup process. 
   This mechanism provides valuable information to the source and 
   destination nodes. Any intermediate routing change at setup time, in 
   case of loose explicit routing, will be reported. 
    
   - Third, a recorded route can be used as input for an explicit 
   route. This is useful if a source node receives the recorded route 
   from a destination node and applies it as an explicit route in order 
   to "pin down the path". 
    
   Within the GMPLS architecture only the second and third functions 
   are mainly applicable for TDM, LSC and FSC layers. 
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               33 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

    
10. Forwarding Adjacencies (FA) 
    
   To improve scalability of MPLS TE (and thus GMPLS) it may be useful 
   to aggregate multiple TE LSPs inside a bigger TE LSP. Intermediate 
   nodes see the external LSP only, they don't have to maintain 
   forwarding states for each internal LSP, less signaling messages 
   need to be exchanged and the external LSP can be somehow protected 
   instead (or in addition) to the internal LSPs. This can considerably 
   increase the scalability of the signaling. 
 
   The aggregation is accomplished by (a) an LSR creating a TE LSP, (b) 
   the LSR forming a forwarding adjacency out of that LSP (advertising 
   this LSP as a unidirectional link into ISIS/OSPF), (c) allowing 
   other LSRs to use forwarding adjacencies for their path computation, 
   and (d) nesting of LSPs originated by other LSRs into that LSP (e.g. 
   by using the label stack construct in the case of IP). 
    
   An LSR may (under its local configuration control) announce an LSP 
   as a link into ISIS/OSPF.  When this link is advertised into the 
   same instance of ISIS/OSPF as the one that determines the route 
   taken by the LSP, we call such a link a "forwarding adjacency" (FA). 
   We refer to the LSP as the "forwarding adjacency LSP", or just FA-
   LSP.  Note that since the advertised entity is a link in ISIS/OSPF, 
   both the endpoint LSRs of the FA-LSP must belong to the same ISIS 
   level/OSPF area (intra-area improvement of scalability). 
    
   In general, creation/termination of a FA and its FA-LSP could be 
   driven either by mechanisms outside of MPLS (e.g., via configuration 
   control on the LSR at the head-end of the adjacency), or by 
   mechanisms within MPLS (e.g., as a result of the LSR at the head-end 
   of the adjacency receiving LSP setup requests originated by some 
   other LSRs). 
    
   ISIS/OSPF floods the information about FAs just as it floods the 
   information about any other links.  As a result of this flooding, an 
   LSR has in its TE link state database the information about not just 
   conventional links, but FAs as well. 
    
   An LSR, when performing path computation, uses not just conventional 
   links, but FAs as well.  Once a path is computed, the LSR uses RSVP-
   TE/CR-LDP for establishing label binding along the path. FAs need 
   simple extensions to signaling and routing protocols. 
    
10.1 Routing and Forwarding Adjacencies 
    
   Forwarding adjacencies may be represented as either unnumbered or 
   numbered links. A FA can also be a bundle of LSPs between two nodes. 
    
   FAs are advertised as GMPLS TE links such as defined in [HIERARCHY]. 
   GMPLS TE links are advertised in OSPF and ISIS such as defined in 
   [OSPF-TE-GMPLS] and [ISIS-TE-GMPLS]. These last two specifications 
   enhance [OSPF-TE] and [ISIS-TE] that defines a base TE link. 
    
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               34 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   When a FA is created dynamically, its TE attributes are inherited 
   from the FA-LSP that induced its creation. [HIERARCHY] specifies how 
   each TE parameter of the FA is inherited from the FA-LSP. Note that 
   the bandwidth of the FA must be at least as big as the FA-LSP that 
   induced it, but may be bigger if only discrete bandwidths are 
   available for the FA-LSP. In general, for dynamically provisioned 
   forwarding adjacencies, a policy-based mechanism may be needed to 
   associate attributes to forwarding adjacencies. 
    
   A FA advertisement could contain the information about the path 
   taken by the FA-LSP associated with that FA. Other LSRs may use this 
   information for path computation. This information is carried in a 
   new OSPF and IS-IS TLV called the Path TLV. 
    
   It is possible that the underlying path information might change 
   over time, via configuration updates, or dynamic route 
   modifications, resulting in the change of that TLV. 
    
   If forwarding adjacencies are bundled (via link bundling), and if 
   the resulting bundled link carries a Path TLV, the underlying path 
   followed by each of the FA-LSPs that form the component links must 
   be the same. 
    
   It is expected that forwarding adjacencies will not be used for 
   establishing ISIS/OSPF peering relation between the routers at the 
   ends of the adjacency. 
    
10.2. Signaling aspects 
    
   For the purpose of processing the explicit route in a Path/Request 
   message of an LSP that is to be tunneled over a forwarding 
   adjacency, an LSR at the head-end of the FA-LSP views the LSR at the 
   tail of that FA-LSP as adjacent (one IP hop away). 
    
10.3 Cascading of Forwarding Adjacencies 
    
   With an integrated model several layers are controlled using the 
   same routing and signaling protocols. A network may then have links 
   with different multiplexing/demultiplexing capabilities. For 
   example, a node may be able to multiplex/demultiplex individual 
   packets on a given link, and may be able to multiplex/demultiplex 
   channels within a SONET payload on other links.  
    
   A new OSPF and IS-IS sub-TLV has been defined to advertise the 
   multiplexing capability of each interface: PSC, L2SC, TDM, LSC or 
   FSC. This sub-TLV is named the Link Multiplex Capability sub-TLV and 
   complements the sub-TLVs defined in [OSPF-TE-GMPLS] and [ISIS-TE-
   GMPLS]. The information carried in this sub-TLV is used to construct 
   LSP regions, and determine region∆s boundaries. 
 
   Path computation may take into account region boundaries when 
   computing a path for an LSP. For example, path computation may 
   restrict the path taken by an LSP to only the links whose 
   multiplexing/demultiplexing capability is PSC. When an LSP need to 
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               35 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   cross a region boundary, it can trigger the establishment of an FA 
   at the underlying layer (i.e. the L2SC layer). This can trigger a 
   cascading of FAs between layers with the following obvious order: 
   L2SC, then TDM, then LSC, and then finally FSC. 
 
11. Network Management 
 
   Service Providers (SPs) use network management extensively to 
   configure, monitor or provision various devices in their network. It 
   is important to note that a SP∆s equipment may be distributed across 
   geographically separate sites, making distributed management even 
   more important. The service provider should utilize an NMS system 
   and standard management protocols such as SNMP [RFC1901] [RFC1902] 
   [RFC1903] [RFC1904] [RFC1905] [RFC1906] and its associated MIBs as 
   standard interfaces to configure, monitor and provision devices at 
   various locations. The service provider may also wish to use the 
   command line interface (CLI) provided by vendors with their devices, 
   but this however, is not a standard or recommended solution due to 
   the fact that there is no standard CLI language or interface, which 
   results in N different CLI∆s in a network with devices from N 
   different vendors. In the context of GMPLS, it is extremely 
   important for standard interfaces to the SP∆s devices (SNMP) to 
   exist due to the nature of the technology itself. Since GMPLS 
   comprises many different layers of control-plane and data-plane 
   technology, it is important for management interfaces in this area 
   to be flexible enough to allow the manager to manage GMPLS easily, 
   and in a standard way.  
    
11.1 Network Management Systems (NMS) 
    
   The NMS system should maintain the collective information about each 
   device within the system. Note that the NMS system may actually be 
   comprised of several distributed applications (i.e.: alarm 
   aggregators, configuration consoles, polling applications, etc...) 
   that collectively comprises the SP∆s NMS. In this way, it can make 
   provisioning and maintenance decisions with the full knowledge of 
   the entire SP network. Configuration or provisioning information 
   (i.e.: requests for new services) could be entered into the NMS and 
   subsequently distributed via SNMP to the remote devices, making the 
   SP∆s job of managing the network much more compact and effortless 
   than having to manage each device individually (i.e.: via CLI). 
   Security and access control can be achieved through the use of 
   SNMPv3 and the View Access Control Model [SNMPv3VACM]. This approach 
   can be very effectively used within an SP network, since the SP has 
   access to and control over all devices within its domain. 
   Standardized MIBs will need to be developed before this approach can 
   be used ubiquitously to provision, configure and monitor devices in 
   non-heterogeneous networks or across SP boundaries. 
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               36 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

11.2 Management Information Base (MIB) 
    
   In the context of GMPLS, it is extremely important for standard 
   interfaces to devices to exist due to the nature of the technology 
   itself. Since GMPLS comprises many different layers of control-plane 
   technology, it is important for SNMP MIBs in this area to be 
   flexible enough to allow the manager to manage the entire control 
   plane. This should be through a set of MIBs that may cooperate 
   (i.e.: coordinated row-creation on the agent), or through more 
   generalized MIBs that aggregate some of the desired actions to be 
   taken and push those details down to the devices. It is important to 
   note that in certain circumstances, it may be necessary to duplicate 
   some small subset of manageable objects in new MIBs for the 
   convenience of management. Control of some parts of GMPLS may also 
   be achieved though the use of existing MIB interfaces (i.e.: 
   existing SONET MIB), or though separate ones, which are yet to be 
   defined. MIBs may have been previously defined in the IETF or ITU. 
   Existing MIBs may need to be extended to facilitate some of the new 
   functionality desired by GMPLS. In these cases, the working group 
   should work on new versions of these MIBs so that these extensions 
   can be added. 
 
11.3 Tools 
 
   As in traditional networks, standard tools such as traceroute 
   [RFC1393] and ping [RFC1739] are needed for debugging and 
   performance monitoring of GMPLS networks, and mainly for the control 
   plane topology that will mimic the data plane topology. Furthermore, 
   such tools provide network reachability information. The GMPLS 
   control protocols will need to expose certain pieces of information 
   in order for these tools to function properly and to provide 
   information germane to GMPLS. These tools should be made available 
   via the CLI. These tools should also be made available for remote 
   invocation via the SNMP interface [RFC2925]. 
 
11.4 Fault Correlation Between Multiple Layers 
 
   Due to the nature of GMPLS and the fact that potential layers may be 
   involved in the control and transmission of GMPLS data and control 
   information, it is therefore required that a fault in one layer be 
   passed to the adjacent higher and lower layers in an effort to 
   notify them of the fault. However, due to nature of these many 
   layers, it is possible and even probable, that hundreds or even 
   thousands of notifications may need to transpire between layers. 
   This is undesirable for several reasons. First, these notifications 
   will overwhelm the device. Second, if the device(s) are programmed 
   to emit SNMP Notifications [RFC1901] then the large number of 
   notifications the device may attempt to emit may overwhelm the 
   network with a storm of notifications. Furthermore, even if the 
   device emits the notifications, the NMS that must process these 
   notifications will either be overwhelmed, or will be processing 
   redundant information. That is, if 1000 interfaces at layer B are 
   stacked above a single interface below it at layer A, and the 
   interface at A goes down, the interfaces at layer B should not emit 
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               37 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   notifications. Instead, the interface at layer A should emit a 
   single notification. The NMS receiving this notification should be 
   able to correlate the fact that this interface has many others 
   stacked above it and take appropriate action, if necessary. 
    
   Devices that support GMPLS should provide mechanisms for 
   aggregating, summarizing, enabling and disabling of inter-layer 
   notifications for the reasons described above. In the context of 
   SNMP MIBs, all MIBs that are used by GMPLS must provide 
   enable/disable objects for all notification objects. Furthermore, 
   these MIBs must also provide notification summarization objects or 
   functionality (as described above) as well. NMS systems and standard 
   tools which process notifications or keep track of the many layers 
   on any given devices must be capable of processing the vast amount 
   of information which may potentially be emitted by network devices 
   running GMPLS at any point in time. 
 
12. Security considerations 
    
   GMPLS defines a new control plane architecture for multiple types of 
   network elements. In general, since LSPs established using GMPLS are 
   expected to carry high volumes of data and consume significant 
   network resources, security mechanisms are required to safeguard the 
   underlying network against attacks on the control plane and/or 
   unauthorized usage of data transport resources.  
    
   Security requirements depend on the level of trust between nodes 
   that exchange GMPLS control messages as well as the exposure of the 
   control channel to third parties. In general, a network node may 
   apply more relaxed security requirements when exchanging GMPLS 
   control messages with nodes under the same administrative domain 
   than when talking to nodes in a different domain. In this respect, 
   network to user (UNI) and network-to-network interfaces are expected 
   to have higher security requirements than node-to-node interfaces.  
    
   Security mechanisms can provide two main properties: authentication 
   and confidentiality. Authentication can provide origin verification, 
   message integrity and replay protection, while confidentiality 
   ensures that a third party cannot decipher the contents of a 
   message. In situations where GMPLS deployment requires primarily 
   authentication, the respective authentication mechanisms of the 
   GMPLS component protocols may be used ([RFC2747], [LDP], [RFC2385], 
   [LMP]). Additionally, the IPSEC suite of protocols ([RFC2402], 
   [RFC2406], [RFC2409]) may be used to provide authentication, 
   confidentiality or both, for a GMPLS control channel; this option 
   offers the benefit of combined protection of all GMPLS component 
   protocols. 
    
   Note however that GMPLS itself introduces no new security 
   considerations to the current MPLS-TE signaling (RSVP-TE, CR-LDP), 
   routing protocols (OSPF-TE, IS-IS-TE) or network management 
   protocols (SNMP). 
    
    
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               38 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

13. Acknowledgements 
    
   This draft is the work of numerous authors and consists of a 
   composition of a number of previous drafts in this area. 
    
   Many thanks to Ben Mack-Crane (Tellabs) for all the useful SDH/SONET 
   discussions that we had together. Thanks also to Pedro Falcao 
   (Ebone) and Michael Moelants (Ebone) for their SDH/SONET and optical 
   technical advice and support. Finally, many thanks also to Krishna 
   Mitra (Calient) and Curtis Villamizar (Avici). 
    
   A list of the drafts from which material and ideas were incorporated 
   follows: 
    
   [GMPLS-SIG]     draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-signaling-04.txt 
                   Generalized MPLS - Signaling Functional Description 
    
   [RSVP-TE-GMPLS] draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-rsvp-te-03.txt 
                   Generalized MPLS Signaling - RSVP-TE Extensions 
    
   [CR-LDP-GMPLS]  draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-cr-ldp-03.txt 
                   Generalized MPLS Signaling - CR-LDP Extensions 
    
   [SONETSDH-GMPLS] draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-sonet-sdh-01.txt 
                    GMPLS Extensions for SONET and SDH Control 
    
   [LMP]           draft-ietf-mpls-lmp-01.txt 
                   Link Management Protocol (LMP)  
    
   [HIERARCHY]     draft-ietf-mpls-lsp-hierarchy-02.txt 
                   LSP Hierarchy with MPLS TE 
    
   [RSVP-TE-UNNUM] draft-ietf-mpls-rsvp-unnum-01.txt 
                   Signalling Unnumbered Links in RSVP-TE 
    
   [CR-LDP-UNNUM]  draft-ietf-mpls-crldp-unnum-01.txt 
                   Signalling Unnumbered Links in CR-LDP 
    
   [BUNDLE]        draft-kompella-mpls-bundle-05.txt 
                   Link Bundling in MPLS Traffic Engineering 
    
   [OSPF-TE-GMPLS] draft-kompella-ospf-gmpls-extensions-01.txt 
                   OSPF Extensions in Support of Generalized MPLS 
    
   [ISIS-TE-GMPLS] draft-ietf-isis-gmpls-extensions-02.txt 
                   IS-IS Extensions in Support of Generalized MPLS 
    
14. References 
    
   [RFC1393]    G. Malkin, "Traceroute Using an IP Option", IETF 
                RFC 1393, January 1993. 
    
   [RFC1901]    Case, J., McCloghrie, K., Rose, M., and S. 
                Waldbusser, "Introduction to Community-based 
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               39 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

                SNMPv2", IETF RFC 1901, January 1996. 
    
   [RFC1902]    Case, J., McCloghrie, K., Rose, M., and S. 
                Waldbusser, "Structure of Management Information for  
                Version 2 of the Simple Network Management Protocol  
                (SNMPv2)", IETF RFC 1901, January 1996. 
    
   [RFC1903]    Case, J., McCloghrie, K., Rose, M., and S. 
                Waldbusser, "Textual Conventions for Version 2 of the 
                Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMPv2)",  
                IETF RFC 1901, January 1996. 
    
   [RFC1904]    Case, J., McCloghrie, K., Rose, M., and S. 
                Waldbusser, "Conformance Statements for Version 2 of  
                the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMPv2)",  
                IETF RFC 1901, January 1996. 
    
   [RFC1905]    Case, J., McCloghrie, K., Rose, M., and S. 
                Waldbusser, "Protocol Operations for Version 2 of 
                the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMPv2)", 
                IETF RFC 1905, January 1996. 
    
   [RFC1906]    Case, J., McCloghrie, K., Rose, M., and S. 
                Waldbusser, "Transport Mappings for Version 2 of 
                the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMPv2)", 
                IETF RFC 1906, January 1996. 
    
   [SNMPv3VACM] Wijnen, B., Presuhn, R., and K. McCloghrie, "View- 
                based Access Control Model (VACM) for the Simple 
                Network Management Protocol (SNMP)", IETF RFC 2575, 
                April 1999. 
    
   [RFC1739]    G. Kessler, S. Shepard , "A Primer On Internet and  
                TCP/IP Tools", RFC1739, December 1994. 
    
  [RFC2328]    J. Moy, "OSPF Version 2", RFC 2328, Standard 
               Track, April 1998.  
    
   [RFC2370]    R. Coltun, "The OSPF Opaque LSA Option", RFC 2370 
                Standard Track, July 1998. 
    
   [RFC2385]    A. Heffernan, "Protection of BGP Sessions via the TCP 
                MD5 Signature Option," IETF RFC 2385. 
    
   [RFC2402]    S. Kent and R. Atkinson, "IP Authentication Header," 
                RFC 2402. 
    
   [RFC2406]    S. Kent and R. Atkinson, "IP Encapsulating Security 
                Payload (ESP)," IETF RFC 2406. 
    
   [RFC2409]    D. Harkins and D. Carrel, "The Internet Key Exchange 
               (IKE)", IETF RFC 2409. 
    
   [RFC2747]    F. Baker et al. "RSVP Cryptographic Authentication",  
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               40 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

                IETF RFC 2747. 
    
   [RFC2925]    K. White , "Definitions of Managed Objects for Remote  
                Ping, Traceroute, and Lookup Operations", IETF RFC 
                2925, September 2000. 
    
   [LPD]        L. Andersson, P. Doolan, N. Feldman, A. Fredette, 
                B. Thomas, "LDP Specification", IETF RFC 3036, January 
                2001. 
    
   [OSPF-TE]    D. Katz, D. Yeung, and K. Kompella, "Traffic 
                Engineering Extensions to OSPF" draft-katz-yeung-ospf- 
                traffic-05.txt. 
    
   [LMP-WDM]    A. Fredette et al., "Link Management Protocol (LMP) for 
                WDM Transmission Systems," Internet Draft, Work in 
                Progress, draft-fredette-lmp-wdm-01.txt, March 2001. 
    
  [MPLS-TEO]   D. Awduche et al., "Multi-Protocol Lambda Switching: 
                Combining MPLS Traffic Engineering Control With Optical 
                Crossconnects," Internet Draft, Work in Progress, 
                draft-awduche-mpls-te-optical-03.txt, April 2001. 
    
15. Author's Addresses 
    
   Peter Ashwood-Smith                Eric Mannie (editor) 
   Nortel Networks Corp.              Ebone (GTS) 
   P.O. Box 3511 Station C,           Terhulpsesteenweg 6A 
   Ottawa, ON K1Y 4H7                 1560 Hoeilaart 
   Canada                             Belgium 
   Phone: +1 613 763 4534             Phone: +32 2 658 56 52 
   Email:                             Email: eric.mannie@gts.com 
   petera@nortelnetworks.com 
    
   Daniel O. Awduche                  Thomas D. Nadeau 
   Movaz Networks                     Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   7296 Jones Branch Drive            250 Apollo Drive 
   Suite 615                          Chelmsford, MA 01824 
   McLean, VA 22102                   USA 
   USA                                Phone: +1 978 244 3051 
   Phone: +1 703 847-7350             Email: tnadeau@cisco.com 
   Email: awduche@movaz.com 
    
   Ayan Banerjee                      Dimitri Papadimitriou 
   Calient Networks                   Alcatel - IPO NSG 
   5853 Rue Ferrari                   Francis Wellesplein, 1 
   San Jose, CA 95138                 B-2018 Antwerpen 
   USA                                Belgium 
   Phone: +1 408 972-3645             Phone: +32 3 240-84-91 
   Email: abanerjee@calient.net       Email: 
                                      dimitri.papadimitriou@alcatel.be 
                                       


 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               41 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   Debashis Basak                     Dimitrios Pendarakis 
   Accelight Networks                 Tellium, Inc. 
   70 Abele Road, Bldg.1200           2 Crescent Place 
   Bridgeville, PA 15017              P.O. Box 901 
   USA                                Oceanport, NJ 07757-0901 
   Phone: +1 412 220-2102 (ext115)    USA 
   email: dbasak@accelight.com        Email: DPendarakis@tellium.com 
                                       
   Lou Berger                         Bala Rajagopalan 
   Movaz Networks, Inc.               Tellium, Inc. 
   7926 Jones Branch Drive            2 Crescent Place 
   Suite 615                          P.O. Box 901 
   MCLean VA, 22102                   Oceanport, NJ 07757-0901 
   USA                                USA 
   Phone: +1 703 847-1801             Phone: +1 732 923 4237 
   Email: lberger@movaz.com           Email: braja@tellium.com 
                                       
   Greg Bernstein                     Yakov Rekhter 
   Ciena Corporation                  Juniper 
   10480 Ridgeview Court              Email: yakov@juniper.net 
   Cupertino, CA 94014 
   USA 
   Phone: +1 408 366 4713 
   Email: greg@ciena.com 
    
   John Drake                         Hal Sandick  
   Calient Networks                   Nortel Networks  
   5853 Rue Ferrari                   Email: 
   San Jose, CA 95138                 hsandick@nortelnetworks.com 
   USA 
   Phone: +1 408 972 3720 
   Email: jdrake@calient.net 
    
   Yanhe Fan                          Debanjan Saha 
   Axiowave Networks, Inc.            Tellium Optical Systems 
   100 Nickerson Road                 2 Crescent Place 
   Marlborough, MA 01752              Oceanport, NJ 07757-0901 
   USA                                USA 
   Phone: +1 508 460 6969 Ext. 627    Phone: +1 732 923 4264 
   Email: yfan@axiowave.com           Email: dsaha@tellium.com 
                                       
   Don Fedyk                          Vishal Sharma 
   Nortel Networks Corp.              Metanoia, Inc. 
   600 Technology Park Drive          335 Elan Village Lane 
   Billerica, MA 01821                San Jose, CA 95134 
   USA                                USA 
   Phone: +1-978-288-4506             Phone:  +1 408 943 1794 
   Email:                             Email: vsharma87@yahoo.com 
   dwfedyk@nortelnetworks.com          





 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               42 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   Gert Grammel                       George Swallow 
   Alcatel                            Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   Via Trento, 30                     250 Apollo Drive 
   20059 Vimercate (Mi)               Chelmsford, MA 01824 
   Italy                              USA 
   Email: gert.grammel@alcatel.it     Phone: +1 978 244 8143 
                                      Email: swallow@cisco.com 
                                       
   Kireeti Kompella                   Z. Bo Tang 
   Juniper Networks, Inc.             Tellium, Inc. 
   1194 N. Mathilda Ave.              2 Crescent Place 
   Sunnyvale, CA 94089                P.O. Box 901 
   USA                                Oceanport, NJ 07757-0901 
   Email: kireeti@juniper.net         USA 
                                      Phone: +1 732 923 4231 
                                      Email: btang@tellium.com 
                                       
   Alan Kullberg                      John Yu 
   NetPlane Systems, Inc.             Zaffire Inc. 
   888 Washington                     2630 Orchard Parkway 
   St.Dedham, MA 02026                San Jose, CA 95134 
   USA                                USA 
   Phone: +1 781 251-5319             Email: jzyu@zaffire.com 
   Email: akullber@netplane.com 
    
   Jonathan P. Lang                   Alex Zinin 
   Calient Networks                   Cisco Systems 
   25 Castilian                       150 W. Tasman Dr. 
   Goleta, CA 93117                   San Jose, CA 95134 
   Email:  jplang@calient.net         Email: azinin@cisco.com 
    
   Fong Liaw                           
   Zaffire Inc. 
   2630 Orchard Parkway 
   San Jose, CA 95134 
   USA 
   Email: fliaw@zaffire.com 
 
Full Copyright Statement 
    
   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               43 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."  












































 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               44 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

Appendix 1 Brief overview of the ITU-T work on G.ASTN/G.ASON 
    
   This appendix gives a brief overview of the work performed in ITU-T 
   related to the control plane for transport networks, and briefly 
   links it to the IETF related work. 
    
   In ITU-T the work is performed in Study Group (SG) 13/Question 10 
   for G.astn, SG15/Q12 for G.ason and SG15/Q14 for G.dcn, G.dcm, 
   G.ndisc, G.sdisc and G.cemr. 
 
   G.astn describes the network level requirements for the control plane 
   of Automatically Switched Transport Networks (ASTNs). Such a network 
   provides a set of control functions for the purpose of setting up and 
   releasing connections across a network. It is recognized that 
   transport networks support multiple clients. As such, ASTNs are 
   intended to be client independent. 
 
A.1 Terminology issues 
    
   A common misunderstanding is related to the usage of terms like 
   layer, LSP and client/server. In IETF the expression "layer" is 
   attached to a technology present in a network like e.g. OTN, SDH, 
   ATM, IP. However ITU-T uses the term "layer" for any kind of 
   mapping. This includes the mapping between different technologies 
   like SDH/SONET in OTN as well as internal mappings like SDH/SONET 
   low order layer and high order layer. In this case a client server 
   relationship between layers is automatically present. In order to 
   avoid misunderstandings the term "technology" is used hereafter to 
   represent the IETF understanding of a layer. 
    
   In GMPLS the notion of Label Switched Path (LSP) is defined to 
   describe connections between two Label Switch Routers (LSRs). In 
   packet switched networks LSPs can be "tunneled" by encapsulating a 
   packet into another packet within the same technology (also known as 
   "label stacking"). What is considered to be encapsulation in IETF is 
   considered to be a mapping in ITU-T that implies the use of a 
   client-server layer relationship. 
 
   In ITU-T the terms "client" and "server" are used to define the role 
   of a layer with respect to another layer e.g. SDH can be the client 
   layer of an OTN server layer network. This distinction is not used 
   in IETF where a layer is associated to a certain type of technology. 
   Instead the term "client" is used for a customer device attached to 
   a service provider network, both belonging to distinct 
   administrative authorities. 
 
A.2 Common Equipment Management [G.cemr] 
    
   The G.cemr recommendation specifies those Equipment Management 
   Functions (EMF) requirements that are common for SDH and OTN.   
   The equipment management function (EMF) provides the means through 
   which a Network Element Level manager manages the Network Element 
   Function (NEF). 
    
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               45 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

   These kinds of functions are not detailed in the current GMPLS work 
   since it is focused on control plane related aspects. Network 
   Management aspects are subject of other working groups in IETF.  
    
A.3 Data Communications Network [G.dcn] 
    
   According to G.dcn the various functions, which constitute a 
   telecommunications network, can be classified into two broad 
   functional groups. One is the transport functional group, which 
   transfers any telecommunications information from one point to 
   another point(s). The other is the control functional group, which 
   realizes various ancillary services and operations and maintenance 
   functions. 
    
   The Data Communications Network (DCN) provides transport for the 
   applications associated with the control functional group. Examples 
   of such applications that are transported by the DCN are: transport 
   network operations/management applications, DCN 
   operations/management applications, Automatic Switched Transport 
   Services (ASTN) control plane applications, voice communications, 
   etc. 
    
   The IP-based DCN provides Layer 1 (physical), Layer 2 (data-link) 
   and Layer 3 (network) functionality and consists of 
   routing/switching functionality interconnected via links. These 
   links can be implemented over various interfaces, including WAN and 
   LAN interfaces. 
    
   This recommendation provides the architecture requirements for an 
   IP-based DCN, the requirements for inter-working between an IP-based 
   DCN and an OSI-based DCN, and the IP-based DCN interface 
   specifications. 
 
   Since in GMPLS the signaling and management plane are orthogonal to 
   each other, different kinds of networks can be used for both tasks. 
   In GMLS, LMP defines mechanisms for the control channel management, 
   which is used to establish and maintain control channels between 
   nodes. However, GMPLS assume that messages are transported by IP but 
   doesn∆t specify how the DCN should be implemented. 
 
A.4 Distributed Connection Management [G.dcm] 
    
   The G.dcm Recommendation covers the areas associated with the 
   signaling aspects of automatic switched transport network, such as 
   attribute specifications, the message sets, the interface 
   requirements, the DCM state diagrams, and the interworking functions 
   for the distributed connection management 
 
   This is the main purpose of the GMPLS signaling, using extensions to 
   protocols like CR-LDP and RSVP-TE. 
 
 
 
 
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               46 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

A.5 Generalized Automatic Neighbor Discovery [G.ndisc]  
    
   The G.ndisc Recommendation provides the requirements and message 
   sets for the automatic neighbor for the User-to-Network Interface 
   (UNI), Internal Node-to-Node Interface (I-NNI), External Node-to-
   Node Interface (E-NNI) and Physical Interface (PI). These 
   requirements determine the discovery process across these interfaces 
   that aid automated connection management. 
 
   GMPLS is an IP centric control plane incorporating protocols defined 
   for routing and neighbor discovery such OSPF and IS-IS. In addition, 
   LMP fulfills some of these requirements as well, especially for the 
   component links of bundled link. 
 
A.6 Generalized Automatic Service Discovery [G.sdisc] 
    
   The G.sdisc Recommendation provides the requirements and message 
   sets for the automatic service discovery for the User-to-Network 
   Interface (UNI), Internal Node-to-Node Interface (I-NNI), External 
   Node-to-Node Interface (E-NNI) and Physical Interface (PI). These 
   requirements determine the discovery process across these interfaces 
   that aid automated connection management. 
 
   GMPLS signaling and routing protocols LMP allows some level of 
   automatic service discovery. 
    
A.7 OTN routing [G.rtg] 
    
   No ITU-T contribution available yet. 
    
   IP based intra-domain (e.g. OSPF, IS-IS) and inter-domain (e.g. BGP-
   4) routing protocols are the strength of a GMPLS control plane. 
   Moreover, BGP-4 is the only practical solution for policy routing 
   between different operators that was proved on a very large scale. 
   GMPLS extends the TE extensions to OSPF and IS-IS. Work on BGP-4 is 
   ongoing. 
    
A.8 OTN Connection Admission Control [G.cac] 
    
   According to G.astn, Connection Admission Control (CAC) is necessary 
   for authentication of the user and controlling access to network 
   resources. CAC shall be provided as part of the control plane 
   functionality. It is the role of the CAC function to determine if 
   there is sufficient free resource available to allow a new 
   connection. If there is, the CAC may permit the connection request to 
   proceed, alternatively, if there is not, it shall notify the 
   originator of the connection request that the request has been 
   denied. Connections may be denied on the basis of available free 
   capacity or alternatively on the basis of prioritization. CAC 
   policies are outside the scope of standardization. 
    
   GMPLS achieves authentication (and other security related features) 
   using the broad range of security mechanisms available in the GMPLS 
   protocols themselves and/or using IPSEC. 
 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               47 

 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt              June 2001  

 
A.9 OTN Link Management [G.lm] 
    
   No ITU-T contribution available yet. 
 
   The Link Management Protocol (LMP) of GMPLS is a collection of 
   procedures between adjacent nodes that provide local services such 
   as control channel management, link connectivity verification, link 
   property correlation, and fault management. 
 
 
 










































 
E. Mannie et. al.    Internet-Draft December 2001               48 
