


Network Working Group				      Yufei Wang (Photuris)
Internet Draft					      Leah Zhang (Photuris)
Expiration Date: December 2001                 

						      June 2001


      A Scalable and Hybrid IP Network Traffic Engineering Approach
             
		draft-wang-te-hybrid-approach-00.txt


Status of this memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."


   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   Currently a common approach to IP network traffic engineering is
   the overlay approach where explicit end to end MPLS LSPs between all
   possible edge nodes are established to form a full mesh virtual network
   on top of the physical topology. By carefully choosing the routes for
   these LSPs, one can completely control how traffic flows across the 
   network and therefore achieve any given traffic engineering objective. 
   However scalability is a serious concern with this approach because it
   requires N square number of LSPs where N is the number of nodes. 


WAng, Y. & Zhang, L.                                            [Page 1]

Internet Draft   draft-wang-te-hybrid-approach-00.txt      June 2001




   A recent research [1] proposes a scalable traffic engineering method
   by optimizing the IGP link weights and shows that theoretically the 
   native shortest path routing (OSPF or IS-IS) under appropriate link 
   weight setting matches the performance of the overlay approach exactly.
   But this theoretical result faces two major practical problems. One is
   that it only applies to static traffic engineering as link weights 
   cannot be changed too often due to IGP slow convergence. The other is
   that it may need to split traffic across multiple equal cost shortest
   paths if any, in unequal proportions and currently OSPF only supports
   equal splitting. We are proposing a new approach called the hybrid 
   approach which relies on both IGP link weight setting and MPLS LSPs. 
   The hybrid approach retains the scalability of the link weight method
   and at the same time eliminates the two practical problems of it. 
   The basic idea of this new approach is to rely on IP native routing
   (OSPF, IS-IS) for most part of the network and to use MPLS LSPs for
   load balancing at some locations only when necessary. The new approach
   achieves the exact performance of the overlay approach without 
   the associated complexity.

   
Introduction


   Traffic engineering is concerned with the problem of how to optimally
   map traffic flows onto the network topology so that network resources 
   are best utilized and network congestions are minimized or completely 
   eliminated [2]. If the traffic matrix (end to end bandwidth 
   requirement, each individual requirement is called a demand) and 
   network bandwidth are given, the traffic engineering problem can be
   modeled as a mathematical problem called multi-commodity network 
   flows [3] which can then be solved easily by some very efficient 
   algorithms such as the simplex method [4]. The solution of this 
   mathematical model provides the optimal set of end to end routes, 
   one for each demand. Therefore how to determine the optimal
   routes is not a problem at all. But how to implement these routes in 
   real world IP networks is the concern. This draft addresses precisely
   this concern.



WAng, Y. & Zhang, L.                                            [Page 2]

Internet Draft   draft-wang-te-hybrid-approach-00.txt      June 2001
                                                                                                                                                      
    
   One straightforward implementation is to set up an explicit LSP for
   each of these routes so that each demand will follow its respective
   optimal routing exactly. This is the overlay approach. The concern 
   with this approach is that it does not scale because it requires
   N square number of LSPs where N is the number of nodes. And even
   worse, N square may not be enough because sometimes a demand needs to
   be split between multiple routes. In other words, it is possible that
   the optimal routing provides multiple optimal paths between a pair of
   end nodes and the traffic between them needs to be split across these
   paths according to the optimal proportions (which are also determined
   by the solution of the mathematical model). In such cases multiple LSPs
   should be set up between these two nodes for load splitting. It should
   be pointed out that although from network topology point of view there
   may be many alternative paths connecting two end nodes, not all of them
   need to necessarily be chosen as optimal paths for traffic engineering
   purpose. Normally the possibilities of traffic splitting between 
   multiple optimal paths may be far less than those suggested by 
   topological connectivity.
   

   The overlay approach seems to be the only viable approach even with
   its scalability concern until very recently when a research paper [1]
   observes that the optimal routes are always the shortest paths with 
   respect to an appropriate set of positive link weights and proposes 
   a new approach which relies on the IP native shortest path routing
   (OSPF, IS-IS). The new approach controls how traffic moves cross 
   the network by making the desirable routes the shortest paths through
   optimal link weight setting. The paper also observes that the optimal 
   link weights are actually provided by the optimal solution of the 
   mathematical model as a by-product. This theoretical result may provide
   us some valuable insight into the traffic engineering capabilities of 
   shortest path routing. 


   However the proposed IGP link weight setting method does have its
   practical limitations. One major issue is that it only applies to 
   static traffic engineering as link weights cannot be changed too 
   often to respond to traffic pattern changes in real time due to IGP
   slow convergence. Another issue is that it may need to split traffic


WAng, Y. & Zhang, L.                                            [Page 3]

Internet Draft   draft-wang-te-hybrid-approach-00.txt      June 2001


   across multiple equal cost shortest paths if any, in unequal
   proportions, while current IGP protocols only support equal 
   splitting. Regarding the first issue, one may argue that the link
   weight method can be used for long-term statistical traffic 
   engineering where traffic volumes are measured as statistical
   averages and that this method is not designed for handling traffic
   fluctuations in real time. But the second issue indeed limits
   the possibility that this method can be implemented in real networks
   today because IGP protocols do not support arbitrary load splitting. It 
   is possible that we implement the link weight method by only doing equal 
   load splitting even though the optimal routing requires unequal 
   distributions. But another research [5] shows that the performance of
   equal splitting only traffic engineering can deviate from that of the
   optimal solution significantly, at least for some worst cases.
   

   It is interesting to notice that traffic splitting across multiple
   optimal paths between two nodes for the overlay approach and traffic
   splitting across multiple equal cost shortest paths between the same
   node pair for the link weight approach are identical. The multiple 
   optimal paths in the overlay approach are precisely turned into multiple
   equal cost shortest paths by properly setting the link weights in the 
   link weight approach. So no matter which implementation approach we take,
   we all implement the optimal traffic engineering routing and we all 
   face the unequal traffic splitting problem. In todayÆs technology, 
   unequal splitting among multiple MPLS LSPs is readily supported [6,7]. 
   When setting up each LSP, one can specify its (virtual) bandwidth, 
   and traffic can be split across multiple LSPs in proportion to 
   their bandwidth ratios. This capability of LSPs motivates us to 
   propose a new approach called the hybrid approach which relies on 
   both IGP link weights and MPLS LSPs. The hybrid approach retains 
   the advantages of IGP link weights method while eliminates its 
   shortcomings.


   To avoid ambiguity, throughout this paper, all traffic (demands), 
   links, and LSPs are assumed unidirectional, even though we do not 
   explicit mentioning directionality. In the illustrated examples, 
   the direction is always assumed to go from left to right. We use 
   the term optimal routing to refer to the optimal solution of 


WAng, Y. & Zhang, L.                                            [Page 4]

Internet Draft   draft-wang-te-hybrid-approach-00.txt      June 2001


   the mathematical traffic enginerring model. But the term optimal
   routing can also refer to any desirable set of routes designed by 
   a carrier which may not be necessarily mathematical optimal
   but are prefered to be implemented for some practical reasons. This 
   draft is about a new approach to the implementation of such routing
   scheme. Whether the routing is realy optimal or not does not make 
   any difference to our approach because research [1] shows that even
   a non-optimal set of routes can also be reproduced as shortest paths
   as long as they are not loopy.


The Hybrid Approach

  
   In this approach we rely on optimal IGP shortest path routing to 
   route most of traffic and only use LSPs to do the necessary traffic
   splitting. We would like to make the following observations. First, 
   not every demand needs to be split for optimal routing. Second, even 
   a demand indeed needs to be split, the section of the split routing
   (which is called load balance section from now on) does not necessarily
   span the entire path from the source node to the destination node. 
   Third, many different demands may share the same load balance section.
   As an example, the third observation of common load balance section is 
   illustrated in figure 1, where many demands (A to I, A to J, B to I,
   C to H, etc.) share the common load balance section that goes 
   between D and G. 


   
   
    A                   E                      I
     \                 /,,\                   /
       \             /,    ,\               /
         \         /,  LSP1  ,\           /
          C ---- D :          : G ----- H
         /         \`  LSP2 ` /          \
       /             \`   ` /              \
     /                 \` /                  \
    B                   F                      J



               Figure 1


WAng, Y. & Zhang, L.                                            [Page 5]

Internet Draft   draft-wang-te-hybrid-approach-00.txt      June 2001

   

   In order to reduce number of LSPs required, we donÆt set up an 
   LSP for every demand that requires splitting. We aggregate splitting. 
   That is, different demands which share the same load balance section
   are aggregated and LSPs are set up only between the two end points of
   the load balance section where traffic flows actually start to diverge
   to difference paths and where they converge back to one path, 
   not between the source node and the destination node of each individual
   demand. As illustrated in figure 1, only two LSPs need to be setup
   for the common load balance section between D and G, LSP1 and LSP2. 
   LSP1 goes from D via E to G and LSP2 goes from D via F to G. All demands
   which share this load balance section D-G (e.g. demands A to I, A to J, 
   B to I, C to H, etc.) are aggregated between D and G and are load 
   balanced uniformly by these two LSPs.


   So the basic idea of the hybrid approach is to set up LSPs for all load
   balance sections for traffic splitting. These LSPs are viewed as virtual
   links (express paths) between the head end and the tail end of a load 
   balance section. They are advertised into IGP as forwarding adjacencies
   (FA) [8] between the head end and the tail end. The LSPs are assigned 
   weights that are the sum of the weights of the links on their paths. 
   So the LSPs are also on the shortest path routing and carry the same 
   total weight as their respective original paths. The routers can be 
   configured [8] such that the LSPs (FAs) are preferred over the original
   links. In addition, these LSPs are assigned bandwidths that represent
   the proportions of the optimal traffic splitting and traffic is split
   across LSPs according to their bandwidths [6,7]. Therefore traffic will 
   be split at the load balance section across multiple LSPs in proportion
   to the bandwidth ratios of these LSPs which will be then identical to 
   the optimal traffic split ratios.

   
   The number of LSPs required by this approach normally should be far less
   than the overlay approach because of the following reasons. First, the 
   percentage of demands that need splitting for optimal routing is usually
   very small. As discussed previously, even though the topological 


WAng, Y. & Zhang, L.                                            [Page 6]

Internet Draft   draft-wang-te-hybrid-approach-00.txt      June 2001


   connectivity may offer many alternative paths between a source node
   and a destination node, only one or very few of them may be selected
   as optimal paths. Second, the ôsplitting aggregationö further reduces
   the LSP needs to per load balance segment from per individual demands. 
   We use the example in figure 1 to demonstrate how scalable this hybrid
   approach is. In figure 1, all the demands that go from node set {A,B,C,D}
   to node set {G,H,I,J} need to traverse the load balance section D-G. 
   There are a total of 16 such demands (A-G, A-H, A-I, A-J, 
   B-G, B-H, B-I, B-J, etc.). If all of them need to be split between D and G,
   the overlay approach will need to set up a total of 32 end to end LSPs,
   two for each demand. Even if some of the demands only take one of the 
   two paths between D-G without load balancing, we still need a minimum
   of 16 LSPs. But in the hybrid approach we only need 2 LSPs. 
   And the performances of the two approaches are identical. Both follow the 
   optimal routing exactly.

   To summarize, the procedure of the hybrid approach is as follows.
 
	1. Solve the mathematical model (just as the link weight setting
           method) to find the optimal solution, if the solution is not given.

        2. Derive the following information from the optimal solution: a) The 
           optimal set of link weights, b) All the load balance sections, 
           and c) The aggregated traffic split proportions for each load 
           balance sections.

	3. Set the links to the optimal link weights

	4. Set up traffic split LSPs for each load balance section. Set 
           the weights of the LSPs as the sum of the link weights of their 
           respective paths. Set their bandwidths to the optimal aggregated 
           traffic split proportions. Advertise these LSPs as forwarding
           adjacencies into IGP [8] and make LSPs the preferred paths over
           the native IGP paths [6] [7].

	5. IGP will compute the optimal shortest path routing. Traffic will
           follow the IGP shortest path routing and only at the load balance
           sections will diverge to appropriate LSPs to achieve the optimal
           load balancing.


WAng, Y. & Zhang, L.                                            [Page 7]

Internet Draft   draft-wang-te-hybrid-approach-00.txt      June 2001


Load Balance Sections and their Scope


   Since in the hybrid approach we only establish LSPs for load balance 
   sections, the concept of load balance section is a key concept and we
   would like to offer a thorough description of it. We first give a 
   precise definition of load balances section and then provide an 
   investigation of load balance scopes for nested load balance sections.

   A load balance section with respect to a given optimal routing consists
   of two nodes, one is called the head end and one is called the tail end,
   and two or more paths called LB (Load Balance) paths between the head 
   end and the tail end such that:

	 ¸  All of the LB paths are optimal shortest paths,
	 ¸  LB paths diverge at the head end and converge at the tail end, 
            and
         ¸  LB paths never come back together at any point in between.

   
   Again using the example in figure 1, D-G is a load balance section but
   C-H is not. Although C-H also has multiple optimal paths, the paths 
   do not diverge at C nor converge at H. A load balance section is a 
   property of an optimal routing as a whole, but not a property of the
   routing of an individual demand. It is shared by all the demands 
   whose optimal paths traverse the section.


                      D
                     / \
                   /     \
                C/         \G
              /  \         /  \
            /      \     /      \
   A-----B/          \ /          \H--------I
          \           E           /
            \                   /
              \               /
                \           /
                  \       /
                    \   /
                      F

   
                  Figure 2



WAng, Y. & Zhang, L.                                            [Page 8]

Internet Draft   draft-wang-te-hybrid-approach-00.txt      June 2001


   Load balance sections can be nested one inside another. The example 
   in figure 2 has two load balance sections, B-H and C-G, where C-G is 
   inside B-H. Obviously any optimal paths between C-G are also on the 
   optimal paths between B-H. There are three optimal paths between B-H.
   Therefore we need to set up three LSPs for B-H, LSP1, LSP2, and LSP3
   (not shown). The first two LSPs, LSP1 (B-C-D-G-H) and LSP2 (B-C-E-G-H)
   also traverse load balance section C-G. The third LSP, LSP3, takes the
   bottom route (B-F-H). The bandwidths for these three LSPs are set
   according to the optimal routing specifications on how the aggregated
   traffic between B-H should be split. Since for load balance section C-G,
   there are only two optimal paths, we need only set up two LSPs, LSP4
   (C-D-G) and LSP5 (C-E-G), between C-G (not shown). Similarly the 
   bandwidths for LSP4 and LSP5 are set according to the optimal routing
   specifications on how the aggregated traffic between C-G should be
   split. Please note that here the aggregated traffic for C-G does not
   include the portion of the aggregated traffic for B-H which flows 
   through LSP1 and LSP2.

 
   It can been seen that the LSPs for C-G are only responsible for load
   balancing "local" traffic, or more specifically, demands between 
   nodes B-G, C-G, and C-H. The balancing of "through" traffic is taken
   care of by two of the LSPs for the outer load balance section B-H, LSP1
   and LSP2. The advantage of this separation is that the impact of any 
   changes to a nested load balance section may only be limited to local
   traffic and may not affect its outer load balance sections. The downside
   is of course that it may be desirable sometimes that a load balance 
   section should be able to balance all the traffic flowing through it, 
   not just local traffic. Unfortunately the current technology does not 
   support the latter option, even though the optimal routing solution 
   provides traffic split ratios for either way.


Dynamic Load Balancing


   In addition to its scalability, another benefit of this approach is 
   that it not only can handle static traffic patterns, but also can 
   address traffic changes dynamically. The key for this capability is 
   the rapid reconfigurability of LSPs' bandwidth.


WAng, Y. & Zhang, L.                                            [Page 9]

Internet Draft   draft-wang-te-hybrid-approach-00.txt      June 2001


   The original LSP bandwidth is set according to the optimal split 
   proportions of the optimal routing. The optimal routing is the 
   solution of the mathematical traffic engineering model which is 
   formed based on static traffic or statistical average traffic. The 
   actual traffic flowing across the network may deviate from this 
   ôassumedö traffic pattern from time to time. Therefore it would be
   desirable if the approach can modify its way of directing traffic flows
   in response to traffic fluctuations rapidly or in real time. 
   Fortunately this hybrid approach can handle traffic changes in a quick
   and easy way. When load level disparity among the constituent links
   of LSPs of a load balance section is detected, the bandwidths of 
   these LSPs can be adjusted to make the load levels more even. 
   In RSVP-TE [9], we can use the shared reservation style to setup
   a new LSP with the adjusted bandwidth to replace the old LSP with
   the old bandwidth gracefully. The time this process takes is usually
   very short.

   Two clarifications should be made with this dynamic load balance 
   feature. First, the changes in the aggregated traffic to be split
   across a load balance section are not the reason for the modification
   of LSP bandwidth ratios because all the LSPs at the load balance 
   section are designed to share the load of the same traffic. The traffic
   volume scale up or scale down should not affect the percentages of
   their shares. What triggers the modification is the uneven load 
   changes of individual links of the load balance sections caused by
   traffic in other directions. In the example of figure 1, what may 
   cause bandwidth adjustments to LSP1 and LSP2 are the possible changes
   of traffic between nodes D and E, or E and G, or D and F, 
   or F and G, or E and F, but not the aggregated traffic between D 
   and G. Second, this reconfiguration still stays within the optimal 
   routing pattern. If the traffic changes so drastically that load 
   balance ratio adjustments can no longer handle, we have to re-compute
   a new set of optimal routes based on a new assumed traffic pattern. 
   But hopefully this global re-optimization does not need to be done
   too often for at least two reasons. First, carriers desire route 
   stability and even though routing needs to be changed to reflect
   new traffic, changes should be made gradually in a controlled fashion,
   not drastically in every minute. Second, technically the IGP 
   protocols take time to converge and do not allow real time link
   weight changes either.


WAng, Y. & Zhang, L.                                            [Page 10]

Internet Draft   draft-wang-te-hybrid-approach-00.txt      June 2001


Security Considerations

   This document raises no new security concerns for IP network traffic
   engineering.


References


[1] Yufei Wang, Zheng Wang, Leah Zhang, "Internet traffic engineering
without full mesh overlaying," Proceedings of INFOCOM'2001, April 2001.

[2] D. Awduche, J. Malcolm, J. Agogbua, M. O'Dell, J. McManus, 
"Requirements for traffic engineering over MPLS," RFC2702, September 1999.

[3] Yufei Wang and Zheng Wang, "Explicit routing algorithms for internet 
traffic engineering," Proceedings of ICCCN'99, September 1999.

[4] R. Ahuja, T. Magnanti, J. Orlin, "Network Flows", Prentice Hall, 1993.

[5] B. Fortz and M. Thorup, "Internet traffic engineering by optimizing
ospf weights," Proceedings of INFOCOM'2000, March 2000.

[6] Cisco IOS. http://www.cisco.com/univercd/cc/td/doc/product/software/
ios120/120newft/120t/120t7/te120_7t.htm

[7] Juniper JUNOS. http://www.juniper.net/

[8] K. Kompella and Y. Rehkter, "LSP hierarchy with MPLS TE," Internet 
Draft, draft-ietf-mpls-lsp-hierarchy-02.txt, February 2001.

[9] D. Awduche, et.al, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP tunnels," 
Internet Draft, draft-ietf-mpls-rsvp-lsp-tunnel-08.txt, February 2001.

     

Author Information


   Yufei Wang
   20 Corporate Place South
   Piscateway, NJ 08854
   Phone: +1 732-465-1000, x1258
   Email: ywang@photuris.com

   Leah Zhang
   20 Corporate Place South
   Piscateway, NJ 08854
   Phone: +1 732-465-1000, x1252
   Email: lzhang@photuris.com

