

   Internet Draft                                                       
                                                            C. Kularski 
   Informational                                        Highland School 
                                                          of Technology 
   Expires: February 2004                                   August 2003 
    
    
                SPAM Reduction Through Creative Addressing 
                                      
                   draft-kularski-spam-spamreduce-02.txt 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This document describes a procedure that users can follow to 
   significantly cut down on the amount of SPAM that they receive. 
   SPAM/UCE (Unsolicited Commercial Email) has become a problem for most 
   Internet users, there is currently no complete solution to the 
   problem. Once the procedure described in this document the user can 
   expect to see dramatically reduced SPAM. Some user refinement may be 
   required at first, but this procedure is very low maintenance.   
 
Copyright Notice 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved. 
 
 
 
 
 
KULARSKI               Expires û February 2004               [Page 1] 
Internet-Draft              SPAM Reduction                 August 2003 
 
 
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [i]. 
    
   A Virtual Address as used in this document is an email address not 
   directly existing on the server, but it specified by a catch-all.  
    
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. General Description............................................2 
      1.1 Proper Implementation......................................3 
   2. Mailbox 1......................................................3 
      2.1 The Email Server Software..................................3 
      2.2 Alternative to Catch-all...................................3 
      2.3 When SPAM Occurs...........................................3 
   3. Mailbox 2......................................................4 
   4. Combining Both Mailboxes.......................................5 
   5. An Oops Queue..................................................5 
   6. SPAM elimination Process.......................................5 
   7. Future Considerations..........................................6 
   8. Results of Experiments Performed...............................6 
   9. Full Copyright Notice..........................................6 
   Security Considerations...........................................7 
   References........................................................7 
   Author's Addresses................................................7 
    
    
1. General Description 
    
   The key to making this procedure for SPAM elimination work with 
   currently available server software is having two email boxes 
   available. Each of these boxes MUST meet a different set of criteria 
   described later in this document.   
    
   This procedure can be used by corporate administrators, Internet 
   Service Providers (ISP), or users who have the resource of their own 
   email server. 
 
 
1.1 Proper Implementation 
    
   Because the procedure described in this document drastically changes 
   the way user receives email the implementation should either be 
   performed at the user's request, or with significant prior 
   notification.  
    
 
 
KULARSKI               Expires - February 2004               [Page 2] 
Internet-Draft              SPAM Reduction                 August 2003 
 
 
2. Mailbox 1 
    
   This mailbox can be used with automated systems, and just about any 
   other purpose, except for those purposes noted for Mailbox 2 in 
   Section 3. This is the only mailbox that is valid for use with non-
   human senders.   
    
   For this mailbox the server will need to recognize each user as their 
   own sub-domain (ex. Jane Doe uses janedoe.example.net). The mailbox 
   MUST have a sub-domain or FQDN (Fully Qualified Domain Name) 
   associated with it. An MX (Mail Exchanger) record should point the 
   domain to the email server on which the account resides. The mailbox 
   will be a general collection box for receiving all of the email 
   pointed at a catch-all mailbox. The address of the real email box 
   should remain private, unless Section 4 is utilized. If Jane uses 
   jane@janedoe.example.net to login to her email box, she should never 
   release jane@janedoe.example.net to anyone as her email address. Each 
   entity that is to receive an email address from the user should be 
   given a unique address, so that the user has the ability to terminate 
   an email address that has been SPAMed and possibly sold to a mass 
   mailing list. If Jane were communicating with the Internet 
   Engineering Task Force she could communicate her email address as 
   being IETF@janedoe.example.net.       
    
    
2.1 The Email Server Software 
    
   The Email server MUST have software capable of handling a catch-all 
   system. The catch all mailbox needs to point to a single mailbox on 
   the server. The mailbox may reside on the same domain or a separate 
   domain, depending upon the user's needs and the server capabilities. 
   The email server SHOULD support the "X-RCPT-TO" email header to allow 
   for identifying mail that may be disguised.    
    
   Some email servers will often tell the sending server the destination 
   of any type of forwarded address, including for catch-alls. This MUST 
   NOT be allowed to occur on a server where the procedure described in 
   this document is implemented.  
 
2.2 Alternative to Catch-all 
 
   An more user involved, but more reliable alternative to the catch-all 
   method for the first mailbox is having each user to specify their own 
   list of acceptable addresses.  
    
   In this method only the accepted addresses will be able to receive 
   mail. This can be done through the use of mail server aliases being 
   added for each approved address, or having the catch-all in place and 
   having everything sorted out by a mail server rule that checks a list 
 
 
KULARSKI               Expires - February 2004               [Page 3] 
Internet-Draft              SPAM Reduction                 August 2003 
 
 
   of approved addresses. Messages received that are not on the approved 
   recipients list should be moved to a queue.     
    
    
2.3 When SPAM Occurs 
    
   After a short amount of time in circulation one or more of the user's 
   virtual addresses will begin to attract SPAM. As soon as SPAM is 
   received the "X-RCPT-TO" or "TO" lines in the header should be 
   checked to verify the address that the mail was destined for. The 
   virtual address should be immediately discontinued from use.   
    
   A few options exist for what to do with the virtual address after it 
   is identified as a SPAM recipient. First, the virtual address can be 
   created as an alias and forwarded to a dead-end mailbox that is 
   automatically cleared after a certain amount of time (or is never 
   permanently recorded). The second option is a little less drastic, 
   the virtual address can be created as an alias and pointed to another 
   actual account residing on the user's domain. For example, Jane can 
   get all of her SPAMed virtual addresses pointed to 
   spam@janedoe.example.net where she can later sort the mail manually, 
   or by a conventional SPAM identification program.   
    
    
3. Mailbox 2 
    
   This mailbox can be used for personal communication, public 
   newsgroups, web page contact or a situation where the address will 
   only be used by humans.  
    
   For this mailbox the server must support intelligent white listing. 
   Intelligent white listing involves the email box not only receiving 
   email from senders listed on the white list, but also sending an 
   email to those who are not on the white list to give them a chance to 
   verify that they are human by accepting an email at a special 
   address, once that mail is received and the sender is confirmed the 
   sender is automatically added to the white list, and the mail is 
   released from the queue and delivered to the user.  
    
   White listing by itself is effective in eliminating SPAM, but is 
   horribly inconvenient, so it MUST be used in conjunction with the 
   catch-all mailbox in Section 2.   
    
   If SPAM is found in the white listed mailbox the sender's email 
   address should be removed from the white list and added to the 
   blacklist.  
    
   It is preferable to place existing email addresses as the white list 
   protected address once automated systems that must contact the user 
 
 
KULARSKI               Expires - February 2004               [Page 4] 
Internet-Draft              SPAM Reduction                 August 2003 
 
 
   have been notified of their assigned address on the catch-all system. 
   Doing so will prevent an interruption in email, or the transition 
   period often associated with changing email systems.  
 
4. Combining Both Mailboxes 
    
   Maintaining two independent email boxes is not user friendly, nor 
   does it maintain a low amount of network traffic. Maintaining two 
   separate mailboxes is quite resource heavy for both the server and 
   client. The two mailboxes can be combined on most servers that 
   support both catch-all and white list functions.  
    
   The proper way to configure both systems as a single mailbox is to 
   set up the catch-all system as specified, and then configure an alias 
   to use white listing. If mail to the white listed alias passes the 
   white list it can be delivered to the user's main mailbox that they 
   keep secret.  
    
5. An Oops Queue 
    
   Where possible the email server SHOULD provide access to a queue 
   where rejected mail from the whitelist or mail to an address not 
   specified by the user (if using option in Section 2.2) is stored. One 
   possible way of implementing the queue is to use a web-based 
   interface that connects to a non-user mailbox, such as "queue" or 
   "spam".  
    
   The queue should be cleared of mail older than a set time limit such 
   as 30 or 45 days. An alternative to this would be a size based queue. 
   Once the queue reaches a certain size begin deleting old mail on a 
   first-in, first-out method. Consideration SHOULD also be given to a 
   removal method that will remove abnormally large email from the queue 
   without regard for the first-in, first-out method.  
 
6. SPAM Elimination Process 
    
   There is a specific process that SHOULD occur for the user to be able 
   to be as SPAM-free as possible. The process uses the procedure from 
   this document as well as other SPAM-prevention techniques. Each level 
   is dependant upon server capabilities, but as many levels as are 
   available should be utilized.   
    
   (1) Verify that address is valid locally 
        Address should either directly exist on the server, or be a 
   valid alias that has been user specified, etc. This step requires 
   that the server be used only for incoming mail, and relayed mail is 
   handled by another server. 
    
   (2) Verify open-relay status of sending server 
 
 
KULARSKI               Expires - February 2004               [Page 5] 
Internet-Draft              SPAM Reduction                 August 2003 
 
 
       If the sending server is listed as an open-relay with an open-
   relay database the message is most likely SPAM, but you can not be 
   certain, recommendation in this situation is to move to the queue.  
    
   (3) Check the message for viruses 
       If the message contains any viruses it should be dropped, or 
   moved to a quarantine area.  
    
   (4) Check mail using weight-based SPAM detection software 
       Use a SPAM detection software that assigns messages a point value 
   based on keywords, invalid headers, and other information. Use a 
   moderate cut-off weight to prevent valid mail from being flagged as 
   SPAM.  
     
    
7. Future Considerations 
    
   In the future the developers of email server software may want to 
   write the software with the ability to assign each user to their own 
   sub-domain and not have to specify the sub-domain as an independent 
   domain within the sever software configuration.  
    
    
8. Results of Experiments Performed 
    
   Several experiments of the procedure described in this document were 
   performed. In each of the experiments there was no loss of legitimate 
   email, and only about 2% of the mail was identified as SPAM. The 
   experiments were performed with live email accounts and actual users 
   using the mailboxes for a period of 6 months.  
    
   The experimental users had an average of about 25 aliases for 
   avoiding SPAM on the catch-all system, and an average of 3.2 
   addresses on their blacklists to avoid mail going to the whitelist 
   only system.  
    
9. Full Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved. 
 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
 
 
KULARSKI               Expires - February 2004               [Page 6] 
Internet-Draft              SPAM Reduction                 August 2003 
 
 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
 
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees. 
 
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
 
Security Considerations 
    
   The actual address of the mailbox that the mail is pointed to as its 
   final destination should never be revealed. If it is revealed to an 
   inappropriate entity the user could begin receiving SPAM that can't 
   be prevented. In the event the primary mailbox is divulged it should 
   be renamed by the administration as soon as possible.   
    
   Because this document does not specify an Internet standard of any 
   kind there are no direct security considerations.  
    
    
References 
                     
   i  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
    
    
    
Author's Addresses 
    
   Curtis M. Kularski 
   219 Best St 
   Bessemer City, NC 28016-9330 
   United States 
   Phone: +1 (704) 629-2498 
   Email: curtis@kularski.net 
 
 
KULARSKI               Expires - February 2004               [Page 7] 
Internet-Draft              SPAM Reduction                 August 2003 
 
 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 
    










































 
 
KULARSKI               Expires - February 2004               [Page 8] 

