SIPPING Workng Group                                       R. Ramanathan
Internet-Draft                                     Microsoft Corporation
Intended status: Informational                          October 14, 2006
Expires: April 17, 2007


                 Response code for declining completely
                      draft-rajesh-sipping-605-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 17, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document defines new response code that clients would use for
   instructing the server to decline a call completely.  This fills in
   the gap that existing response codes do not provide








Ramanathan               Expires April 17, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                     605                      October 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  605 Decline Everywhere  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   4.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     4.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 5










































Ramanathan               Expires April 17, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                     605                      October 2006


1.  Introduction

   The 605 Decline Everywhere response code allows the receiving UA the
   ability to instruct the proxy to decline a call completely, and
   terminate all call legs including any staged ringing to other
   destinations such as a team.  It fills in the gap that existing 6xx
   response codes have with staged ringing.

   The 605 looks identical to the 603 in all respects, except that the
   response code has a very special meaning for the proxy.  Proxys that
   do not support 605 are expected to treat this as a 603 and send the
   response all the back to the client.


2.  Terminology

   In this document, the key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED",
   "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT
   RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" are to be interpreted as
   described in BCP 14, RFC 2119 [1] and indicate requirement levels for
   compliant implementations.


3.  605 Decline Everywhere

   We have the following scenarios that need to be addressed with SIP
   response codes

   Scenario1: User declines a call from one specfic endpoint and allows
   other endpoints to ring.  One example of this scenario is where the
   current endpoint already has one or more ongoing calls and cannot
   accept any other calls.  The client can send out a 486 Busy Here
   response code and the proxy will continue to ring other endpoints.

   Scenario2: User declines a call and does not want to accept it from
   any of his own endpoints.  However, he would like the call to be
   answered by voicemail or, in a staged ringing scenario, by endpoints
   capable of answering the call such as a team member.  The 603
   response code allows the user to support this scenario.

   Scenario3: User is currently busy and knows that the call cannot be
   answered by any other of his own endpoints including voicemail.
   However he would like the call to be answered by other endpoints not
   his own (such as a team member) that are capable of answering the
   call.  The 600 reason code can be used for this purpose

   Scenario4: User wants to decline the call and convey the intention
   that he wants to contact through a different mode.  The user wants no



Ramanathan               Expires April 17, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                     605                      October 2006


   other staged ringing endpoints such as team to pick up the call, and
   does not want the call to be answered by voicemail.  The new 605
   Decline Everywhere response code fills in this gap.

   The 605 response code indicates to the server to decline the call
   completely and stop further processing of the call.  An example of a
   scenario there this is required is where the receving user wants to
   reply to the incoming call with another mode (such as instant
   messaging) and does not want the incoming call to be sent to
   voicemail or other destinations.

   The 605 is identical to 603 in all respects, with the exception that
   the Retry-After semantics shall not be supported.

   Proxy servers that do not support 605 are expected to sent it all the
   way to the calling party.  Clients should be prepared to recive a 605
   and treat it similar to a 603


4.  References

4.1.  Normative References

      [1] Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
          Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler, "SIP:
          Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.



Author's Address

   Rajesh Ramanathan
   Microsoft Corporation
   One Microsoft Way
   Redmond, WA  98052, USA

   Email: rajeshra@microsoft.com














Ramanathan               Expires April 17, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                     605                      October 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Ramanathan               Expires April 17, 2007                 [Page 5]
