


TSVWG                                                         J. Babiarz
Internet-Draft                                                 S. Dudley
Expires: January 12, 2006                                        K. Chan
                                                         Nortel Networks
                                                           July 11, 2005


              Discussion of Congestion Marking with RT-ECN
                     draft-babiarz-rtecn-marking-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 12, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   At the 62nd IETF meeting, it was requested that the authors of
   Congestion Notification Process for Real-Time Traffic (RT-ECN) draft
   look at rate proportional marking as an method of indicating that
   traffic has exceeded a configured rate.  In version 03 of RT-ECN
   draft (draft-babiarz-tsvwg-rtecn-03) we stated, when the rate exceeds
   the engineered traffic level, all packets as indicated by a DS
   codepoint from ECN-capable end-systems are marked to indicate



Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 12, 2006                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2005


   congestion for the duration of the experienced congestion.  In this
   memo, we looked at the two approaches, provide analysis as well our
   conclusions.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1   Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Analysis for Admission Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1   Rate Proportional versus Threshold Based Marking . . . . .  5
   4.  Analysis for Preemption  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.1   Where Rate Proportional Marking May be Useful  . . . . . .  9
     4.2   Limitations of Rate Proportional Marking . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   6.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   7.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 16
































Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 12, 2006                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2005


1.  Introduction

   At the 62nd IETF meeting, it was requested that the authors of
   Congestion Notification Process for Real-Time Traffic (RT-ECN) draft
   look at rate proportional marking as an method of indicating that
   traffic has exceeded a configured rate.  In version 03 of [RT-ECN]
   draft we stated, when the rate exceeds the engineered traffic level,
   all packets as indicated by a DS codepoint coming from ECN-capable
   end-systems are marked to indicate congestion for the duration of the
   experienced congestion.  We will refer to it as "threshold based"
   marking.

   Our understanding of rate proportional marking is that if the
   measured traffic rate as indicated by a specific DS codepoint is
   exceeded by h%, that h% of traffic as a rate needs to be ECN marked.
   Our definition of threshold based marking is that when a rate is
   exceeded, all packets that are marked with the specific DS codepoint
   are ECN marked until the traffic rate drops below the measured
   threshold.  The duration of ECN marking can be control by the fill
   level of the token bucket above empty.  Both of these metering and
   marking approaches can be done using token bucket or other methods.

   RT-ECN draft proposes a new set of ECN semantics to provide two
   levels of congestion as well metering and marking behavior.  It is
   applied to real-time inelastic flows such as VoIP and video
   conferencing for control of admission and preemption of real-time
   flows.

   As the analyses are some what lengthy, we will present our
   conclusions first followed by the detailed analysis of threshold
   based and rate proportional marking for flow admission control and
   preemption.

1.1  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].













Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 12, 2006                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2005


2.  Conclusions

   Both rate proportional marking and threshold based marking approaches
   were compared for two different uses in the network.  The first use
   is for admission of new flows into the network.  The second is for
   preemption of existing flows.

   As a result of our analysis, we believe that rate proportional
   marking of real-time traffic is not appropriate for admission control
   of new flows in to the network.  Threshold based marking provides a
   much faster and more deterministic indication that traffic on the
   path is congested (exceeds configured level).  Rate proportional
   marking approach would be inappropriate for use in situations where
   Service Level Agreements for bandwidth management are required.
   Since this is the most likely scenario for the use of admission
   control, this shortcoming severely handicaps its applicability.

   For flow preemption, both the rate proportional and threshold based
   marking methods can work for a network where all flows have a single
   or no precedence (flow importance).  For networks that need to
   support one or more level of precedence, the threshold based approach
   should be used.  The threshold based approach works under all network
   conditions, traffic flow scenarios and with multi precedence levels
   for traffic within a service class.  Rate proportional marking, if
   implemented as a strictly random marking process, could lead to
   situations where the percentage of marking does not represent the
   rate of congestion experienced on the end-to-end path.  The second
   issue arises when there are two or more precedence (flow importance)
   levels of traffic being managed.  A strictly random marking process
   is not flow precedence aware, and it may result in higher precedence
   traffic being targeted for preemption when lower precedence traffic
   is still present on the link.  Again, from the perspective of the
   most likely use cases, this is highly undesirable.  A rate
   proportional based marking approach does however provide additional
   information to end systems that may be used to assess the relative
   severity of congestion on the network or for comparison of which flow
   has encountered more congestion.  A rate proportional marking
   approach could be used in networks were there are no flow precedence
   levels.

   Further discussion is needed on whether threshold based and rate
   proportional marking should both be allowed for flow preemption with
   RT-ECN.  Note, it is felt that both approaches could be used as long
   the marking method matches the end systems expectation.







Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 12, 2006                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2005


3.  Analysis for Admission Control

   For admission control of new flows into the network, it is desirable
   that feedback about traffic level (congestion level) on the flow's
   path is fast, as call setup delay is a critical parameter that users
   of the VoIP service look at.  For RT-ECN, during call setup, a
   signaling protocol such as SIP is used to trigger the sending of RTP
   probe packets in both directions along the path that voice or video
   will take to test the current traffic level.  The RTP probe flow uses
   the same source/destination IP address and port number as the media
   to guarantee that the path is identical.  The data rate of the probe
   flow is deliberately held to the minimum to avoid affecting the link
   more than necessary.

   Taking the case of the RTP probe stream for a rate proportional
   marking approach, consider the case where 100 flows have been
   admitted and a RTP probe is used to test for admission of the 101st
   flow.  The threshold for admission is at a data rate equivalent to
   100 flows.  Under this condition, there is a high probability that
   the ECN marking of the RTP probe packets would indicate that the path
   is not congested and the new flow would be admitted.  The point at
   which the system could be guaranteed to deny admission would be
   higher than the threshold point.  If the reason to set the threshold
   is to meet the needs of a Service Level Agreement, this make the
   process of choosing threshold for implementing the system somewhat
   problematic.  The choice of threshold is affected by the expected
   traffic level as is illustrated in the following analysis.  The
   analysis is a first level approximation of feedback mechanisms in the
   rate proportional and threshold based marking systems.

3.1  Rate Proportional versus Threshold Based Marking

   The high level performance analysis of rate proportional marking
   versus threshold based marking for admission control is provided in
   this section.  The charts shown here are representative only of some
   features of the two systems.  They were generated using a spreadsheet
   and calculating using call arrival rates.  To simplify the
   calculations, no attempt was made to accommodate randomness in
   arrivals, enforcement of whole calls being admitted within each
   calculation interval, or show the effects of latency in the network.
   All of these would affect both schemes and make them much less smooth
   than these charts show but the long term average number of calls
   admitted would be the same.

   The first chart illustrates the rate proportional based admission
   control scheme.  The charts show a link engineered for 10 calls.  The
   call arrival rate (how many new calls arrive per minute) is varied.
   Call hold time (how long the call remains active) is fixed at 300



Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 12, 2006                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2005


   seconds (5 Minutes).

   As the 2 CPM (Calls Per Minute) line illustrates, as we follow the
   time line from left to right, we start from no calls and the arrival
   rate exceeds the departure rate (2 CPM arrival rate vs 0 CPM
   departure rate ) so the level rises.  As the number of calls on the
   link increases, the departure rate starts to rise as well, until at
   10 calls per minute, the arrival rate equals the departure rate and
   the system stabilizes at 10 calls.












   To view the chart, please see the pdf version of this memo.










   Keeping the threshold for the rate proportional marking at 10 Calls
   per minute and looking at other arrival rates, as the arrival rate
   increases, the curve becomes steeper at the beginning but always
   eventually levels off where the departure rate equals the arrival
   rate.  As can be seen from the graph, at an arrival rate of 4 Calls
   per minute (i.e. twice the arrival rate for which the link was
   engineered) the equilibrium point is about 13 calls.

   The behavior of the threshold based admission control scheme is
   illustrated in the graph below.  That behavior is: 100% admission
   when the number of calls is just below the threshold, and 100% denial
   when the number of calls just exceeds the threshold.  Note that the
   curves show artifacts of the simplifications that we used in creating
   these charts in that they don't provide unit increases.  Note also
   that no preemption process is at work here, only the natural
   departure rate of the system.



Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 12, 2006                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2005


   To view the chart, please see pdf version of this memo.








   In comparing the two strategies, the general observation that can be
   made is that the rate proportional based admission control scheme
   does not achieve the objective of limiting admission at an engineered
   level of 10 calls.  In comparison, the threshold based admission
   control scheme provides a hard engineered limit of 10 calls.

   The performance of the rate proportional scheme is highly dependent
   on the actual call arrival rates.  In a situation where a Service
   Level Agreement requires choosing thresholds that must be hard
   limits, this complicates the engineering process so that the system
   must either accept the possibility of oversubscription, which could
   result in degraded service for ALL Real-Time flows on the link (not
   just the offending set of flows), or of setting overly conservative
   thresholds that guarantee that bandwidth would be unused.  Either
   way, the choice of threshold is not intuitively apparent so the risk
   of mis-understanding between parties about the purpose of the
   threshold is very high.

   For this reason we believe that threshold based marking is the
   correct approach for admission control of new real-time flows.  It
   provides much faster indication to the new flow that the path is
   below or above the configured traffic level prior to admitting the
   flow into the network, and it provides an intuitive understanding of
   the performance of the network so that working with the system is
   simpler.

















Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 12, 2006                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2005


4.  Analysis for Preemption

   Preemption of flows on a network is a behavior intended to protect
   the network from unusual situations.  An example would be the case
   where a network failure results in re-routing of traffic on the
   network, delivering more traffic to a particular link than was
   originally admitted.  It also includes the case where a network
   operates with multiple precedence levels (e.g. commercial E911
   service, Government Emergency Telecommunication Service (GETS),
   Defense Switch Network (DSN), etc.) and where higher precedence calls
   are more important than routine calls.  In this case, the admission
   control threshold described previously would apply to routine calls
   only.  High precedence calls would presumably be admitted to some
   higher traffic level (other congestion level).  Normally, the
   percentage of these calls is quite low compared with routine calls on
   the network.  There are, however, times when a disaster event might
   cause a very large number of higher precedence calls to be initiated.
   At those times, there needs to be a mechanism for the network to
   protect it self and shed load, presumably by preferentially
   preempting routine or lower precedence sessions to permit the higher
   precedence flows to be admitted.

   As an aside to this discussion, it should be noted that the ability
   to preferentially shed load in a "panic" situation is an existing
   capability of the Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN).  The
   mechanisms at work however are based on the physical connections of
   wires within the PSTN "switch".  Critical services are physically
   wired to the low numbered positions on the line cards.  If the switch
   needs to start shedding load, these are the last to go, and the first
   to come back into service.  Since there is no real protocol involved
   in this mechanism, it can't be directly ported to the VoIP world.
   However, the migration from TDM based to VoIP based telephony
   currently involves the loss of this capability.

   Returning now to our analysis of rate proportional and threshold
   based preemption schemes, we note that there must, unavoidably, be
   some difference between a preemption threshold and an admission
   control threshold.  The admission control process could exist for
   purposes of meeting the needs of a Service Level Agreement to
   allocate bandwidth between applications on a converged link.
   However, the preemption process is a second level process that
   protects the network from over submission.  It is used to protect a
   converged network from having all of its bandwidth consumed by real-
   time flows that have DiffServ markings that give them preferential
   access to network resources.  The preemption threshold provides a way
   of implementing a protection scheme that is targeted at removing some
   of the lower precedence traffic from the network during high
   congestion periods.



Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 12, 2006                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2005


   For rate proportional based preemption schemes, some of the same
   issues which are faced in a rate proportional based admission control
   scheme will face the preemption scheme.  That is to say that, if not
   properly controlled, it could result in preemption of higher
   precedence traffic when lower precedence traffic still exists on the
   link.  Rate proportional based schemes do, however, bring something
   else to the table so they cannot be dismissed completely.

4.1  Where Rate Proportional Marking May be Useful

   For rate proportional marking, a flow that passes through a higher
   level of congestion would have a higher number of packets ECN marked
   whereas a flow of the same rate that passes through lower level of
   congestion would have fewer packets ECN marked.  A flow that passes
   through several congestion points would also have a higher number of
   packets ECN marked versus a flow of the same rate that passes only
   through a single congestion point.  A flow of higher rate would get
   more packets ECN marked than a flow of lower rate flowing through the
   same congestion point.

   The implications of these observations are as follows.  The absence
   of an ECN marking on a single packet does not indicate the absence of
   congestion in the network.  However, where markings are viewed over a
   sufficiently long period of time, and assuming that we have
   controlled the implementation so that the percentage of marking is
   truly representative of the overall percentage of congestion, rate
   proportional marking provides additional information to end systems
   that is not available in a threshold based preemption scheme.
   However, time is required to arrive at a good estimate of the actual
   network behavior.  Lower rate systems may need to wait longer before
   they could make a determination of whether an event was persistent vs
   transitory, or significantly above vs slightly above.

   A rate proportional marking tells the end system not only that the
   threshold has been exceeded, but also gives the end system a way of
   estimating whether the flow is experiencing small or large
   congestion.  It does not, however, provide an indication of the
   number of flows that represent the non-conformant traffic as the
   measuring point normally is not flow aware.  Also should the packet
   flows encounter a second or third congestion point on the path,
   additional marking will be performed distorting the rate of
   congestion that is reported to the end system.

   Once a flow has been admitted, it may be useful in some application
   of RT-ECN to report the percentage of a flow's packets that exceed
   the preemption threshold.  Assuming that the implementation
   effectively controlled the probability of marking on a flow by flow
   basis, this marking could be used in the selection of which flow



Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 12, 2006                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2005


   should be preempted first.  The flow with the highest percentage
   marking passes through a higher congestion point or it passes through
   several points of moderate congestion and thus makes a better
   candidate for preemption than other flows reporting a smaller
   percentage of marked packets.  It may still not be selected for
   preemption because of rules governing the behavior of precedence vs
   routine traffic but the ability to make these decisions may improve
   the overall performance of the system.

4.2  Limitations of Rate Proportional Marking

   Real-time flows may be variable rate or constant rate, and may have
   fixed or variable packet sizes.  Variable rate traffic may consist of
   variable size packets with fixed emitted intervals, fixed size
   packets with variable emitted intervals or variable size packets with
   variable emission intervals.  In IP networks different flows from
   different end systems, although constant rate, may use different
   fixed size packet (60 versus 200 byte) as well as different packet
   emit intervals, therefore different constant rate flows as well
   variable rate flows may be flowing through the congestion point.
   Normally, a router measures aggregated traffic and is not flow aware.
   Marking is performed on the traffic aggregate and not per flow.  If
   the aggregate traffic rate is exceeded by "k" bits per second, then
   the expectation for a rate proportional marker is to mark packets at
   "k" bits per second on packet boundaries.  However, the ECN marker
   does not know to which flow the packet that is being marked belongs,
   therefore flows will have there packets marked randomly.

   Below is an example illustrating where rate proportional marking by
   itself would not identify the number of flows that are non-
   conformant:

      All traffic is sourced from endpoints that send 200 bytes every
      20ms (constant rate 80kbps) or 50 packets per second.  A single
      rate control (congestion) point is configured on a router to
      support 10 independent flows of 50 packets per second for a total
      rate of 800kbps or 500 packets per second.  Now one additional
      flow of 50 packets per second (200 bytes every 20ms) is added into
      the path for a total of 11 flows which is equivalent to 880kbps or
      550 packets per second.  Below is an example illustrating where
      rate proportional marking by itself would not identify the number
      of flows that are non-conformant:

      Using rate proportional marking for the above simple case on
      average 50 out of 550 packets every second would be marked as non-
      conformant until the load is reduced through the rate control
      (congestion) point in the network.  The marking of 50 packets
      every second would be randomized with no association to flows.



Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 12, 2006               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2005


      Packets belonging to more than one flow would be marked as non-
      conformant.  Depending on the measurement time interval in the
      endpoints and the traffic characteristics, many and possibly all
      11 endpoints will see some packets marked as flowing through a
      congested point in the network.  However, each endpoint does not
      have enough information to determine the rate of congestion in the
      network.  We can't use a simple policy such as "preempt at level X
      of marking" in the endpoint to make the preemption decisions.

      Rate proportional marking in routers does not identify the number
      of flows that needs to be preempted nor does congestion marking of
      packets of a single flow as observed at the endpoint provide
      enough information to determine the level of congestion is
      experienced..  Other mechanisms in the preemption system need to
      be in place.

   A second example illustrates a potential for unfairness in marking
   between flows:

      A link carries traffic from 8 fixed rate voice flows with G.729
      codec at 10 ms framing intervals and 3 fixed rate voice flows with
      G.711 codec at 20 ms framing interval.  The first 8 voice flows
      have 50 byte packets at 100 times per second.  The other 3 flows
      have 200 byte packets at 50 times per second.  If we assume a
      token bucket style of metering, the point in the cycle that is
      most likely to detect the threshold first is on the packet with
      the largest size.  In fact, if we are just barely above the
      preemption threshold, we would expect that the empty token bucket
      event would occur every time on the large packet instead of being
      distributed evenly among all flows.

      This example illustrates the fact that control over marking rates
      on a flow by flow basis is not generally provided by typical
      processes for random marking.  Great care must be exercised to
      ensure that these issues are overcome.  The example here used two
      voice flows.  The problem becomes much more severe with a
      combination of variable rate video flows, since the video flows on
      an instantaneous basis could be as much as 20 times the throughput
      of a single flow, even if they are only 5 times as much on an
      average basis.  They also send multiple packets in quick
      succession which makes one of those packets far more likely to be
      marked than the other voice flows.  A simple rate proportional
      marking scheme discriminates by more aggressively marking flows
      with large packets or flows that are more bursty.

   Example 3 exposes limitation of using rate proportional marking to
   determining how many or which flows to preempted:




Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 12, 2006               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2005


      Now let's consider a different scenario, in this scenario all
      flows monitored are transmitted from the same source.  The
      receiving network edge device computes the non-conformant rate and
      signals the rate to the transmitter.  The simple response is for
      the transmitter to reduce its rate by the signaled amount,
      terminating one or more flows.  However, there are situations
      where the computed congestion rate by the receiving end system is
      not accurate.

      The first situation is where multiple congestions points exist
      along the path.  Both congestion points marking packets to
      indicate their level of congestion, resulting in packet flows
      being marked twice as well with some remarking by the second
      congestion point of packets marked by the fist congestion point.
      In that case, the measured congestion in the receiving end system
      as a representation rate proportional marking is not accurate.
      This could lead to more flows being preempted than may be
      necessary.

      The second situation arises when flows take are monitored at the
      receiving end take different paths through the network and were
      levels of congestion may not be the same.  The summing of marked
      packets at the monitoring end system does not provide what the
      congestion level is along a specific path.  Rate proportional
      marking its self does not provide how many flows need to be
      preempted from each path.

   Example 4 discusses rate proportional marking and different flow
   precedence level:

      Another issue arises when there is traffic from two of more
      precedence levels in the network and where there are many higher
      precedence flows and only a few or one low precedence flow going
      through a congestion point the problem becomes more acute.  The
      router that is performing rate proportional marking is not flow or
      precedence aware and, if using a simple token bucket approach and
      will mark packets as token are used up.  Since there is a larger
      number of high precedence vs low precedence packets flowing
      through the congestion point, the probability is high that the
      higher precedence packets will be marked and the one low
      precedence flow will not be marked.  Without a significantly
      longer latency and more complex decision making, this would result
      in preemption of the higher precedence flow even though there was
      a low precedence flow on the path that should be the flow selected
      for preemption.  US DoD's DSN or DRSN networks are examples were 5
      or 6 levels of flow precedence is used with the requirement that
      the lowest precedence flow(s) that pass through a congestion
      point(s) versus preempting a flow(s) that pass through the highest



Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 12, 2006               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2005


      congestion point or one that pass through several congestion
      points.

   Example 5 discusses control over the randomness and farness of
   marking:

      Finally the issue of control over the randomness is an important
      issue in determining whether those benefits could be achieved.
      For example, the traditional rate base policing algorithms based
      on token buckets result in almost guaranteed marking of the last
      few packets of a "bunch" of packets that arrive very close
      together.  Codecs that emit packets on a fixed interval have a
      high likelihood of creating the scenario where packets from two
      flows arrive in the same sequence and at about the same relative
      timing from frame to frame.  Since nothing prevents the last
      packets in the sequence from having a higher precedence, it is
      highly likely that a lower precedence flow that falls at the
      beginning of that bunch will remain unmarked from frame to frame
      while the precedence flow at the tail of that bunch would always
      be marked.































Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 12, 2006               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2005


5.  Security Considerations

   This document doesn't propose any new mechanisms for the Internet
   protocol, and therefore doesn't introduce any new security
   considerations.














































Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 12, 2006               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2005


6.  Acknowledgements

   The authors acknowledge a great many inputs, most notably from David
   Black, Attila Bader and Georgios Karagiannis.

7.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RT-ECN]   Babiarz, J., Chan, K., and V. Firoiu, "Congestion
              Notification Process for Real-Time Traffic",
              draft-babiarz-tsvwg-rtecn-03 (RT-ECN), March 2005.


Authors' Addresses

   Jozef Babiarz
   Nortel Networks
   3500 Carling Avenue
   Ottawa, Ont.  K2H 8E9
   Canada

   Phone: +1-613-763-6098
   Fax:   +1-613-768-2231
   Email: babiarz@nortel.com


   Stephen Dudley
   Nortel Networks
   4001 E. Chapel Hill Nelson Highway
   Research Triangle Park, NC  27709
   U.S.A.

   Email: SMDudley@nortel.com


   Kwok Ho Chan
   Nortel Networks
   600 Technology Park Drive
   Billerica, MA  01821
   US

   Phone: +1-978-288-8175
   Fax:   +1-978-288-4690
   Email: khchan@nortel.com





Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 12, 2006               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                  Document                       July 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Babiarz, et al.         Expires January 12, 2006               [Page 16]


