


MEXT Working Group                                           G. Giaretta
Internet-Draft                                                  Qualcomm
Expires: June 29, 2008                                       I. Guardini
                                                              E. Demaria
                                                          Telecom Italia
                                                            J. Bournelle
                                                             Orange Labs
                                                                R. Lopez
                                                         Univ. of Murcia
                                                       December 27, 2007


                       AAA Goals for Mobile IPv6
                    draft-ietf-mext-aaa-ha-goals-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 29, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   In commercial and enterprise deployments Mobile IPv6 can be a service
   offered by a Mobility Services Provider (MSP).  In this case all



Giaretta, et al.          Expires June 29, 2008                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          AAA Goals for Mobile IPv6          December 2007


   protocol operations may need to be explicitly authorized and traced,
   requiring the interaction between Mobile IPv6 and the AAA
   infrastructure.  Integrating the AAA infrastructure (e.g.  NAS and
   AAA server) offers also a solution component for Mobile IPv6
   bootstrapping.  This document describes various scenarios where a AAA
   interface for Mobile IPv6 is required.  Additionally, it lists design
   goals and requirements for such an interface.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Bootstrapping Scenarios  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     4.1.  Split Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     4.2.  Integrated Scenario  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Goals for AAA-HA interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.1.  General goals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.2.  Service Authorization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.3.  Accounting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.4.  Mobile Node Authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.5.  Provisioning of Configuration Parameters . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Goals for the AAA-NAS interface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     10.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     10.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 12



















Giaretta, et al.          Expires June 29, 2008                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          AAA Goals for Mobile IPv6          December 2007


1.  Introduction

   Mobile IPv6 [1] provides the basic IP mobility functionality for
   IPv6.  When Mobile IPv6 is used in tightly managed environments with
   the use of the AAA (Authentication, Authorization and Accounting)
   infrastructure, an interface between Mobile IPv6 and AAA protocols
   needs to be defined.  Also, two scenarios for bootstrapping Mobile
   IPv6 service [2] , i.e., split [3] and integrated [4] scenarios,
   require the specification of a message exchange between the HA and
   AAA infrastructure for authentication and authorization purposes and
   a message exchange between the AAA server and the NAS in order to
   provide the visited network with the necessary configuration
   information (e.g.  Home Agent address).

   This document describes various scenarios where a AAA interface is
   required.  Additionally, it lists design goals and requirements for
   the communication between the HA and the AAA server and the NAS and
   the AAA server needed in the split and integrated scenarios.
   Requirements are listed in case either IPsec or rfc 4285 [5] is used
   for Mobile IPv6 authentication.

   This document only describes requirements, goals and scenarios.  It
   does not provide solutions.

   Notice that this document builds on the security model of the AAA
   infrastructure.  As such, the end host/user shares credentials with
   the home AAA server and the communication between the AAA server and
   the AAA client may be protected.  If the AAA server and the AAA
   client are not part of the same administrative domain, then some sort
   of contractual relationship between the involved administrative
   domains is typically in place in form of roaming agreements.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [6], with the
   qualification that unless otherwise stated these words apply to the
   design of the AAA protocol extension, not its implementation or its
   usage.

   Some of the terms are also extracted from [2].

   o  Access Service Authorizer (ASA).  A network operator that
      authenticates a mobile node and establishes the mobile node's
      authorization to receive Internet service.




Giaretta, et al.          Expires June 29, 2008                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          AAA Goals for Mobile IPv6          December 2007


   o  Access Service Provider (ASP).  A network operator that provides
      direct IP packet forwarding to and from the end host.
   o  Mobility Service Authorizer (MSA).  A service provider that
      authorizes Mobile IPv6 service.
   o  Mobility Service Provider (MSP).  A service provider that provides
      Mobile IPv6 service.  In order to obtain such service, the mobile
      node must be authenticated and prove authorization to obtain the
      service.


3.  Motivation

   Mobile IPv6 specification [1] requires that Mobile Nodes (MNs) are
   provisioned with a set of configuration parameters, namely the Home
   Address and the Home Agent Address, in order to accomplish a home
   registration.  Moreover, MNs and Home Agents (HAs) must share the
   cryptographic material needed in order to setup IPsec security
   associations to protect Mobile IPv6 signaling (e.g. shared keys or
   certificates).  This is referred as the bootstrapping problem: as
   described in [2], the AAA infrastructure can be used as the central
   element to enable dynamic Mobile IPv6 bootstrapping.  In this case
   the AAA infrastructure can be exploited to offload the end host's
   authentication to the AAA server as well as to deliver the necessary
   configuration parameters to the visited network.

   Moreover, in case Mobile IPv6 is a service offered by a Mobility
   Service Provider (MSP), all protocol operations (e.g., home
   registrations) may need to be explicitly authorized and monitored
   (e.g., for accounting purposes).  This can be accomplished relying on
   the AAA infrastructure of the MSA that stores user profiles and
   credentials.


4.  Bootstrapping Scenarios

   This section describes some bootstrapping scenarios in which a
   communication between the AAA infrastructure of the Mobility Service
   Provider and the Home Agent is needed.  The need of a MIPv6-aware
   communication between the AAA server and the Network Access Server
   (NAS) is also described.  For more details, please refer to the
   bootstrapping documents [2], [3] and [4].

4.1.  Split Scenario

   In the split scenario [3], there is the assumption that the mobility
   service and network access service are not provided by the same
   administrative entity.  This implies that the mobility service is
   authorized by the MSA that is a different entity from the ASA.



Giaretta, et al.          Expires June 29, 2008                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          AAA Goals for Mobile IPv6          December 2007


   In this scenario, the Mobile Node discovers the Home Agent Address
   using the Domain Name Service (DNS).  It queries the address based on
   the Home Agent name or by service name.  In the former case, the
   Mobile Node is configured with the Fully Qualified Domain Name (FDQN)
   of the Home Agent.  In the latter case, [3] defines a new service
   resource record (SRV RR).

   Then the Mobile Node performs an IKEv2 [8] exchange with the HA to
   setup IPsec SAs (to protect Mobile IPv6 signaling) and to configure
   its Home Address (HoA).  Mutual authentication for IKEv2 between
   Mobile Node and Home Agent can be done with or without use of
   Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP).

   If EAP is used for authentication, the operator can choose any
   available EAP methods.  Use of EAP with the AAA infrastructure allows
   the HA for not necessarily maintaining authentication credentials for
   each Mobile Node by itself.  It also allows roaming in terms of
   Mobile IPv6 service where MSP and MSA belong to different
   administrative domains.

   The Mobile Node may also want to update its FQDN in the DNS with the
   newly allocated Home Address. [3] recommends that the HA performs the
   DNS entry update on behalf of the Mobile Node.  For that purpose, the
   Mobile Node indicates its FDQN in the IKEv2 exchange (IDi field in
   IKE_AUTH) and adds a DNS Update Option in the Binding Update message
   sent to the HA.

   When the Mobile Node uses a Home Agent belonging to a different
   administrative domain (MSP != MSA), the local HA may not share a
   security association with the home DNS server.  In this case, [3]
   suggests that the home AAA server is responsible for the update.
   Thus, the HA should send to the home AAA server the (FDQN, HoA) pair.

4.2.  Integrated Scenario

   In the integrated scenario [4], the assumption is that the Access
   Service Authorizer (ASA) is same as the Mobility Service Authorizer
   (MSA).

   The Home Agent can the assigned either in the Access Service
   Provider's network or in the seprate network.  In the former case,
   the MSP is the same entity as the ASP, whereas in the latter case MSP
   and ASP are different entities.

   In this scenario, Mobile Node discovers the Home Agent Address using
   DHCPv6.  If the user is authorized for Mobile IPv6 service, during
   the network access authentication the AAAH sends the information
   about the assigned home agent to the Network Access Server (NAS)



Giaretta, et al.          Expires June 29, 2008                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          AAA Goals for Mobile IPv6          December 2007


   where the Mobile Node is currently attached.  To request home agent
   data, the Mobile Node sends a DHCPv6 Information Request to the
   All_DHCP_Relay_Agents_and_Servers multicast address.  With this
   request, the Mobile Node can specify if it wants a home agent
   provided by the visited domain (ASP/MSP) or by the home domain (ASA/
   MSA).  In both cases, the NAS acts a DHCPv6 relay.  When the NAS
   receives the DHCPv6 Information Request then it sends home agent
   information received from AAAH in a new DHC Relay Agent Option as
   defined in [4].

   In case the Mobile Node cannot acquire home agent information via
   DHCPv6, it can try the default mechanism based on DNS described in
   [3].  After the Mobile Node has acquired the home agent information,
   the mechanism used to bootstrap the HoA, IPsec Security Association,
   and Authentication and Authorization with the MSA is the same
   described in the bootstrapping solution for split scenario [3].


5.  Goals for AAA-HA interface

   Section 4 raises the need to define extensions for the AAA protocol
   used between the AAA server of the MSA and the HA.  The following
   sections list the goals for such an interface.  This communication is
   needed for both split and integrated scenario.

5.1.  General goals

   G1.1  The AAAH server and the HA MUST be able to authenticate each
      other (mutual authentication) in order to prevent the installation
      of unauthorized state on the HA.  In some deployment scenarios, it
      may not be feasible for HA and AAA server to mutually authenticate
      each other.  In such a case, several AAA intermediate proxies
      could forward MIP6 bootstrapping information between HA and AAA.
      Thus, to prevent the installation of unauthorized state on the HA,
      the path between HA and AAAH should be secure.

   G1.2  The AAA-HA interface MUST provide integrity protection in order
      to prevent any alteration of exchanged data (e.g., Mobile IPv6
      configuration parameters).

   G1.3  The AAA-HA interface MUST provide replay protection.


5.2.  Service Authorization







Giaretta, et al.          Expires June 29, 2008                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          AAA Goals for Mobile IPv6          December 2007


   G2.1  The AAA-HA interface MUST allow the use of Network Access
      Identifier (NAI) to identify the user.

   G2.2  The HA MUST be able to query the AAAH server to verify Mobile
      IPv6 service authorization for the mobile node.

   G2.3  The AAAH server MAY assign explicit operational limitations and
      authorization restrictions on the HA (e.g., packet filters, QoS
      parameters).

   G2.4  The AAAH server MUST be able to send an authorization lifetime
      to the HA to limit Mobile IPv6 session duration for the MN.

   G2.5  The HA MUST be able to request to the AAAH server an extension
      of the authorization lifetime granted to the MN.

   G2.6  The AAAH server MUST be able to force the HA to terminate an
      active Mobile IPv6 session for authorization policy reasons (e.g.,
      credit exhaustion).

   G2.7  The HA MUST be able to indicate the IPv6 HoA that will be
      assigned to the MN.

   G2.8  The AAAH server MUST be able to authorize the MN to use an IPv6
      HoA.

   G2.9  The AAAH server MUST be able to indicate to the HA whether
      return routability test (HoT, HoTi) shall be permitted or not via
      the HA for a given MN.

   G2.10  The AAAH server MUST be able to authorize the MN for Dual
      Stack operation [9].

   G2.11  The AAAH server MUST be able to indicate to the HA whether the
      bearer traffic for the MN needs to receive IPsec ESP protection.

   G2.12  The HA MUST be able to authenticate the MN through the AAAH in
      case a pre-share key is used in IKEv2 for user authentication.
      The exact procedure is part of the solution space.

5.3.  Accounting

   G3.1  The AAA-HA interface MUST support the transfer of accounting
      records needed for service control and charging.  These include
      (but may not be limited to): time of binding cache entry creation
      and deletion, octets sent and received by the mobile node in bi-
      directional tunneling, etc.




Giaretta, et al.          Expires June 29, 2008                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          AAA Goals for Mobile IPv6          December 2007


5.4.  Mobile Node Authentication

   G4.1  The AAA-HA interface MUST allow the HA to act as a pass-through
      EAP authenticator.

   G4.2  The AAA - HA interface SHOULD support authentication based on
      the Mobility Message Authentication Options defined in [5].

   G4.3  The HA SHOULD be able to request either the keying material to
      generate MN-HA key for MN-HA Mobility Message Authentication
      Option or SHOULD be able to request the MN-HA key and the related
      SPI values from the AAAH server.

   G4.4  The HA SHOULD be able to request the AAAH server to
      authenticate the MN with the value in the MN-AAA Mobility Message
      Authentication Option.

   G4.5  The HA MUST include the Mobile Node Identifier option [7] in
      the AAA transactions with the AAAH server.

   G4.6  The AAAH server SHOULD be able to authenticate the MN
      identified by the value in the Mobile Node Identifier option using
      the value in MN-AAA Mobility Message Authentication Option and the
      corresponding value of the SPI.

   G4.7  If the MN-AAA Mobility Message Authentication Option is not
      included by the HA or the MN-AAA Mobility Message Authentication
      Option is included and the MN-AAA authentication is successful,
      the AAAH MUST send the keying material for MN-HA key to the HA if
      the HA requested for MN-HA keying material only.  The AAAH MUST
      send the MN-HA key and the corresponding SPI value to the HA if
      the HA requested for MN-HA key and SPI.


5.5.  Provisioning of Configuration Parameters

   o  The HA SHOULD be able to communicate to the AAAH server the Home
      Address allocated to the MN and the FQDN of the MN (e.g., for
      allowing the AAAH server to perform a DNS update on behalf of the
      MN).

   o  The AAAH SHOULD be able to indicate to the HA if the MN is
      authorized to autoconfigure its Home Address.








Giaretta, et al.          Expires June 29, 2008                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          AAA Goals for Mobile IPv6          December 2007


6.  Goals for the AAA-NAS interface

   In the integrated scenario, the AAA server provides the HA
   information to the NAS as part of the whole AAA operations for
   network access.

   G6.1  The AAAH server MUST be able to communicate the Home Agent
      Information (IP Address or FQDN) to the NAS.

   G6.2  The NAS SHOULD be able to notify the AAAH of the
      functionalities described in [4].

   G6.3  The ASP/MSP SHOULD be able to indicate to the MSA if it can
      allocate a Home Agent to the MN.  Therefore the NAS SHOULD be able
      to include suggested HA address in the ASP in the NAS - AAA
      interaction.

   G6.4  The AAA server of the MSA MUST be able to indicate to the NAS
      whether the MN is authorized to use a local Home Agent (i.e. a
      Home Agent in the ASP/MSP).

   G6.5  The overall AAA solution for integrated scenario MUST support
      the scenario where the AAA server of the ASA/MSA used for network
      access authentication is different from the AAA server used for
      mobility service authentication and authorization.


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require actions by IANA.


8.  Security Considerations

   As stated in Section 5.1 the AAA-HA interface must provide mutual
   authentication, integrity and replay protection.  Furthermore, if
   security parameters (e.g., IKE pre-shared key) are transferred
   through this interface, confidentiality is strongly recommended to be
   supported.  In this case the links between the HA and the AAA server
   of the MSA and between the NAS and the AAA server must be secure.


9.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank James Kempf, Alper Yegin, Vijay
   Devarapalli, Basavaraj Patil, Gopal Dommety and Madjid Nakhjiri for
   their comments and feedback.  Moreover the authors would like to
   thank Hannes Tschofenig for his deep technical and editorial review



Giaretta, et al.          Expires June 29, 2008                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          AAA Goals for Mobile IPv6          December 2007


   of the draft.  Finally the aithors would like to thank Kuntal
   Chowdhury who contribbuted identifying the goals related to rfc4285
   authentication.


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in
        IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [2]  Patel, A. and G. Giaretta, "Problem Statement for bootstrapping
        Mobile IPv6 (MIPv6)", RFC 4640, September 2006.

   [3]  Giaretta, G., Kempf, J., and V. Devarapalli, "Mobile IPv6
        Bootstrapping in Split Scenario", RFC 5026, October 2007.

   [4]  Chowdhury, K. and A. Yegin, "MIP6-bootstrapping for the
        Integrated Scenario",
        draft-ietf-mip6-bootstrapping-integrated-dhc-05 (work in
        progress), July 2007.

   [5]  Patel, A., Leung, K., Khalil, M., Akhtar, H., and K. Chowdhury,
        "Authentication Protocol for Mobile IPv6", RFC 4285,
        January 2006.

   [6]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [7]  Patel, A., Leung, K., Khalil, M., Akhtar, H., and K. Chowdhury,
        "Mobile Node Identifier Option for Mobile IPv6 (MIPv6)",
        RFC 4283, November 2005.

10.2.  Informative References

   [8]  Kaufman, C., "Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2) Protocol", RFC 4306,
        December 2005.

   [9]  Soliman, H., "Mobile IPv6 support for dual stack Hosts and
        Routers (DSMIPv6)", draft-ietf-mip6-nemo-v4traversal-06 (work in
        progress), November 2007.









Giaretta, et al.          Expires June 29, 2008                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          AAA Goals for Mobile IPv6          December 2007


Authors' Addresses

   Gerardo Giaretta
   Qualcomm
   5995 Morehouse Drive
   San Diego,   92109
   USA

   Email: gerardog@qualcomm.com


   Ivano Guardini
   Telecom Italia Lab
   via G. Reiss Romoli, 274
   TORINO,   10148
   Italy

   Email: ivano.guardini@telecomitalia.it


   Elena Demaria
   Telecom Italia Lab
   via G. Reiss Romoli, 274
   TORINO,   10148
   Italy

   Email: elena.demaria@telecomitalia.it


   Julien Bournelle
   Orange Labs


   Email: julien.bournelle@gmail.com


   Rafa Marin Lopez
   University of Murcia
   30071 Murcia
   Spain

   Email: rafa@dif.um.es









Giaretta, et al.          Expires June 29, 2008                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          AAA Goals for Mobile IPv6          December 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Giaretta, et al.          Expires June 29, 2008                [Page 12]


