 



CCAMP Working Group                                   Rakesh Gandhi, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                 Zafar Ali
Intended status: Informational                 Gabriele Maria Galimberti
Expires: October 25, 2014                            Cisco Systems, Inc.
                                                              Xian Zhang
                                                                  Huawei
                                                          April 23, 2014


              RSVP-TE Signaling For GMPLS Restoration LSP
              draft-gandhi-ccamp-gmpls-restoration-lsp-04


Abstract

   In transport networks, there are requirements where Generalized
   Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) end-to-end recovery scheme
   needs to employ restoration Label Switched Path (LSP) while keeping
   resources for the working and/or protecting LSPs reserved in the
   network after the failure.  

   This document reviews how the LSP association is to be provided using
   Resource Reservation Protocol - Traffic Engineering (RSVP-TE)
   signaling in the context of GMPLS end-to-end recovery when using
   restoration LSP where failed LSP is not torn down.  No new procedures
   or mechanisms are defined by this document, and it is strictly
   informative in nature.


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."





 


gandhi, et al.          Expires October 25, 2014                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   RSVP-TE Signaling for Restoration LSP    April 23, 2014


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.









Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Signaling Restoration LSP Association  . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Acknowledgement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     6.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     6.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7














 


gandhi, et al.          Expires October 25, 2014                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   RSVP-TE Signaling for Restoration LSP    April 23, 2014


1.  Introduction

   Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) [RFC3473] extends
   Multi-Protocol Label Switching (MPLS) to include support for
   different switching technologies.  These switching technologies
   provide several protection schemes [RFC4426][RFC4427] (e.g., 1+1, 1:N
   and M:N).  Resource Reservation Protocol - Traffic Engineering (RSVP-
   TE) signaling has been extended to support various GMPLS recovery
   schemes [RFC4872][RFC4873], to establish Label Switched Paths (LSPs),
   typically for working LSP and protecting LSP.  [RFC4427] Section 7
   specifies various schemes for GMPLS recovery.

   In GMPLS recovery schemes generally considered, restoration LSP is
   signaled after the failure has been detected and notified on the
   working LSP.  In non-revertive recovery mode, working LSP is assumed
   to be removed from the network before restoration LSP is signaled. 
   For revertive recovery mode, a restoration LSP is signaled while
   working LSP and/or protecting LSP are not torn down in control plane
   due to a failure.  In transport networks, as working LSPs are
   typically signaled over a nominal path, service providers would like
   to keep resources associated with the working LSPs reserved.  This is
   to make sure that the service (working LSP) can use the nominal path
   when the failure is repaired to provide deterministic behaviour and
   guaranteed Service Level Agreement (SLA).  Consequently, revertive
   recovery mode is usually preferred by recovery schemes used in
   transport networks.

   As defined in [RFC4872] and being considered in this document, "fully
   dynamic rerouting switches normal traffic to an alternate LSP that is
   not even partially established only after the working LSP failure
   occurs.  The new alternate route is selected at the LSP head-end
   node, it may reuse resources of the failed LSP at intermediate nodes
   and may include additional intermediate nodes and/or links."

   One example of the recovery scheme considered in this document is 1+R
   recovery.  The 1+R recovery is exemplified in Figure 1.  In this
   example, working LSP on path A-B-C-Z is pre-established.  Typically
   after a failure detection and notification on the working LSP, a
   second LSP on path A-H-I-J-Z is established as a restoration LSP. 
   Unlike protection LSP, restoration LSP is signaled per need basis.


                        A --- B --- C --- Z
                         \               /
                           H --- I --- J


           Figure 1: An example of 1+R recovery scheme
 


gandhi, et al.          Expires October 25, 2014                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   RSVP-TE Signaling for Restoration LSP    April 23, 2014


   During failure switchover with 1+R recovery scheme, in general,
   working LSP resources are not released and working and restoration
   LSPs coexist in the network.  Nonetheless, working and restoration
   LSPs can share network resources.  Typically when failure is
   recovered on the working LSP, restoration LSP is no longer required
   and torn down (e.g., revertive mode).

   Another example of the recovery scheme considered in this document is
   1+1+R.  In 1+1+R, a restoration LSP is signaled for the working LSP
   and/or the protecting LSP after the failure has been detected and
   notified on the working LSP or the protecting LSP.  The 1+1+R
   recovery is exemplified in Figure 2.  In this example, working LSP on
   path A-B-C-Z and protecting LSP on path A-D-E-F-Z are
   pre-established.  After a failure detection and notification on a
   working LSP or protecting LSP, a third LSP on path A-H-I-J-Z is
   established as a restoration LSP.  The restoration LSP in this case
   provides protection against a second order failure.  Restoration LSP
   is torn down when the failure on the working or protecting LSP is
   repaired.



                           D --- E --- F
                         /               \
                        A --- B --- C --- Z
                         \               /
                           H --- I --- J


           Figure 2: An example of 1+1+R recovery scheme


   [RFC4872] Section 14 defines PROTECTION object for GMPLS recovery
   signaling.  As defined, the PROTECTION object is used to identify
   primary and secondary LSPs using S bit and protecting and working
   LSPs using P bit.  Furthermore, [RFC4872] defines the usage of
   ASSOCIATION object for associating GMPLS working and protecting LSPs.

   [RFC6689] Section 2.2 reviews the procedure for providing LSP
   associations for GMPLS end-to-end recovery and covers the schemes
   where the failed working LSP and/or protecting LSP are torn down.

   This document reviews how the LSP association is to be provided for
   GMPLS end-to-end recovery when using restoration LSP where working
   and protecting LSP resources are kept reserved in the network after
   the failure.


 


gandhi, et al.          Expires October 25, 2014                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   RSVP-TE Signaling for Restoration LSP    April 23, 2014


2.  Signaling Restoration LSP Association

   Where GMPLS end-to-end recovery scheme needs to employ restoration
   LSP while keeping resources for the working and/or protecting LSPs
   reserved in the network after the failure, restoration LSP is
   signaled with ASSOCIATION object with the association ID set to the
   LSP ID of the LSP it is restoring.  For example, when a restoration
   LSP is signaled for a working LSP, the ASSOCIATION object in the
   restoration LSP contains the association ID set to the LSP ID of the
   working LSP.  Similarly, when a restoration LSP is signaled for a
   protecting LSP, the ASSOCIATION object in the restoration LSP
   contains the association ID set to the LSP ID of the protecting LSP.

   The procedure for signaling the PROTECTION object is specified in
   [RFC4872].  Specifically, restoration LSP being used as a working LSP
   is signaled with P bit cleared and being used as a protecting LSP is
   signaled with P bit set.

   As discussed in Section 1 of this document, [RFC6689] Section 2.2
   reviews the procedure for providing LSP associations for the GMPLS
   end-to-end recovery scheme using restoration LSP where the failed
   working LSP and/or protecting LSP are torn down.

3.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request for IANA action.

4.  Security Considerations

   This document reviews procedures defined in [RFC4872] and [RFC6689]
   and does not define any new procedure.  As such, no new security
   considerations are introduced in this document.

5.  Acknowledgement

   The authors would like to thank George Swallow for the discussions on
   the GMPLS restoration.











 


gandhi, et al.          Expires October 25, 2014                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   RSVP-TE Signaling for Restoration LSP    April 23, 2014


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC3473]  Berger, L., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching
              (GMPLS) Signaling Resource ReserVation Protocol-Traffic
              Engineering (RSVP-TE) Extensions", RFC 3473, January 2003.

   [RFC4872]  Lang, J., Rekhter, Y., and Papadimitriou, D., "RSVP-TE
              Extensions in Support of End-to-End Generalized Multi-
              Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) Recovery", RFC 4872, May
              2007.

   [RFC6689]  Berger, L., "Usage of the RSVP ASSOCIATION Object", RFC
              6689, July 2012.


6.2.  Informative References

   [RFC4426]  Lang, J., Rajagopalan, B., and Papadimitriou, D.,
              "Generalized Multiprotocol Label Switching (GMPLS)
              Recovery Functional Specification", RFC 4426, March 2006.

   [RFC4427]  Mannie, E., and Papadimitriou, D., "Recovery (Protection
              and Restoration) Terminology for Generalized
              Multi-Protocol Label Switching, RFC 4427, March 2006.

   [RFC4873]  Berger, L., Bryskin, I., Papadimitriou, D., and Farrel,
              A., "GMPLS Segment Recovery", RFC 4873, May 2007.



















 


gandhi, et al.          Expires October 25, 2014                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   RSVP-TE Signaling for Restoration LSP    April 23, 2014


Authors' Addresses


   Rakesh Gandhi (editor)
   Cisco Systems, Inc.

   Email: rgandhi@cisco.com


   Zafar Ali
   Cisco Systems, Inc.

   Email: zali@cisco.com


   Gabriele Maria Galimberti
   Cisco Systems, Inc.

   Email: ggalimbe@cisco.com


   Xian Zhang
   Huawei Technologies
   Research Area F3-1B,
   Huawei Industrial Base,
   Shenzhen, 518129, China

   Email: zhang.xian@huawei.com























gandhi, et al.          Expires October 25, 2014                [Page 7]
