

SIPPING WG                                                   J. Peterson
Internet-Draft                                                   NeuStar
Expires: August 25, 2003                                         J. Polk
                                                                   Cisco
                                                               D. Sicker
                                                              CU Boulder
                                                       February 24, 2003


    Role-based Authorization Requirements for the Session Initiation
                                Protocol
                  draft-peterson-sipping-role-authz-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 25, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document lays out a set of requirements related to role-based
   authorization for the Session Initiation Protocol.  While numerous
   authentication mechanisms are described in the base SIP
   specification, role-based authorization provides information used to
   make policy decisions based on the attributes of a participant in a
   session.  This approach provides a richer framework for
   authorization, as well as allow greater privacy for users of an



Peterson, et al.        Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                SIPPING RBA                  February 2003


   identity system.

Table of Contents

   1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2. Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3. Role-Based Authorization Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4. Role-based Authorization Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
      Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
      Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
      Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
      Full Copyright Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10





































Peterson, et al.        Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                SIPPING RBA                  February 2003


1. Introduction

   This document explores requirements of the Session Initiation
   Protocol [1] for enabling role-based authorization.  This effort
   stems from the recognition that when SIP requests are received by a
   User Agent Server (UAS) there are authorization requirements that go
   beyond the establishment of the identity of the User Agent Client
   (UAC).  Supplemental authorization information might allow the UAS to
   implement non-identity- based policies that depend on further
   attributes of the principal that originated a SIP request.

   For example, the mere fact that a UAC has been authenticated by a UAS
   doesn't mean that the UAS will grant the UAC full access to its
   services or capabilities - in most instances, a UAS will compare the
   authenticated identity of the UAC to some set of users that are
   permitted to make particular requests (as a way of making an
   authorization decision).  However, in large communities of users with
   few pre-existing relationships (such as federations of discrete
   service providers), it is unlikely that the authenticated identity of
   a UAC alone will give a UAS sufficient information to decide how to
   handle a given request.

   Role-based authorization entails an assertion by a authorization
   service of attributes associated with an identity.  These attributes
   describe the 'role' or 'roles' of the identity in question - facts
   about the principal corresponding to that identity.  For example, a
   given principal might be a faculty member at a university.  An
   assertion for that principal's identity might state that they have
   the 'role' of a faculty member.  When a UAS receives a request with
   this role assertion, it can make an authorization decision based on
   whether or not faculty members are permitted to make the request in
   question, rather than just looking at the identity of the UAC and
   trying to discover whether or not they are a faculty member through
   some external means.  Thus, these assertions allow a UAS to authorize
   a SIP request without having to store attributes associated with the
   identity of the UAC itself.

   In fact, when role-based authorization is used, an assertion can be
   presented to a UAS instead of the identity of user of the UAC.  In
   many cases, the UAS has no need to know who, exactly, has made a
   request - knowing the identity is only a means to the end of matching
   that identity to policies that actually depend on roles.  This fact
   allows role-based authorization to offer a very compelling privacy
   and anonymity solution.  Identity becomes one more attribute of an
   assertion that may or may not be shared with various destinations.

   Role-based authorization depends on an authorization service that is
   trusted by the UAC and the UAS.  For that reason, authorization



Peterson, et al.        Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                SIPPING RBA                  February 2003


   services are most applicable to either single domains, or federated
   domains that have agreed to trust one another's authorization
   services.  This could be common in academic environments, or business
   partnerships that wish to share attributes of principals with one
   another.  Some role-based authorization architectures have been
   proposed to provide single sign-on services.

   Although role-based identity offers an alternative to traditional
   identity architectures, this effort should be considered
   complementary to the end- to-end cryptographic SIP identity effort
   [3].  An authentication service might also act as an authorization
   service, generating some sort of role assertion token instead of an
   authenticated identity body.

2. Terminology

   In this document, the key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED",
   "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT
   RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" are to be interpreted as
   described in RFC2119 [2] and indicate requirement levels for
   compliant SIP implementations.

3. Role-Based Authorization Framework

   A role-based authorization architecture entails the existence of an
   authorization service.  Devices need to send requests to an
   authorization service in order to receive an assertion that can be
   used in the context of a given network request.  Different network
   request types will often necessitate different or additional
   attributes in assertions from the authorization service.

   For the purposes of SIP, SIP requests might be supplied to an
   authorization service to provide the basis for an assertion.  It
   could be the case that a user agent will take a particular SIP
   request, such as an INVITE, for which it wishes to acquire an
   assertion and forward this to the authorization service (in a manner
   similar to the way that an authenticated identity body is requested
   in [3]).  User agents might also use a separate protocol to request
   an assertion.  In either case, the client will need to authenticate
   itself to an authorization service before it receives an assertion.
   This authentication could use any of the standard mechanisms
   described in RFC3261 [1], or use some other means of authentication.

   Once a SIP UA has an assertion, it will need some way to carry an
   assertion within in a SIP request.  It's possible that this assertion
   could be provided by reference or by value.  For example, a SIP UA
   could include a MIME body within a SIP request that contains the
   assertion; this would be inclusion by value.  Alternatively, content



Peterson, et al.        Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                SIPPING RBA                  February 2003


   indirection [4], or some new header, could be used to provide a URI
   (perhaps an HTTP URL) where interested parties could acquire the
   assertion; this is inclusion by reference.

   Some important design decisions are associated with carrying
   assertions in a SIP request.  If an assertion is carried by value, or
   uses a MIME-based content indirection system, then proxy servers will
   be unable to inspect the assertion themselves.  If the assertion were
   referenced in a header, however, it might be possible for the proxy
   to acquire and inspect the assertion itself.  There are certainly
   architectures in which it would be meaningful for proxy servers to
   apply admissions controls based on assertions.

   It is also the case that carrying assertions by reference allows
   versatile access controls to be applied to the assertion itself.  For
   instance, an HTTP URL where an assertion could be acquired could
   indicate a web server that challenged requests, and only allowed
   certain authorized sources to inspect the assertion, or which
   provided different versions of the assertion depending on who is
   asking.  When a SIP UA initiates a request with privacy controls [5],
   a web server might provide only role information ('faculty',
   'student', or 'staff') to most queries, but provide more detailed
   information, including the identity of the originator of the SIP
   request, to certain privileged askers.  The end-users that makes
   requests should have some way to inform authorization services of the
   attributes that should be shared with particular destinations.

   Assertions themselves might be scoped to a particular SIP
   transaction, SIP dialog, or possibly have a longer lifetime.  The
   recipient of an assertion associated with a SIP request needs to have
   some way to verify that the authorization service intended that this
   assertion could be used for the request in question.  However, the
   format of assertions is not specified by these requirements.

   Role assertions for responses to SIP requests are outside the scope
   of these requirements; it is not clear if there is any need for the
   recipient of a request to provide authorization data to the
   requestor.

   Role-based authorization has significant applicability to SIP.  There
   are numerous instances in which it is valuable to assert particular
   facts about a principal other than the principal's identity to aid
   the recipient of a request in making an authorization policy
   decision.  For example, a telephony service provider might assert
   that a particular user is a 'customer' as a role.  An emergency
   services network might indicate that a particular user has a
   privileged status as a caller.




Peterson, et al.        Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                SIPPING RBA                  February 2003


4. Role-based Authorization Requirements

   The following are listed requirements proposed from this effort:

   1.   The mechanism must support a way for SIP user agents to carry an
        authorization assertion in SIP requests by reference or by
        value.

   2.   The mechanism must allow SIP UACs to supply SIP requests to an
        authorization service to form the basis for an assertion.  The
        mechanism should also provide a way for SIP intermediaries to
        recognize that an assertion will be needed, and either forward
        requests to an authorization service themselves, or notify the
        UAC of the need to do so.

   3.   Authorization services must be capable of delivering an
        assertion to a SIP UAC, either by reference or by value.  It may
        also be possible for an authorization service to add assertions
        to requests itself, if the user profile permits this (for
        example, through the use of content-indirection as described in
        [4]).

   4.   Authorization services must have a way to authenticate a SIP
        UAC.

   5.   Authorization services must treat each request with a unique
        assertion; this becomes apparent when the service request is
        progressive in nature (has multiple values within the same
        service).

   6.   Proxy servers should have a way to inspect assertions associated
        with a SIP request.

   7.   The mechanism must have a single baseline mandatory-to-
        implement authorization assertion scheme.  The mechanism must
        also allow support of other assertion schemes, which would be
        optional to implement.  One example of an assertion scheme is
        SAML [6].

   8.   Assertion schemes used for this mechanism must have reference
        integrity with a SIP request in order to prevent replay attacks.
        Note that this reference integrity may apply on a per-message,
        per-transaction, or per-dialog basis.

   9.   Assertion schemes used for this mechanism must be capable of
        asserting attributes and/or roles associated with the identity
        of the principal originating a SIP request.  No specific roles
        or attributes are required by this specification.



Peterson, et al.        Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                SIPPING RBA                  February 2003


   10.  The mechanism must support a means for end-users to specify
        policies to an authorization service for the distribution of
        their roles and/or attributes to various destinations.

   11.  An assertion must have security properties that prevent
        unauthorized parties from viewing the contents of the assertion.

   12.  Assertion schemes must provide a way of selectively sharing the
        roles and/or attributes of the principal in question.  In other
        words, it must be possible to show only some of the attributes
        of a given principal to particular recipients, based on the
        cryptographically- assured identity of the recipient.

   13.  It must be possible to provide an assertion without an identity
        - that is, to present only attributes or roles of the principal
        making a request, rather than the identity of the principal.

   14.  The manner in which an assertion is distributed must permit
        cryptographic authentication and integrity properties to be
        applied to the assertion by the authorization service.

   15.  It must be possible for a UAS or proxy server to reject a
        request that lacks an authorization assertion, and to notify the
        UAC that it must acquire such an assertion in order to complete
        the request.

   16.  The recipient of a request containing an assertion must be able
        to ascertain which authorization service generated the
        assertion.

   17.  A legitimate recipient of a request containing an assertion
        (either a UAS or a proxy server) must be capable of inspecting
        an assertion, and

   18.  It must be possible for a UAS or proxy server to reject a
        request containing an assertion that does not provide any
        attributes or roles that are known to the recipient, or that are
        relevant to the request in question.


5. Security Considerations

   The subject of this document is an authorization system for SIP that
   is not predicated on the distribution of end-users' identities, but
   rather shares roles of the users.  As such, the bulk of this document
   discusses security.

   The distribution of authorization assertions requires numerous



Peterson, et al.        Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                SIPPING RBA                  February 2003


   security properties.  An authorization service must be able to sign
   assertions, or provide some similar cryptographic assurance that can
   provide non-repudiation for assertions.  These requirements are
   further detailed in Section 3.

6. IANA Considerations

   This document introduces no considerations for the IANA.

Normative References

   [1]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler, "SIP:
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, May 2002.

   [2]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to indicate requirement
        levels", RFC 2119, March 1997.

Informative References

   [3]  Peterson, J., "Enhancements for Authenticated Identity
        Management in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", draft-
        ietf-sip-peterson-identity-01 (work in progress), July 2002.

   [4]  Olson, S., "A Mechanism for Content Indirection in SIP
        Messages", draft-ietf-sip-content-indirect-mech-01 (work in
        progress), November 2002.

   [5]  Peterson, J., "A Privacy Mechanism for the Session Initiation
        Protocol (SIP)", RFC 3323, November 2002.

   [6]  Organization for the Advancement of Structured Industry
        Standards, "Security Assertion Markup Language v1.0", November
        2002, <http://www.oasis-open.org>.


Authors' Addresses

   Jon Peterson
   NeuStar, Inc.
   1800 Sutter St
   Suite 570
   Concord, CA  94520
   US

   Phone: +1 925/363-8720
   EMail: jon.peterson@neustar.biz
   URI:   http://www.neustar.biz/



Peterson, et al.        Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                SIPPING RBA                  February 2003


   James M. Polk
   Cisco Systems
   2200 East President George Bush Turnpike
   Suite 570
   Richardson, TX  75802
   US

   EMail: jmpolk@cisco.com


   Douglas C. Sicker
   University of Colorado at Boulder
   ECOT 531
   Boulder, CO  80309
   US

   EMail: douglas.sicker@colorado.edu


































Peterson, et al.        Expires August 25, 2003                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                SIPPING RBA                  February 2003


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Peterson, et al.        Expires August 25, 2003                [Page 10]

