

                                                                S. Lind
Internet Draft                                                     AT&T
Document: draft-lind-itut-e370-00.txt                         July 2000
Category: Informational


     Service Principles when Public Circuit-Switched International
      Telecommunication Networks Interwork with IP-based Networks


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is NOT offered in accordance
   with Section 10 of RFC2026, and the author does not provide the IETF
   with any rights other than to publish as an Internet-Draft

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


1. Abstract

   This document describes the current thinking of the collaborators of
   ITU-T Question 10/2, "Management and development of PSTN-based
   telecommunication services," about service principles when public
   circuit switched international telecommunication networks interwork
   with IP-based networks. This document contains most of the text
   (there has been some rearrangement of the text) from draft new
   Recommendation E.370 [1], starting from section 3 of this Internet
   Draft, which was determined to be stable at the March 2000 meeting
   of Study Group 2. It may be approved by the members of the ITU,
   subject to written comments received from those members, at a
   meeting of the Study Group (or its successor) in early 2001
   (provisionally 23-26 January 2001). It is hoped that this document
   will further the collaborative efforts between Study Group 2 and the
   various working groups of the IETF.


2. Conventions used in this document




Lind             Informational - Expires January 2001                1


                   Service Principles when Public          July 2001
            Circuit-Switched International Telecommunication
               Networks Interwork with IP-based Networks


   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2].


3. Introduction

   There is an increased availability of Internet Protocol (IP)-based
   networks on an international and national basis. Users of these IP-
   based networks expect to be able to be connected with users of
   public, circuit switched, international telecommunications networks.
   In order to ensure that the needs of both IP-based network users and
   circuit-switched, international telecommunication network users are
   met, principles of interworking between IP-based networks and the
   circuit-switched, international telecommunication networks are
   presented in this Recommendation.


4. Scope

   This Recommendation defines the principles applicable to
   international public correspondence services provided by IP-based
   networks interworking with the ITU-defined, circuit-switched,
   public,  international telecommunication networks (for example, the
   PSTN, ISDN, and PLMN).

   This Recommendation is applicable to those cases where the IP-based
   network is implemented by a separate service provider (e.g., ROA)
   from the service provider of the public, circuit-switched
   international telecommunication network. It does not cover the case
   where IP technology is integrated within the international
   telecommunication network of a single service provider.


5. Definitions

   IP-based network: A network in which the Internet Protocol is used
   as the ISO layer 3 protocol (OSI Reference Model).


6. Abbreviations

   For the purpose of this Recommendation, the following abbreviations
   are used:
   DTMF         Dual Tone Multi-Frequency
   IP           Internet Protocol
   ISDN         Integrated Services Digital Network
   ISO          International Standards Organization
   ITU          International Telecommunication Union
   ITU-T        International Telecommunication Union -
                Telecommunication Standardisation Sector

Lind             Informational - Expires January 2001                2


                   Service Principles when Public          July 2001
            Circuit-Switched International Telecommunication
               Networks Interwork with IP-based Networks


   IWF          Interworking Facility
   OSI          Open System Interconnection
   PLMN         Public Land Mobile Network
   PSTN         Public Switched Telephone Network
   ROA          Recognised Operating Agency
   SIP          Session Initiation Protocol


7. General Principles of Interconnection

   In general, the interconnection of a IP-based network to an existing
   international telecommunication network should not impose any
   requirement for additional functionality in the international
   telecommunication network, nor any restriction in the normal
   operation of the international telecommunication network. Any added
   functionality should be provided in the IP-based network, unless
   otherwise agreed between the operators of the IP-based and
   international telecommunication networks. The international
   telecommunication network should not have to be specially engineered
   to compensate for possible performance variation of services
   supported by the IP-based network interconnected to it in order to
   match the performance of similar services fully supported by the
   international telecommunication network.

   The interconnection arrangements could be formalised by an agreement
   between the operators of the two networks. The agreement could cover
   the following areas:

        - network topology;
        - interface specifications, including signalling systems;
        - provisioning procedures;
        - operations and maintenance procedures;
        - performance monitoring (quality of service, grade of
          service, traffic measurement, etc.);
        - growth management (forecasts, network planning, etc.);
        - charging and accounting arrangements.

   It should be possible to setup calls:

   a) that originate at a terminal (such as those based on H.323 [3] or
   SIP [4]) on an IP-based network and terminate at terminals on
   PSTN/ISDN/PLMN networks;

   b) that originate at terminals on PSTN/ISDN/PLMN networks and
   terminate at a terminal on an IP-based network.

   Backward and forward call clearing should be possible.  The
   detection of a non-recoverable failure of any of the critical
   resources involved in the call shall initiate the clearing of the
   call.


Lind             Informational - Expires January 2001                3


                   Service Principles when Public          July 2001
            Circuit-Switched International Telecommunication
               Networks Interwork with IP-based Networks


   User services, which make use of end to end bi-directional and
   unidirectional DTMF signaling, should be supported e.g. voice mail
   applications, conference bridge applications, etc.

   An inability to complete the call within the PSTN/ISDN/PLMN network
   should be detected and communicated to the calling party (e.g. busy
   tone).

   The ability for inband audio tones and announcements to be received
   by the caller should be supported (e.g. special information tones,
   referral messages, etc).

   In order to preserve existing PSTN/ISDN/PLMN service features the
   following should be supported:

   a) Presentation of a number in ITU-T Recommendation E.164 [5] format
   identifying the Calling Party for Calling Line Identification
   Presentation;

   b) Transport of calling line identification;

   c) Transport of calling line identification restriction;

   d) Malicious call tracing;

   e) Emergency calling;

   f) International Emergency Preference Scheme (see Recommendation
   E.106 [6])

   g) E.164 number portability.


8. Services

   The services, including any supplementary services, offered by IP-
   based networks (voice, data, etc) when interworking with the
   international telecommunication networks to provide public
   correspondence services should, as far as practicable, be similar to
   those provided on those international telecommunication networks and
   work on an end-to-end basis. For example, when interworking with
   users on the PSTN, Recommendation E.105 [7] defines the requirements
   of the International Telephone Service. While it is recognized that
   the manner in which the services, including any supplementary
   services, are presented to users on an IP-based network may be
   different from the way in which those services are presented to
   users of the PSTN, ISDN and PLMN; the basic functions, as defined in
   the appropriate ITU-T Recommendation, should still operate across
   the various networks.



Lind             Informational - Expires January 2001                4


                   Service Principles when Public          July 2001
            Circuit-Switched International Telecommunication
               Networks Interwork with IP-based Networks


9. Service Scenarios

   A number of scenarios may be deployed to reflect particular
   configurations of networks, namely:

   Scenario 1: communication between IP-based network users and
   International Telecommunication Network users, in which the call
   set-up is originated by the IP network user.

   Scenario 2: communication between IP-based network users and
   International Telecommunication Network users, in which the call
   set-up is originated by the International Telecommunication Network
   user.

   Scenario 3: communication between International Telecommunication
   Network users, using IP-based networks for the connection/trunking
   between the involved users.

   Scenario 4: communication between IP-based network users, using
   International Telecommunication Networks for the connection/trunking
   between the involved users.

   In principle the interworking between the IP-based network and the
   international telecommunication network can be at any level in the
   international telecommunication network hierarchy, e.g. local
   exchange, transit exchange, international exchange

   For all scenarios, any added functionality to enable interworking
   should be provided in the IP-based network, unless otherwise agreed
   between the operators of the IP-based and international
   telecommunication networks.

   In the case of scenarios 3 and 4, the IP-based network is provided
   by a separate entity (e.g., ROA) from the international
   telecommunication network. Recommendation E.370 does not cover the
   case where IP technology is integrated within the international
   telecommunication network of a single service provider. The traffic,
   technical, economical, and administrative advantages/disadvantages
   should be considered before such interconnection is proposed by
   network operators.


10. Operation

   When interworking between IP-based networks and international
   telecommunication networks the operational procedures for services
   should, wherever possible, be the same as for those on the
   international telecommunications networks. The same tones,
   announcements, service codes and signals, etc., used in the
   international telecommunication services should be recognised and
   where appropriate returned by the IP-based network. For interworking

Lind             Informational - Expires January 2001                5


                   Service Principles when Public          July 2001
            Circuit-Switched International Telecommunication
               Networks Interwork with IP-based Networks


   between IP-based networks and international telecommunication
   networks, User-to-Network signalling (where a user on one network is
   accessing functionality supplied on the other network), Network-to-
   Network signalling, and User-to-User signalling must be consistently
   interpreted across the various networks. The latter case is
   particularly important when users must interact with interactive
   voice response systems.

   For users on the international telecommunication networks to reach
   users on IP-based networks, terminals on the IP-based network should
   be addressable using the international numbering plan applicable to
   the International telecommunications services (i.e., Recommendation
   E.164).

   There should be mechanisms in place to cater for the needs of any
   call recording, billing and international accounting functions that
   might be required. For example, an answer supervisory signal should
   be returned by the terminating network when an incoming call is
   established.


11. Quality of Service

   When international telecommunication networks interwork with IP-
   based networks, the quality of service experienced by the users
   should, as far as practible, be the same as if there had been no
   interworking involved. Note: Categories of speech quality are
   defined in Recommendation G.109 [8].

12. References


   1  ITU-T Draft New Recommendation E.370, Service principles when
      public circuit switched international telecommunication networks
      interwork with IP-based networks, COM 2-R077, March 2000

   2  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997

   3  ITU-T Recommendation H.323, Packet-based multimedia
      communications systems, September 1999

   4  M. Handley, H. Schulzrinne, E. Schooler, and J. Rosenberg, "SIP:
      session initiation protocol," RFC 2543, March 1999

   5  ITU-T Recommendation E.164, The international public
      telecommunication numbering plan, May 1997

   6  ITU-T Recommendation E.106, International Emergency Preference
      Scheme, March 2000


Lind             Informational - Expires January 2001                6


                   Service Principles when Public          July 2001
            Circuit-Switched International Telecommunication
               Networks Interwork with IP-based Networks




   7  ITU-T Recommendation E.105, International Telephone Service,
      August 1992

   8  ITU-T Recommendation G.109 - Definition of categories of speech
      transmission quality, September 1999


13. Author's Address

   Steven D. Lind
   AT&T
   180 Park Avenue, Bldg. 2, Room 2G25
   Florham Park, NJ 07932
   Phone: +1 973 236 6787
   Email: sdlind@att.com



































Lind             Informational - Expires January 2001                7


                   Service Principles when Public          June 2000
            Circuit-Switched International Telecommunication
               Networks Interwork with IP-based Networks



Full Copyright Statement

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved.

    This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
    others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
    or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
    and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
    kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
    are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
    document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
    the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
    Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
    developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
    copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
    followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
    English.

    The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
    revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

    This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
    "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
    TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
    BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
    HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
    MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.























Lind            Informational - Expires December 2000               8
