





Individual Submission                                          G. Huston,
Internet Draft                                                 S. Bradner
Document: draft-huston-iana-00.txt                           October 2002
Category: BCP
Expires: April 2003


            Defining the Role and Function of the IETF-IANA


Status of this Memo

    This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
    all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
    other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
    Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
    six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
    documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts
    as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
    progress."

    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

    Comments on this draft should be directed to gih@telstra.net.

Abstract

    This memo describes the role and function of the IETF-IANA.

    Many IETF protocols make use of commonly defined values that are
    passed within protocol objects. To ensure consistent interpretation
    of these values between independent implementations, there is a need
    to ensure that the values and associated semantic intent are
    uniquely defined.

    The IETF uses a single registry to register these protocol values
    and their associated semantic intent. In this memo the registry
    function is referred to as the IETF Internet Assigned Numbers
    Authority (IETF-IANA).

    This document provides a description of this function and proposes



Huston & Bradner                                        [Page 1]







draft-huston-iana-00.txt     IETF-IANA Role              22 October 2002


    that this description be adopted by the Internet Architecture Board
    (IAB).

1. Introduction

    Many IETF protocols make use of commonly defined values that are
    passed within protocol objects. To ensure consistent interpretation
    of these values between independent implementations, there is a need
    to ensure that the values and associated semantic intent are
    uniquely defined.

    The IETF uses a single registry to register these protocol values
    and their associated semantic intent.

    Historically, this registry is referred to as the Internet Assigned
    Numbers Authority (IANA). In this context the IANA function has
    included both the registration of protocol-specific identifier
    values (e.g. TCP parameters) as well as the registration of various
    numbering and name resources that are used within public Internet
    networks (e.g. IPv4 address allocations).

    In this document a distinction is drawn between the registration of
    protocol parameters for protocols defined in IETF RFCs, and other
    IANA functions. The new term to describe the IETF-related activity
    is the "IETF-IANA".

    The document describes this IETF-IANA function as it applies to the
    IETF Internet Standards Process. [RFC1700]

2. Definition of IETF-IANA

    The Internet Standards document STD-2 [RFC1700], published in
    October 1994, defined the role of the IANA as follows:

        The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) is the central
        coordinator for the assignment of unique parameter values for
        Internet protocols.  The IANA is chartered by the Internet
        Society (ISOC) and the Federal Network Council (FNC) to act as
        the clearinghouse to assign and coordinate the use of numerous
        Internet protocol parameters.

        The Internet protocol suite, as defined by the Internet
        Engineering Task Force (IETF) and its steering group (the IESG),
        contains numerous parameters, such as internet protocol
        addresses, domain names, autonomous system numbers (used in some
        routing protocols), protocol numbers, port numbers, management
        information base object identifiers, including private
        enterprise numbers, and many others.



Huston & Bradner                                        [Page 2]







draft-huston-iana-00.txt     IETF-IANA Role              22 October 2002


        The common use of the Internet protocols by the Internet
        community requires that the particular values used in these
        parameter fields be assigned uniquely.  It is the task of the
        IANA to make those unique assignments as requested and to
        maintain a registry of the currently assigned values. [RFC1700]

    The definition of the IETF-IANA role is provided in BCP 26
    [RFC2434]:

        Many protocols make use of identifiers consisting of constants
        and other well-known values. Even after a protocol has been
        defined and deployment has begun, new values may need to be
        assigned (e.g., for a new option type in DHCP, or a new
        encryption or authentication algorithm for IPSec).  To insure
        that such quantities have consistent values and interpretations
        in different implementations, their assignment must be
        administered by a central authority. For IETF protocols, that
        role is provided by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority
        (IANA). [RFC2434]


    The operation of the IETF-IANA role is described in the MoU Between
    IETF and the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers
    (ICANN) concerning IANA [RFC2860]

        4.1. The IANA will assign and register Internet protocol
        parameters only as directed by the criteria and procedures
        specified in RFCs, including Proposed, Draft and full Internet
        Standards and Best Current Practice documents, and any other RFC
        that calls for IANA assignment. If they are not so specified, or
        in case of ambiguity, IANA will continue to assign and register
        Internet protocol parameters that have traditionally been
        registered by IANA, following past and current practice for such
        assignments, unless otherwise directed by the IESG.

        If in doubt or in case of a technical dispute, IANA will seek
        and follow technical guidance exclusively from the IESG. Where
        appropriate the IESG will appoint an expert to advise IANA.

        The IANA will work with the IETF to develop any missing criteria
        and procedures over time, which the IANA will adopt when so
        instructed by the IESG.[RFC2860]

3. Publication of IETF-IANA Assignments

    The current mode of publication of IETF-IANA assignments is
    described in the Informational Document RFC 3232 [RFC3232],
    published in January 2002:



Huston & Bradner                                        [Page 3]







draft-huston-iana-00.txt     IETF-IANA Role              22 October 2002


        From November 1977 through October 1994, the Internet Assigned
        Numbers Authority (IANA) periodically published tables of the
        Internet protocol parameter assignments in RFCs entitled,
        "Assigned Numbers".  The most current of these Assigned Numbers
        RFCs had Standard status and carried the designation: STD 2.  At
        this time, the latest STD 2 is RFC 1700.

        Since 1994, this sequence of RFCs have been replaced by an
        online database accessible through a web page (currently,
        www.iana.org). The purpose of the present RFC is to note this
        fact and to officially obsolete RFC 1700, whose status changes
        to Historic.  RFC 1700 is obsolete, and its values are
        incomplete and in some cases may be wrong. [RFC3232]


4. The Procedures related to IETF-IANA Parameter Management

    IETF-IANA actions are defined through the inclusion of an "IANA
    Considerations" section in Internet Standards documents, as
    described in RFC 2434 [RFC1700]. There are also RFCs that
    specifically address IANA considerations for particular protocols,
    such as RFC 2780, [RFC2870], RFC 2939 [RFC2939], and RFC 2978
    [RFC2978].

5. The Operation of the IETF-IANA

    As documented in the IAB Charter [RFC2850], the role of the Internet
    Architecture Board includes responsibility for the IANA function.
    Specifically, the IAB, acting on behalf of the IETF, approves the
    appointment of an organization to act as IANA on behalf of the IETF,
    and also approves the terms and conditions of this delegation of the
    IANA function.

    The IANA has a non-voting liaison with the IAB to facilitate clear
    communications and effective operation of the IETF-IANA function.

    The technical direction of the IANA with respect to IETF-IANA is
    provided by the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG).
    [RFC2850] The IANA has a non-voting liaison with the IESG to
    facilitate clear communications and effective operation of the IETF-
    IANA function.

6. Current IETF-IANA Protocol Parameter Assignments

    The list of current IETF-IANA protocols for which parameter
    assignments are registered by IANA is listed in reference
    [IANA.ORG].




Huston & Bradner                                        [Page 4]







draft-huston-iana-00.txt     IETF-IANA Role              22 October 2002


    With reference to the IETF-IANA, the protocol parameters that are
    excluded from the scope of the IETF-IANA role are the registration
    of unicast IPv4 address blocks, unicast IPv6 address blocks,
    Autonomous System blocks, and top level delegations within the
    Domain Name System, as they are considered to be outside the scope
    of the IETF-IANA as defined in Section 2 of this document.

7. A Description of the Operation and Responsibilities of the IETF-IANA

    A description of the operation and responsibilities of the IETF-IANA
    is proposed for consideration by the Internet Architecture Board.
    This document is intended to clearly describe and define the role of
    the IETF-IANA and the related roles of the IAB, the IESG, and the
    Internet Society. A draft of such a description is contained in
    Attachment A.

8. Acknowledgements

    The authors acknowledge the assistance provided by reviewers of
    earlier drafts of this document, including James Kempf, Ran
    Atkinson, Sally Floyd, Harald Alvestrand and Leslie Daigle.

9. References

    [RFC1700] Reynolds, J., Postel, J., "ASSIGNED NUMBERS", STD2,
        RFC1700, October 1994.

    [RFC2434] Narten, T., Alvestrand, H., "Guidelines for Writing an
        IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP26, RFC2434, October
        1998.

    [RFC2860] Carpenter, B., Baker, F., Roberts, M., "Memorandum of
        Understanding Concerning the Technical Work of the Internet
        Assigned Numbers Authority", RFC2860, June 2000.


    [RFC3232] Reynolds, J. ed., "Assigned Numbers: RFC 1700 is Replaced
        by an On-line Database", RFC3232, January 2002.

    [RFC2870] Bradner, S., Paxson, V., "IANA Allocation Guidelines For
        Values In the Internet Protocol and Related Headers", BCP37, RFC
        2780, March 2000.

    [RFC2939] Droms, R., "Procedures and IANA Guidelines for Definition
        of New DHCP Options and Message Types.", BCP43, RFC 2939,
        September 2000.

    [RFC2978] Freed, N., Postel, J., "IANA Charset Registration



Huston & Bradner                                        [Page 5]







draft-huston-iana-00.txt     IETF-IANA Role              22 October 2002


        Procedures", BCP19, RFC 2978, October 2000.

    [RFC2850] Carpenter, B., ed., "Charter of the Internet Architecture
        Board (IAB)" BCP39, RFC 2850, May 2000.

    [IANA.ORG] "IANA Protocol Numbers and Assignment Services" available
        online as http://www.iana.org/numbers.htm

         [DYSON] Correspondence from Esther Dyson, Interim Chairman,
         ICANN to Scott Bradner, Brian Carpenter and Fred Baker of the
         IETF, Feb 25 1999, http://www.icann.org/correspondence/bradner-
         dyson-25feb99.htm


10. Authors

    Geoff Huston
    Telstra
    242 Exhibition St, Melbourne
    AUSTRALIA

    EMail: gih@telstra.net


    Scott Bradner
    Harvard University
    29 Oxford St
    CAmbridge MA 02138
    USA

    EMail: sob@harvard.edu




















Huston & Bradner                                        [Page 6]







draft-huston-iana-00.txt     IETF-IANA Role              22 October 2002


Attachment A

The Operation and Responsibilities of the IETF-IANA

Abstract

    This memo describes the operation and role of the IETF-IANA, and the
    roles of related bodies with reference to the IETF-IANA function.

Introduction

    Many protocols make use of identifiers consisting of constants and
    other well-known values. Even after a protocol has been defined and
    deployment has begun, new values may need to be assigned (e.g., for
    a new option type in DHCP, or a new encryption or authentication
    algorithm for IPSec).  To insure that such quantities have
    consistent values and interpretations in different implementations,
    their assignment must be administered by a central authority. For
    IETF protocols, that role is provided by the IETF Internet Assigned
    Numbers Authority (IETF-IANA).

IETF-IANA Role

    The IETF-IANA is a function undertaken under the auspices of the
    Internet Architecture Board (IAB).

    The roles of the IETF-IANA are as follows:

    - Review and Advise

      The IETF-IANA reviews Internet-Drafts that are being considered by
      the IESG, with the objective of offering advice to the IESG
      regarding the need for an IANA Considerations section, whether
      such a section, when required, is clear in terms of direction to
      IETF-IANA and whether the section is consistent with the current
      published IETF- IANA Guidelines.

    - Registry

      The IETF-IANA operates a registry of protocol parameter
      assignments.

      This registry includes:

      * all protocol parameters that are managed by IETF-IANA,

      * for each protocol parameter, a reference to the RFC document
        that describes the parameter and the associated IANA



Huston & Bradner                                        [Page 7]







draft-huston-iana-00.txt     IETF-IANA Role              22 October 2002


        Considerations concerning the parameter, and

      * for each registration of a protocol parameter, the source of the
        registration and the date of the registration.

      The registry operates as a public registry, and the contents of
      the registry are openly available to the public, on-line and free
      of charge.

      The IETF-IANA assigns protocol parameter values in accordance with
      the policy associated with the protocol parameter. (Some policies
      are listed in RFC 2434. [RFC2434])

    - Mailing Lists

      The IETF-IANA operates public mailing lists as specified in IANA
      Considerations. Such lists are designated for the purpose of
      review of assignment proposals in conjunction with a designated
      expert review function.

    - Liaison

      The IETF-IANA designates an individual to act as a non-voting
      liaison to the IAB.

      The IETF-IANA designates an individual to act as a non-voting
      liaison to the IESG. The IETF-IANA liases with the IESG regarding
      the provision of advice to the IESG on IETF protocol parameters as
      well as the IANA Considerations section of Internet-drafts that
      are being reviewed for publication as an RFC.

    - Reporting

      The IETF-IANA will submit periodic reports to the IAB concerning
      IETF-IANA operational performance of the registry function.

      The IETF-IANA will undertake periodic reports to the IETF Plenary
      concerning the status of the IETF-IANA role.

      The IETF-IANA will publish an annual report describing the status
      of the IETF-IANA function and a summary of performance indicators.

    - Intellectual Property Rights and the IETF-IANA

      IETF-IANA assigned values are published and made available free of
      any charges and free of any constraints relating to further
      redistribution, with the caveat that the IETF-IANA assignment
      information may not be modified in any redistributed copy.



Huston & Bradner                                        [Page 8]







draft-huston-iana-00.txt     IETF-IANA Role              22 October 2002


      Any intellectual property rights of IETF-IANA assignment
      information, including the IETF-IANA registry and its contents,
      are to be held by the IETF and ISOC, and all IETF-IANA
      publications relating to assignment information are to be
      published under the terms of Section 10 of RFC2026, and are to
      include the copyright notice as documented in Section 10.4 (C) of
      RFC2026. [RFC2939] [DYSON]

IAB role

    The IETF-IANA is a function undertaken under the auspices of the
    Internet Architecture Board (IAB).

    The IAB has the responsibility to, from time to time, review the
    current description of the IETF-IANA function and to adopt
    amendments relating to its role and mode of operation of the IETF-
    IANA according to the best interests of the IETF.

    The IAB has the responsibility to select an organization to
    undertake the delegated functions of the IETF-IANA.

    The IAB has the responsibility to determine the terms and conditions
    of this delegated role. Such terms and conditions should ensure that
    the IETF-IANA operates in a manner that is fully conformant to the
    functions described in this document. In addition, such terms and
    conditions must not restrict the rights and interests of the IETF
    with respect to the IETF-IANA function.

    The IETF-IANA designates a non-voting liaison to the IAB to
    facilitate clear communications and effective operation of the IETF-
    IANA function.

IESG Role

    The IESG is responsible for the technical direction of the IETF-
    IANA. Such technical direction is provided through the adoption of
    IETF RFC documents within the "IANA Considerations" section of such
    documents, or as stand-alone "IANA Considerations" RFC documents.

    The IESG shall ensure that the review of Internet-Drafts that are
    offered for publications as RFCs ensures that IANA Considerations
    sections are present when needed, and that IANA Considerations
    sections conform to the current published guidelines.

    The IETF-IANA designates a non-voting liaison to the IESG to
    facilitate clear communications and effective operation of the IETF-
    IANA function.




Huston & Bradner                                        [Page 9]







draft-huston-iana-00.txt     IETF-IANA Role              22 October 2002


Internet Society Role

    Any intellectual property rights of IETF-IANA assignment
    information, including the IETF-IANA registry and its contents, and
    all IETF-IANA publications, are to be held by the Internet Society
    on behalf of the IETF.

Acknowledgement

    This document is adapted from RFC2434 [RFC2434], and has been
    modified to include explicit reference to Intellectual Property
    Rights, and the roles of the IAB and IESG in relation to the IETF-
    IANA function.






































Huston & Bradner                                       [Page 10]




