

CCAMP Working Group                                    Young Hwa Kim 
Internet-Draft                                                  ETRI 
Expires: April 14, 2006                                              
                                                                     
                                                    October 15, 2005 

    
           Requirements for the Resilience of Control Plane 
         
                   <draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-01.txt> 
    
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
    By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
    applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
    have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
    aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
     
    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
    other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
    Drafts. 
     
    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
    documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
    as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
    progress". 
     
    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
    http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
     
    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
    http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
     
    This Internet-Draft will expire on April 14, 2006. 
    
 
Copyright Notice  
              
    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005). 
  
     
Abstract 
    
   The resilience of control plane refers to the ability of control 
   plane to continue its operation even under failure conditions of 
 
 
Kim                    Expires April 14, 2006                 [Page 1]

draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-01.txt                      October 15, 2005 
 
 
   control components such as control entities, control nodes, and 
   control channels. This document describes requirements for providing 
   the resilience capability of control plane (in other words, control 
   network) in non-(G)MPLS and (G)MPLS. This contribution, as a document 
   that proposes a framework to provide the resilience capability of 
   control plane, include terminologies, basic concepts of control 
   networks, possible configurations, necessities and requirements, 
   additional considerations including the relationship with other 
   protocol such as LMP for the resilience of control plane. 
    
    
    
Table of Contents 
    
    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
      1.1  Terminology for Resilience of Control Channels............3 
   2. Terminology....................................................4 
   3. Control Networks...............................................4 
   4. Necessities for Resilience of Control Channels.................7 
   5. Requirements for Resilience of Control Channels................8 
      5.1 Requirements for MPLS 1+1 LSPs.............................8 
      5.2 Requirements for LMP-CCM Extension.........................8 
   6. Functions for LMP-CCM Extension................................9 
      6.1 Identification of PG-1 and PG-3 Control Channel............9 
      6.2 Identification of Detour Control Channels.................10 
      6.3 Automatic Switchover......................................10 
      6.4 Forced Switchover.........................................10 
      6.5 Recovery from Failure.....................................10 
      6.6 Notification of Control Channel Unavailability............10 
      6.7 Inquiry of Switchover Attributes..........................11 
      6.8 Hello Initiation..........................................11 
      6.9 Notification of Protocol Errors...........................11 
   7. Security Considerations.......................................11 
   8. IANA Considerations...........................................11 
   9. References....................................................11 
      9.1 Normative References......................................11 
      9.2 Informative References....................................12 
   Author's Addresses...............................................12 
   Intellectual Property Statement..................................12 
    
    
1. Introduction  
 
   There are three components in control plane, which are control 
   entities, control nodes, and Control Channels (CCs). As described in 
   [LMP], a control channel is a pair of mutually reachable interfaces 
   can be used to exchange the control plane information such as link 
   provisioning and fault management information, path management and 
 
 
Kim                    Expires April 14, 2006                 [Page 2]

draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-01.txt                      October 15, 2005 
 
 
   label distribution information, and network topology and state 
   distribution information. In addition to the exchange of control 
   packets between nodes within a network, it may be possible to do 
   transparent relay of routing and signaling information over those 
   control channels between neighboring networks. A control entity is a 
   functional process responsible for running link management, routing 
   protocols or signaling functions. A control node means a physical 
   node keeping various control entities. 
    
   Best-effort based IP networks use routing protocols such as OSPF and 
   BGP in order to forward data packets. In this situation, control 
   packets generated by routing protocols are processed in the layer 3 
   as the same way that data packets exchanged by ordinary users are 
   done in the layer. It means that channels carrying data and control 
   packets share the fate. MPLS based IP networks upgraded from the 
   best-effort based IP networks use routing and signaling protocols to 
   establish LSPs that are determined for more effectively forwarding 
   data packets. However, their control packets are still processed in 
   the layer 3, and the fate of control channels is the same to that of 
   data channels as well. 
    
   Then, GMPLS based IP networks come to be capable of handling control 
   channels separated from data channels. It means that channels 
   carrying data and control packets do not have an impact upon each 
   other. Several control channels such as SONET/SDH DCC channels and 
   Ethernet OAM channels defined by the OIF, MPLS based LSPs applied as 
   dedicated control channels, public IP networks, out-of-fiber based 
   dedicated control channels, and so on can be configured independent 
   from data channels for the purpose. 
    
   In the end, a node can configure control channels of sharing the own 
   fate with data channels or of separating the fate from data channels 
   according to network requirements. It is an important thing that 
   possible alternative paths exist between the communicating entities. 
   Here, a network can provide protection and switchover functions of 
   various levels based on configuration schemes and physical 
   characteristics of paths to be used to exchange control packets 
   between adjacent nodes. To effectively use these alternative paths 
   between nodes, this document describes requirements for the 
   resilience of control networks, which include terminologies, basic 
   concepts of control networks, possible configurations, necessities 
   and requirements, additional considerations, and so on. In this 
   current document, only the resilience part of control channels is 
   covered, the parts of control entities and control nodes need a 
   further study. 
    
    
1.1   Terminology for Resilience of Control Channels 
    
 
 
Kim                    Expires April 14, 2006                 [Page 3]

draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-01.txt                      October 15, 2005 
 
 
   To provide the resilience capabilities of control channels, several 
   terms layer should be introduced. For examples, these include control 
   packet types, active and standby control channels, physical control 
   channels, protection groups (PGs), and etc, which are not exhaustive. 
    
   - Control packet types: Control information such as routing, 
   signaling, and link management in GMPLS. In more detail, Open 
   Shortest Path First (OSPF), Intermediate System to Intermediate 
   System (IS-IS), and Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) variants are 
   candidates for routing, Constraint-Based Routing Label Distribution 
   Protocol (CR-LDP) and resource ReSerVation Protocol with Traffic 
   Engineering (RSVP-TE) are ones for signaling, and Link Management 
   Protocol (LMP) and the protocol proposed here are candidates for link 
   management. 
    
   - Active control channels: Physical control channels which are 
   currently carrying the control information. An active control channel 
   becomes a standby control channel when it can not carry the control 
   information due to a failure. 
    
   - Standby control channels: Physical control channels which are not 
   currently carrying the control information, but can carry them upon 
   the failure of active control channel. Once one of standby control 
   channels is used to carry the control information, the standby 
   control channel becomes an active control channel. 
    
   - Physical control channels: Physical links used to carry control 
   information, for examples, a separate wavelength or fiber, an 
   Ethernet link, an Internet Protocol (IP) tunnel through a separate 
   management network, or the overhead bytes of a data link. In this 
   proposal, as a more extended concept, all links of in-fiber in-bend, 
   in-fiber out-of-bend, and out-of-fiber can be physical control 
   channels. 
    
   - Protection group: A set of physical control channels using the same 
   type of network configuration or belonging to similar aspects within 
   the control network configuration. 
    
    
2. Terminology 
 
   In this document, the key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", 
   "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT 
   RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" are to be interpreted as 
   described in BCP 14, RFC 2119 and indicate requirement levels for 
   compliant implementations. 
 
3. Control Networks 
    
 
 
Kim                    Expires April 14, 2006                 [Page 4]

draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-01.txt                      October 15, 2005 
 
 
    
   In current IP networks, there is no explicit concept of control 
   network. Instead there is the implicit concept of that. However, the 
   terminology, called "control plane", gets acquainted in the IP world. 
   The control plane represents aspects of control networks comprising 
   control channels, control entities and control nodes used to 
   transport control packets of signaling, link management, and routing 
   protocols. In a sense of terminology, control plane is a set of 
   communicating entities that are responsible for the establishment of 
   connections including set-up, release, supervision and maintenance. A 
   control plane is supported by a signaling network, in other words, a 
   control network. 
    
   In traditional IP networks or MPLS networks, there is an implicit 
   one-to-one association of a control channel to a data channel. Under 
   the one-to-one association between control channels and data 
   channels, the protection of control channels may be resolved using
   the protection schemes for data channels such as 1+1, 1:1, and 1:N 
   protections. In other words, where there is fate sharing, failures of 
   data channels could instantly influence the own control channels. 
    
   However, as described in [GMPLS-ARCH], a control channel can be 
   separated from the data channel in GMPLS. To allow for the control 
   channels between adjacent nodes to be separated from the associated 
   data-bearing links means that there is not a one-to-one association 
   between a control channel and a data channel. It means that failures 
   of data channels could not influence the own control channels any 
   more. 
    
   As indicated in [ITU-G807], a control network (as a narrow meaning, 
   signaling network) supports control plane by the act of transferring 
   service-related information between the user and the network and also 
   between network entities. The control network can be constructed 
   using common control signaling, thereby allowing a network operator 
   to have the capability of developing a separate control network. 
   According to this document, control channels are associated with data 
   channels in the following ways: 
    
   - Associated mode in which control packets between network elements 
   are transferred over control channels that directly connect the 
   network elements such as transport channels; 
    
   - Quasi-associated mode in which control packets between nodes A and 
   B follow a predetermined routing path over several control channels 
   while the traffic channels are routed directly between A and B; 
    
   - Non-associated mode in which control packets between two network 
   elements A and B are routed over several control channels, while 
   traffic signals are routed directly between A and B. The control 
 
 
Kim                    Expires April 14, 2006                 [Page 5]

draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-01.txt                      October 15, 2005 
 
 
   channels used may vary with time and network conditions. This mode 
   has two types of control channels, non-associated mode with internal 
   network and non-associated mode with external network. The internal 
   case says that control channels are connected each other under the 
   similar configuration of its transport network, but the external case 
   says that control channels are connected each other via other network 
   that is definitely different from the configuration of its transport 
   network. 
    
   On the one hand, as defined by the Optical Internet Forum (OIF), 
   control channel configurations to carry control packets over 
   Synchronous Optical NETwork (SONET) and Synchronous Digital Hierarchy 
   (SDH), Optical Transport Network (OTN), and Ethernet include two 
   types of the following: 
    
   - In-fiber configuration in which control packets are carried over a 
   control channel embedded in the data-carrying link between network 
   elements; 
    
   - Out-of-fiber configuration in which control packets are carried 
   over a dedicated control channel between adjacent nodes, which is 
   separated from the data-bearing links. 
    
   In the case of in-fiber configuration above, we can expand this 
   configuration and apply it to the out-of-fiber configuration that a 
   control channel within a fiber that includes transport channels can 
   handle transport channels in the fiber itself as well as other
   fibers.  
    
   In addition, a similar concept to a control network can be found in 
   the Signaling Communication Network (SCN) within the Automatic 
   Switched Transport Network (ASTN) in [ITU-G7712]. There may be 
   several physical implementations for the SCN. For example, Embedded 
   Control Channels (ECC) interfaces, Local Area Network (LAN) 
   interfaces, and Wide Area Network (WAN) interfaces are possible. 
    
   Then, there is an important indication for the resilience of control 
   plane. Common to each topology is that alternative diverse paths 
   exist between the entities. Although a failure occurs over a 
   signaling link between adjacent nodes on the topology, one or more 
   alternative paths disjointed or indifferent to the failed link can be 
   identified. To use the most of possible control channels would have 
   an important role for the resilience of control plane. 
    
   Here, the resilience of control plane refers to the ability of a 
   control network to maintain an acceptable level of control services 
   during failures of communicating entities. Also, the resilience of 
   control channels means the protection and switchover capability that 
   can configure one or more signaling routes between adjacent nodes 
   within a control network or between control networks, and allow 
 
 
Kim                    Expires April 14, 2006                 [Page 6]

draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-01.txt                      October 15, 2005 
 
 
   control packets to be exchanged within a threshold against the 
   failure of one or more control channels. 
    
    
4. Necessities for Resilience of Control Channels 
    
   As recognized in the IP world, IP routing protocols have slow 
   convergence time due to the hello interval and expiration times for 
   the normal operation of IP networks. Under this situation, fast and 
   reliable recovery is very difficult from one or more failures 
   occurred over interfaces between adjacent nodes. Then, why is the 
   fast and reliable recovery of control channels needed? There is a 
   reason that the failure of control channels would affect new 
   connection set-up, connection tear-down, and fault report. In 
   addition, control channels could include control packets for link 
   management protocol, routing protocols as well as control packets of 
   other IP control protocols, according to the application level into 
   those. In this circumstance, the fast and reliable communication 
   environment would be a very important factor in controlling IP 
   networks stably. 
    
   However, if there is no resilience capability of control channels 
   even though there is a possibility being capable of sufficiently 
   using the nature of a network, the early determination that there are 
   no more control channels within a network may cause problems like the 
   communication suspension between control entities even though data 
   channels are running well. When RSVP variant protocols are used 
   between adjacent nodes, if there is no self-refresh procedure, the 
   failure of control channels may result effects such as unwanted 
   connection teardown. In particular, as described in [ITU-G7712], such 
   a failure that could not transport ASTN messages over the SCN may 
   impact restoration when ASTN is used to provide restoration of 
   existing connections. It is therefore critical for a control network 
   to provide the resilience of control channels that could sufficiently 
   use direct and indirect ones between adjacent nodes. 
    
   Those channels could be classified into two groups roughly, direct 
   (similar to the associated mode) and indirect interfaces. More 
   specifically, the indirect case could be classified into indirect 
   interfaces using direct interfaces (similar to the quasi-associated 
   mode) and other indirect interfaces including internal or external 
   networks (similar to the non-associated modes). 
    
   Here, a network can provide protection and switchover functions of 
   various levels based on configuration schemes and physical 
   characteristics of links to be used to exchange control packets 
   between adjacent nodes. For examples, for the resilience of control 
   channels, the control channel management (CCM) function of LMP could 
 
 
Kim                    Expires April 14, 2006                 [Page 7]

draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-01.txt                      October 15, 2005 
 
 
   be extended, or MPLS 1+1 LSPs using the dual-feed and selection 
   scheme could be applied. 
    
    
5. Requirements for Resilience of Control Channels 
    
   To introduce resilience capabilities into control channels, several 
   requirements have to be identified according to schemes addressed 
   above. 
    
5.1 Requirements for MPLS 1+1 LSPs 
    
   For this scheme, control entities should establish two LSPs to be 
   used as control channels using signaling protocol such as a RSVP or 
   LMP variant protocol. Control packets shall be sent with the same 
   sequence number and the same contents over two LSPs between adjacent 
   nodes. The sequence number shall be used as the identifier for packet 
   1+1 protection, and is located after the 4-bytes MPLS encapsulation 
   header. Then, a receiving node of these control packets would ignore 
   a control packet that arrives late with the same sequence number. 
   This section is based on [ITU-G7712]. 
    
    
5.2 Requirements for LMP-CCM Extension 
    
   1) Configuration of control networks 
    
   The support of the resilience capability of control networks though 
   the LMP extension requires either that the number of control channels 
   between adjacent nodes has to be greater than one, and there has to 
   be at least one active control channel and more than one standby 
   control channel. The important point is that adjacent nodes that want 
   to exchange control packets should in advance know their physical 
   characteristics of control channels and control modes such as 
   associated, non-associated, or quasi-associated. 
    
   For this scheme, it is to keep a single active control channel and 
   one or more standby control channels. When a failure occurs at an 
   active control channel, a node would switch the failed control 
   channel over to the one of standby control channels using 
   provisioning rules and negotiation results between nodes. Then, one 
   among several standby control channels turns into an active control 
   channel instead of the previous active control channel. 
    
   The distribution of control packet types into more than one control 
   channel may be possible, but this case requires further study. For 
   this case, the switchover function of control channels should in 
   advance know control packet types that a control channel carries. In 
   order to simplify our approach in the problem domain, it is assumed 
 
 
Kim                    Expires April 14, 2006                 [Page 8]

draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-01.txt                      October 15, 2005 
 
 
   that a single control channel carries all control packets such as 
   routing, signaling, and link management. 
    
    
   2) Protection Groups of Control Networks 
    
   We assign control channels of the associated mode to the PG-1, assign 
   control channels of the quasi-associated mode to the PG-2, and 
   finally assign control channels of the non-associated mode to the PG-
   3. Such as, a set of data channels in a transport network can be PG-1 
   and PG-2 control channels. In addition, the PG-3 control channels 
   have to be able to control security options according to its network 
   environment. 
    
   Nodes over a PG-3 route might not detect the condition of an 
   unavailable control channel because they do not have the function of 
   control channel management. On a failure of control channel over the 
   detour route, there may be a situation that the availability of a 
   control channel can not be guaranteed within a proper timing limit. 
   Also, different addressing scheme of control channels among PGs can 
   be applied, and the same addressing scheme of control channels within 
   a PG should be applied. 
    
    
   3) Relay of Control Packets in a Transit Node 
    
   In other modes except for the associated mode, there is a possibility 
   that control packets can be traversed via one or more transit nodes 
   in order to guarantee the safe transfer of control packets between 
   real adjacent nodes. In this case, if a node is not the destination 
   node of being capable of receiving control packets, the node must 
   relay those packets over a control channel connected with a 
   succeeding node. 
    
    
6. Functions for LMP-CCM Extension 
    
6.1 Identification of PG-1 and PG-3 Control Channel 
    
   This function allows two adjacent nodes to configure the 
   communication environment of PG-1 and PG-3 control channels. Its 
   procedure to identify active and standby control channels differs 
   from the way how to connect physical links between nodes. That is, in 
   case of point-to-point connection, control channels are identified 
   using a multicast address, and in other cases, they are identified 
   using an unicast address. 
    
    
 
 
Kim                    Expires April 14, 2006                 [Page 9]

draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-01.txt                      October 15, 2005 
 
 
6.2 Identification of Detour Control Channels 
    
   This function is used to configure a more powerful control network 
   after the identification of PG-1 and PG-3 control channels. This is 
   to establish a detour route using PG-1 or PG-3 control channels over 
   one or more transit nodes between adjacent nodes. Note that the 
   detour route is established using ACCs of the PG-1 or PG-3 configured 
   previously between other adjacent nodes. 
    
    
6.3 Automatic Switchover 
    
   When a failure on the ACC in use occurs, this function is used to 
   switchover to a control channel that first responds to the switchover 
   request (called multicast switchover).  
    
   Switchover messages are multicast via all standby control channels 
   except for the current ACC between adjacent nodes. Especially, when 
   switchover group messages are exchanged over a detour route, they 
   have to be forwarded at the IP layer of a transit node, and have not 
   to be gone up the application layer. 
    
    
6.4 Forced Switchover 
    
   Differently from the automatic switchover, this function is used to 
   switchover a control channel compulsorily for the purpose of 
   operation and administration via an intervention of operator. 
    
    
6.5 Recovery from Failure 
    
   On recovery from the previous failure, the control channel performs 
   the process of connectivity verification of the control channel using 
   the identification of PG-1 and 3 control channels. Then, the control 
   channel becomes a SCC. 
    
    
6.6 Notification of Control Channel Unavailability 
    
   This function is used to notify that there is no ACC to forward 
   control packets towards the terminating node due to subsequent 
   failures of other ACCs. This is called, DCC full down. A message is 
   used for the notification. If the node that is notified the 
   unavailability of control channels is not the original node, this 
   process of relaying the message is repeated until the original node 
   receives the message. 
    
    
 
 
Kim                    Expires April 14, 2006                [Page 10]

draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-01.txt                      October 15, 2005 
 
 
6.7 Inquiry of Switchover Attributes 
    
   This function is used to retrieve the protection and switchover 
   attributes of control channels over an ACC between adjacent nodes, 
   which are kept in its peer. 
    
   The protection and switchover attributes of control channels can be 
   classified into the ACC attributes and SCC ones. Accordingly, the 
   original node and its terminating node can identify if the own node 
   has the same attributes with its peer except for DCC related
   contents. 
    
    
6.8   Hello Initiation 
    
   This function is the same one to that in the LMP specification. 
    
    
6.9   Notification of Protocol Errors 
    
   A functional entity for the resilience of control networks should 
   check protocol error conditions as a general rule before acting upon 
   a message after receiving the message from the peer entity. If there 
   is no protocol error within the received message, resultant 
   operations would be performed. However, if a protocol error occurs, 
   the receiving entity should notify the sending entity of the 
   situation using a message, and there is no action against the 
   received message. 
    
    
7. Security Considerations 
    
   This document does not introduce any new security considerations. 
    
    
8. IANA Considerations 
    
   This document does not contain any IANA actions. 
    
    
9. References 
    
9.1 Normative References 
    
   [LMP] J. Lang, et al, "Link Management Protocol," IETF, draft-ietf-
       ccamp-lmp-10.txt, October 2003. 
    
   [GMPLS-ARCH] Eric Mannie, "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching  
      (GMPLS) Architecture", rfc3945, May 2003. 
    
 
 
Kim                    Expires April 14, 2006                [Page 11]

draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-01.txt                      October 15, 2005 
 
 
    
    
9.2 Informative References 
    
   [ITU-G870]  ITU-T, "Requirements for Automatic Switched Transport 
       Networks (ASTN)," G.807, July 2001. 
    
   [ITU-G7712] ITU-T, "Architecture and Specification of Data 
       Communications Network," G.7712, March 2003. 
    
    
    
Author's Addresses 
    
   Young Hwa Kim 
   yhwkim@etri.re.kr 
   161 Gajeong-Dong Yuseong-Gu, Deajon 305-350, Korea 
          
    
    
Intellectual Property Statement 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 
    
    
Disclaimer of Validity 
 
 
Kim                    Expires April 14, 2006                [Page 12]

draft-kim-ccamp-cpr-reqts-01.txt                      October 15, 2005 
 
 
    
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE 
   INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
    
Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject 
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
    
    
Acknowledgement 
    
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 
    
 
 
 
Kim                    Expires April 14, 2006               [Page 13]

