




      
      
     Network Working Group                                  Hing-Kam Lam 
     Internet Draft                                       Alcatel-Lucent 
     Expires: April, 2009                                Scott Mansfield 
     Intended Status: Informational                            Eric Gray 
                                                                Ericsson 
                                                         October 8, 2008 
                                         
      
                                         
                    MPLS TP Network Management Requirements 
                        draft-gray-mpls-tp-nm-req-01.txt 


     Status of this Memo 

        By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that       
        any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is       
        aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she       
        becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of       
        BCP 79. 

        Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet 
        Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working 
        groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working 
        documents as Internet-Drafts. 

        Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
        months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
        documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
        Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work 
        in progress." 

        The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
             http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

        The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
             http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

        This Internet-Draft will expire on January 8, 2009. 

     Abstract 

        This document specifies the network management requirements for 
        supporting the Transport Profile for Multi-Protocol Label 
        Switching (MPLS-TP). 





     Gray, et al              Expires April, 2009               [Page 1] 
       




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        October, 2008 
         

     Table of Contents 

         
        1. Introduction................................................3 
           1.1. Terminology............................................3 
        2. Management Architecture.....................................4 
           2.1. Network Management Architecture........................4 
           2.2. Element Management Architecture........................5 
           2.3. Standard Management Interfaces.........................6 
        3. Management Channel Requirements.............................6 
        4. OAM Management Requirements.................................7 
        5. Fault Management Requirements...............................8 
           5.1. Supervision Function...................................8 
           5.2. Validation Function...................................10 
           5.3. Alarm Handling Function...............................11 
              5.3.1. Alarm Severity Assignment........................11 
              5.3.2. Alarm Suppression................................11 
              5.3.3. Alarm Reporting Control..........................11 
              5.3.4. Alarm Reporting..................................11 
        6. Configuration Requirements.................................12 
        7. Performance Requirements...................................12 
           7.1. Path Characterization Performance Metrics.............13 
           7.2. SLA Performance Metrics...............................14 
           7.3. ATM/Ethernet/MPLS OAM Based Performance Metrics.......14 
           7.4. Performance Collection Instrumentation................14 
              7.4.1. Collection Frequency.............................14 
              7.4.2. Collection Granularity...........................14 
        8. Security Requirements......................................14 
           8.1. Management Communication Channel Security.............14 
              8.1.1. In-Band management security......................15 
              8.1.2. Out-of-Band management security..................15 
           8.2. Signaling Communication Channel Security..............15 
           8.3. Distributed Denial of Service.........................15 
        9. Security Considerations....................................16 
        10. IANA Considerations.......................................16 
        11. Acknowledgments...........................................16 
        12. References................................................16 
           12.1. Normative References.................................16 
           12.2. Informative References...............................17 
        13. Author's Addresses........................................17 
        Intellectual Property Statement...............................18 
        Disclaimer of Validity........................................18 
        Copyright Statement...........................................18 
        Acknowledgment................................................19 
         


      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires April, 2009               [Page 2] 
          




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        October, 2008 
         

     1. Introduction 

        This document describes the requirements necessary to manage the 
        elements and networks that support a Transport Profile for MPLS.  
        These requirements are derived from the set of requirements 
        specified in ITU-T G.7710/Y.1701 [1], which addresses generic 
        management requirements for transport networks (including 
        packet-based and circuit-based). This document also leverages 
        the OAM requirements for MPLS Networks (RFC4377)[2] and MPLS-TP 
        Networks [3] documents and expands on the requirements to cover 
        the modifications necessary for configuration, performance, 
        fault, and security for the Transport Profile. 

     1.1. Terminology 

        The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL 
        NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and 
        "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described 
        in RFC 2119 [6]. 

        MPLS-TP NE: a network element (NE) that supports MPLS-TP 
        functions  

        MPLS-TP network: a network in which MPLS-TP NEs are deployed  

        Equipment Management Function (EMF): the management functions 
        within an NE. See ITU-T G.7710 [1]. 

        Data Communication Network (DCN): a network that supports Layer 
        1 (physical), Layer 2 (data-link), and Layer 3 (network) 
        functionality for distributed management communications related 
        to the management plane, for distributed signaling 
        communications related to the control plane, and other 
        operations communications (e.g., order-wire/voice 
        communications, software downloads, etc.). A DCN supporting 
        management communication is referred to as a Management 
        Communication Network (MCN). A DCN supporting signaling 
        communication is referred to as a Signaling Communication 
        Network (SCN). 

        Embedded Communication Channel (ECC): a logical operations 
        channel between network elements (NEs) that can be utilized by 
        multiple applications (e.g., management plane applications, 
        control plane applications, etc.). The physical channel 
        supporting the ECC is technology specific. An example of 
        physical channels supporting the ECC is a DCC channel within 
        SDH. 
      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires April, 2009               [Page 3] 
          




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        October, 2008 
         

        Management Communication Channel (MCC): a dedicated logical 
        operations channel between NEs for management plane 
        communications. The physical channel supporting the MCC is 
        technology specific. 

        Signaling Communication Channel (SCC): a dedicated logical 
        operations channel between NEs for control plane communications. 
        This SCC MAY be used for GMPLS/ASON signaling and/or other 
        control plane messages like e.g., routing messages. The physical 
        channel supporting the SCC is technology specific. 

        Management Application Function (MAF): an application process 
        that participates in system management. Each NE and Operations 
        System (OS) MUST support a MAF. A MAF is the origin and 
        termination for all TMN messages. 

     2. Management Architecture 

        The management of the MPLS-TP network is based on a multi-tiered 
        distributed management systems as described in ITU-T M.3010 [8] 
        and M.3060 [9]. Each tier provides a predefined level of network 
        management capabilities. The lowest tier of this organization 
        model includes the MPLS-TP Network Element Functions (NEFs) that 
        provides the transport service and the Operations System 
        Functions (OSFs) at the Element Management Level. The Management 
        Application Function (MAF) within the NEFs and OSFs provides the 
        management support. The MAF at each entity can include agents 
        only, managers only, or both agents and managers. MAFs that 
        include managers are capable of managing an agent included in 
        other MAFs. 

        The management communication to peer NEFs and/or Operations 
        System Functions (OSFs) is provided via the Message 
        Communication Function (MCF) within each entity (e.g. NEF and 
        OSF). The user can access the management of the MPLS-TP 
        transport network via a Local Craft Terminal (LCT) attached to 
        the NEF or via a Work Station (WS) attached to the OSF. 

     2.1. Network Management Architecture 

        A transport Management Network (MN) MAY consist of several 
        transport-technology-specific Management Networks. Notation used 
        in G.7710 ([1]) for a transport-technology-specific MN is x.MN, 
        where x is the transport specific technology.  For example, a 
        MPLS-TP specific MN might be MPLS-TP.MN (this was previously TM-
        MN for T-MPLS specific MN).  Where there is no ambiguity, we 

      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires April, 2009               [Page 4] 
          




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        October, 2008 
         

        will use "MN" for an MPLS-TP specific MN, and "MPLS-TP.MN" (or 
        "MPLS-TP MN") and "MN" where both are used in a given context.  

        The management of the MPLS-TP network SHALL be separable from 
        the management of the other technology-specific networks, and 
        operate independently of any particular client or server layer 
        management plane. 

        A MPLS-TP Management Network MAY be partitioned into MPLS-TP 
        Management SubNetworks ("MPLS-TP.MSN" or "MPLS-TP MSN", or just 
        "MSN" where usage is unambiguous). 

        The MPLS-TP MSN MAY be connected to other parts of the MN 
        through one or more Local Craft Terminals (via F-interface, see 
        M.3010) and/or Operations Systems (via Q-interface, see M.3010 
        [8]). The MCF of an MPLS-TP NE initiates/terminates, routes, or 
        otherwise processes management messages over ECCs or via an 
        external Q-interface or F-interface. 

        Multiple addressable MPLS-TP NEs MAY be present at a single 
        physical location (i.e. site or office). The inter-site 
        communications link between the MPLS-TP NEs will normally be 
        provided by the ECCs. Within a particular site, the NEs MAY 
        communicate via an intra-site ECC or via a LAN. 

     2.2. Element Management Architecture 

        The Equipment Management Function (EMF) of a MPLS-TP NE provides 
        the means through which a management system manages the NE. 
        Figure 5/G.7710 [1] illustrates examples of EMF components 
        within an NE.  

        The EMF interacts with the NE's transport functions and control 
        functions (i.e., control plane functions that reside in the NE) 
        by exchanging Management Information (MI) across the Management 
        Point (MP) Reference Points. The EMF MAY contain a number of 
        functions that provide a data reduction mechanism on the 
        information received across the MP Reference Points. 

        The EMF includes functions such as Date & Time and the FCAPS 
        (Fault, Configuration, Accounting, Performance and Security) 
        management functions. The EMF provides event message processing, 
        data storage and logging. The management Agent, a component of 
        the EMF, converts internal management information (MI signals) 
        into Management Application messages and vice versa. The Agent 
        responds to Management Application messages from the Message 
        Communications Function (MCF) by performing the appropriate 
      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires April, 2009               [Page 5] 
          




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        October, 2008 
         

        operations on (for example) the Managed Objects in a Management 
        Information Base (MIB), as necessary. The MCF contains 
        communications functions related to the outside world of the NE 
        (i.e. Date & Time source, Management Plane, Control Plane, Local 
        Craft Terminal and Local Alarms). 

        The Date & Time functions keep track of the NE's date/time which 
        is used by the FCAPS management functions to e.g. time stamp 
        event reports. 

     2.3. Standard Management Interfaces 

        This document places no restriction on which management 
        interface to be used for managing an MPLS-TP network. It is 
        possible to provision and manage an end-to-end connection 
        across a network where some segments are 
        created/managed/deleted, for example by netconf/XML or snmp/smi 
        and other segments by CORBA/IDL interfaces. Use of any network 
        management interface for one management related purpose does 
        not preclude use of another network management interface for 
        other management related purposes, or the same purpose at 
        another time However, an MPLS-TP NE is not required to offer 
        more than one standard management interface.   

         

     3. Management Channel Requirements 

        The Embedded Communication Channel (ECC) provides a logical 
        operations channel between NEs for transferring Management 
        and/or Signaling information. Note that some technologies 
        provide separate communication channels for Management (MCC) and 
        Signaling (SCC).   

        This document places no restriction on the physical topology of 
        the MN to support management communications. However, the MPLS-
        TP MN SHOULD support seamless connectivity with remote transport 
        domains and NEs as specified in ITU-T G.8601 [10] as well as 
        with termination points located in NEs under control by a third 
        party network operator as specified in G.8601. 

        Each MPLS-TP MSN MUST have at least one MPLS-TP NE which is 
        connected to an OS (possibly via a Mediation Device). This NE is 
        called a Gateway Network Element (GNE). The GNE SHOULD be able 
        to perform an intermediate system network layer routing function 
        for ECC messages destined for any end system in the MSN. 
        Messages passing between the OS and any of the end systems in 
      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires April, 2009               [Page 6] 
          




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        October, 2008 
         

        the subnetwork are routed through the GNE and, in general, other 
        intermediate systems. 

        MPLS-TP NEs communicate via the DCN. The DCN connects NEs with 
        management systems, NEs with NEs, and management systems with 
        management systems. DCN architecture and requirements are 
        specified in ITU-T G.7712/Y.1703 [7], including network layer 
        protocols and their interworking. In order to have the DCN 
        operate properly, a number of management functions are required. 
        Examples are: 

          . Retrieval of network parameters to ensure compatible 
             functioning, e.g. packet size, timeouts, quality of 
             service, window size, etc.; 

          . Establishment of message routing between DCN nodes; 

          . Management of network addresses; 

          . Retrieval of operational status of the DCN at a given node; 

          . Capability to enable/disable access to the DCN. 

         

     4. OAM Management Requirements 

        <This section will be aligned with the OAM terminology document> 

        The purpose of the Operation and Maintenance (OAM) functionality 
        is to maintain the integrity of the network and to ensure that 
        the transport service is compliant with the committed Service 
        Level Agreement (SLA).  

        [3] specifies the requirements for the OAM functionality that 
        are deployed in the transport plane to maintain the integrity of 
        the client signal between ingress and egress ports of the MPLS-
        TP network. These OAM functionalities are sometimes called 
        "Horizontal OAM". 

        There are OAM functionalities that are deployed in the 
        management plane to support maintaining the overall network 
        integrity and achieving the SLA. These OAM functionalities are 
        sometimes called "Vertical OAM" or OAM&P (Operation, 
        Administration, Maintenance, & Provisioning), in the sense that 
        they involves higher level systems, such as element management 
        systems (EMS), network management systems (NMS), and/or service 
      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires April, 2009               [Page 7] 
          




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        October, 2008 
         

        management systems (SMS). Examples of vertical OAM functions 
        include hardware provisioning, software configuration, alarm 
        notification/retrieval, performance monitoring (PM) data 
        collection & reporting.  

        Note that management of horizontal OAM parameters is also part 
        of the vertical OAM function. Regardless what specific 
        horizontal OAM mechanisms (tools) will be deployed in the 
        transport plane, these mechanisms (tools) need to be managed 
        (e.g. configured and monitored) to ensure their proper 
        functioning. The management requirements for the horizontal OAM 
        mechanisms will be specified in the subsequence sections, along 
        with the vertical OAM management requirements. 

     5.Fault Management Requirements 

        The Fault Management functions within the EMF of an MPLS-TP NE 
        enable the supervision, detection, validation, isolation, 
        correction, and reporting of abnormal operation of the MPLS-TP 
        network and its environment. 

     5.1. Supervision Function 

        The supervision function analyses the actual occurrence of a 
        disturbance or fault for the purpose of providing an appropriate 
        indication of performance and/or detected fault condition to 
        maintenance personnel and operations systems. 

        The MPLS-TP NE shall support the following types of supervision:  

          A) Transmission supervision:  

             . Continuity supervision for the detection of a broken 
                connection;  

             . Connectivity supervision for the detection of a 
                misconnection;  

             . Looping supervision for unintended self-replication; 

             . Alarm suppression based on native OAM, e.g., AIS (Alarm 
                Indication Signal) and FDI (Forward Defect Indication)  

             . Lock indication supervision; 

             . Packet loss measurement in both directions of the 
                bidirectional connection;  
      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires April, 2009               [Page 8] 
          




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        October, 2008 
         

             . Misinsertion supervision for misinserted packet in the 
                connection  

             . Diagnostic test supervision; 

             . Route trace supervision; 

             . Remote defect indication supervision; 

             . Protocol supervision for the detection of failure in 
                the sequence of a protocol exchange (e.g. automatic 
                protection switching protocol); 

             The transmission supervision mechanisms MUST support the 
             flexibility to be configured to perform on-demand or 
             proactively.  

          B) Software Processing Supervision for software or software 
             processing fault, such as storage capacity problem, version 
             mismatch, Corrupted data, Out of memory, etc. 

          C) Hardware Supervision for interchangeable and non-
             interchangeable units, cable, and power problem. 

          D) Environment Supervision for temperature, humidity, etc. 

        The following requirements related to defect detection specified 
        in RFC 4377 [2] are applicable for MPLS-TP NE. 

           . The ability to detect defects in a broken connection 
              (LSP, PW) MUST NOT require manual hop-by-hop 
              troubleshooting of each node used to switch traffic for 
              that connection. 

           . The automation of path liveliness is desired in cases 
              where large numbers of connections might be tested. 

           . Synchronization of detection time bounds by tools used to 
              detect broken connections is required. 

           . Any detection mechanisms that depend on receiving the 
              status via a return path SHOULD provide multiple return 
              options with the expectation that one of them will not be 
              impacted by the original defect.         



      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires April, 2009               [Page 9] 
          




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        October, 2008 
         

           . The OAM packet for defect detection MUST follow the 
              customer data path exactly in order to reflect path 
              liveliness used by customer data.    

           . Defect SHOULD be detected by the network operator prior 
              to the customers of the service in question detecting 
              them. 

           . Recovery of service from faults MAY be automatically 
              taken according to the type of fault. 

     5.2. Validation Function 

        Validation is concerned with the integration of Fault Causes 
        into Failures. A Fault Cause indicates a limited interruption of 
        the required function. A Fault Cause is not reported to 
        maintenance personnel because it could exist only for a very 
        short time. Some of these events however are summed up in the 
        Performance Monitoring process, and when this sum exceeds a 
        certain value, a Threshold Report can be generated. 

        When the Fault Cause lasts long enough, an inability to perform 
        the required function arises. This Failure condition is subject 
        to be alarmed to maintenance personnel because corrective action 
        might be required. Conversely, when the Fault Cause ceases after 
        a certain time, the Failure condition MUST disappear. 

        The EMF within the MPLS-TP NE MUST perform a persistency check 
        on the fault causes before it declares a fault cause a failure. 

        A transmission failure shall be declared if the fault cause 
        persists continuously for 2.5 +/- 0.5 sec. The failure shall be 
        cleared if the fault cause is absent continuously for 10 +/- 0.5 
        sec. 

        The failure declaration and clearing MUST be time stamped. The 
        time-stamp shall indicate the time at which the fault cause is 
        activated at the input of the fault cause persistency (i.e. 
        defect-to-failure integration) function, and the time at which 
        the fault cause is deactivated at the input of the fault cause 
        persistency function. 






      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires April, 2009              [Page 10] 
          




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        October, 2008 
         

     5.3. Alarm Handling Function 

     5.3.1. Alarm Severity Assignment 

        Failures MAY have been categorized to indicate the severity or 
        urgency of the fault. The MPLS-TP NE SHOULD support the 
        flexibility of assignment of severity (e.g., Critical, Major, 
        Minor, Warning) by the management system. 

        See G.7710 [1] for more description. 

     5.3.2. Alarm Suppression 

        An MPLS-TP NE MUST provide alarm suppression functionality that 
        prevents the generation of a superfluous generation of alarms, 
        e.g., by simply discarding them (or not generating them in the 
        first place), or by aggregating them together, thereby greatly 
        reducing the number of notifications emitted. 

        An MPLS-TP NE supporting the inter-working of one or more 
        networking technologies (e.g., Ethernet, SDH/SONET, OTN, MPLS) 
        over MPLS-TP MUST be able to translate an MPLS-TP defect into 
        the native technology's error condition. 

        See RFC 4377 [2] for more description. 

     5.3.3. Alarm Reporting Control 

        Alarm Reporting Control (ARC) supports an automatic in-service 
        provisioning capability. Alarm reporting MAY be turned off on a 
        per-managed entity basis to allow sufficient time for customer 
        service testing and other maintenance activities in an "alarm 
        free" state. Once a managed entity is ready, alarm reporting is 
        automatically turned on (to ALM). 

        See G.7710 [1] for more description.    

     5.3.4. Alarm Reporting 

        Alarm Reporting is concerned with the reporting of relevant 
        events and conditions, which occur in the network (including the 
        NE, incoming signal, and external environment). 

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support local reporting of alarms. Local 
        reporting is concerned with automatic alarming by means of 
        audible and visual indicators near the failed equipment.  

      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires April, 2009              [Page 11] 
          




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        October, 2008 
         

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support reporting of alarms to an OS. These 
        reports are either autonomous reports (notifications) or reports 
        on request by maintenance personnel.  

     6. Configuration Requirements 

        Configuration Management provides functions to exercise control 
        over, identify, collect data from, and provide data to NEs. 
        Generic configuration management requirements for transport 
        network are specified in G.7710 [1], for examples hardware, 
        software, protection switching, alarm reporting control, and 
        date/time.   

        The EMF of the MPLS-TP NE MUST support the capability of 
        configuring the OAM functions as part of connectivity 
        management, including bidirectional point-to-point connection, 
        uni-directional point-to-point connection, and uni-directional 
        point-to-multipoint connection.  

        The EMF of the MPLS-TP NE MUST have the flexibility to configure 
        OAM parameters to meet their specific operational requirements, 
        such as whether (1) one-time on-demand or (2) periodically based 
        on a specified frequency.  

        The EMF of the MPLS-TP NE MUST support the capability to choose 
        which OAM functions to use and which maintenance entity to apply 
        them.   

        The EMF of the MPLS-TP NE MUST support the configuration of 
        maintenance entity identifiers (e.g. MEP ID and MIP ID) for the 
        purpose of connection connectivity checking. The connectivity 
        check process of the MPLS-TP NE needs to be provisioned with the 
        identifiers to transmit, the expected identifiers, and 
        enable/disable the connectivity check processing.  

        The EMF of the MPLS-TP NE MUST support retrieval of the details 
        of the NE's path forwarding operations. These details can then 
        be compared during subsequent testing relevant to OAM 
        functionality.   

         

     7. Performance Requirements 

        Performance Management provides functions to evaluate and report 
        upon the behavior of the equipment, NE, and network for the 
        purpose of Maintenance, Bring-into-service, Quality of service, 
      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires April, 2009              [Page 12] 
          




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        October, 2008 
         

        and Performance monitoring for signal degradation. Generic 
        requirements for packet-switched and circuit-switched transport 
        networks are specified in G.7710 [1] with the objective of 
        providing coherent and consistent interpretation of the network 
        behavior, in particular for hybrid network which consists of 
        multiple transport technologies. The performance management 
        requirements specified in this document are driven by such an 
        objective. 

     7.1. Path Characterization Performance Metrics 

        Packet loss measurement and delay measurement MUST be collected 
        so that they can be used to detect performance degradation. 

        Performance degradation MUST be reported via fault management 
        for corrective actions (e.g. protection switch). 

        Performance degradation MUST be reported via performance 
        monitoring, e.g. as Errored Second (ES), Severely Errored Second 
        (SES), and Unavailable Second (UAS), for Service Level Agreement 
        (SLA) verification and billing. 

        An ES is declared when, during one second period, there is one 
        or more Errored Blocks (EBs) detected, or when a defect is 
        declared. In a packet layer, a block is a packet. An EB is an 
        indication of a lost packet. 

        A SES is declared when, during one second, the number of EBs 
        exceeds a threshold, or when a defect is declared.  

        The number of SESs (and ESs) is summed over 15-minute and 24-
        hour intervals. 

        A Background Block Error (BBE) is an EB not occurring as part of 
        a SES.  

        The number of BBEs is summed over 15-minute and 24-hour 
        intervals, over which the trend analysis is performed. 

        A period of unavailable time (UAT) begins at the onset of 10 
        consecutive SES events. These 10 seconds are considered to be 
        part of unavailable time. A new period of available time begins 
        at the onset of 10 consecutive non-SES events. These 10 seconds 
        are considered to be part of available time.  

        The number of unavailable time in seconds (UAS) is summed over 
        15-minute and 24-hour intervals. 
      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires April, 2009              [Page 13] 
          




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        October, 2008 
         

     7.2. SLA Performance Metrics 

        TBD 

     7.3. ATM/Ethernet/MPLS OAM Based Performance Metrics 

        TBD 

     7.4. Performance Collection Instrumentation 

     7.4.1. Collection Frequency 

        The performance collection mechanisms MUST support the 
        flexibility to be configured to operate on-demand or 
        proactively.  

     7.4.2. Collection Granularity 

        On Packet loss measurement: 

          - For bidirectional (P2P) connection, collection of on-demand 
             single-ended packet loss measurement is required. 

          - For bidirectional (P2P) connection, collection of proactive 
             packet loss measurements for both directions is required. 

          - For unidirectional (P2P and P2MP) connection, collection of 
             proactive packet loss measurement is required. 

        On Delay measurement:  

          - For unidirectional (P2P and P2MP) connection, collection of 
             on-demand delay measurement is required. 

          - For bidirectional (P2P) connection, collection of on-demand 
             one-way and two-way delay measurement is required. 

     8. Security Requirements 

        The EMF of the MPLS-TP NE MUST be able to secure the transport 
        plane and control plane. 

     8.1. Management Communication Channel Security 

        Secure channels MUST be provided for all network traffic and 
        protocols used to support management functions.  This MUST 
        include, at least, protocols used for configuration, monitoring, 
      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires April, 2009              [Page 14] 
          




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        October, 2008 
         

        configuration backup, logging, time synchronization, 
        authentication, and routing.  The MCC MUST support application 
        protocols that provide confidentiality and data integrity 
        protection.   

     8.1.1. In-Band management security 

        If in-band management is provided, the MCC MUST require the 
        following: 

          - Use of open cryptographic algorithms (See RFC 3871 [5] 
             section 4.5)  

          - Authentication  

          - Allow management connectivity only from authorized IP 
             addresses or MAC Addresses. 

     8.1.2. Out-of-Band management security 

        The MPLS TP NE MUST support an out-of-band management console 
        port.  The management traffic MUST remain separate from the data 
        and control plane traffic (no routing or forwarding between the 
        management plane and the data/control plane). 

     8.2. Signaling Communication Channel Security 

        Secure control plane protocols MAY be used in place of their 
        insecure counterparts.  If an insecure protocol is used, the 
        transport layer protocol MAY be used to secure the SCC. 

     8.3. Distributed Denial of Service 

        Denial of Service (DoS) attack is an attack which tries to 
        prevent a target from performing an assigned task, or providing 
        its intended service(s), through any means. A Distributed DoS 
        (DDoS) can multiply attack severity (possibly by an arbitrary 
        amount) by using multiple (potentially compromised) systems to 
        act as topologically (and potentially geographically) 
        distributed attack sources. It is possible to lessen the impact 
        and potential for DDOS by using secure protocols, turning off 
        unnecessary processes, logging and monitoring, and ingress 
        filtering.  RFC 4732 [4] provides background on DOS in the 
        context of the Internet. 



      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires April, 2009              [Page 15] 
          




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        October, 2008 
         

     9. Security Considerations 

        Section 8 lists a set of security requirements that apply to 
        MPLS-TP network management. 

        Provisions to any of the network mechanisms designed to satisfy 
        the requirements described herein are required to prevent their 
        unauthorized use.  Likewise, these network mechanisms MUST 
        provide a means by which an operator can prevent denial of 
        service attacks if those network mechanisms are used in such an 
        attack. 

        Solutions MUST provide mechanisms to prevent this private     
        information from being accessed by unauthorized eavesdropping,     
        or being directly obtained by an unauthenticated network     
        element, system or user. 

        Performance of diagnostic functions and path characterization 
        involves extracting a significant amount of information about 
        network construction that the network operator MAY consider 
        private. 

     10. IANA Considerations 

        <insert IANA considerations, if any, here) 

     11. Acknowledgments 

        The authors/editors gratefully acknowledge the thoughtful 
        review, comments and explanations provided by Ben Niven-Jenkins, 
        Bernd Zeuner, Diego Caviglia, Dieter Beller, He Jia, Leo Xiao, 
        Maarten Vissers. 

     12.References  

     12.1. Normative References 

        [1]   ITU-T Recommendation G.7710/Y.1701, "Common equipment 
              management function requirements", July, 2007. 

        [2]   Nadeau, T., et al., "Operations and Management (OAM) 
              Requirements for Multi-Protocol Label Switched (MPLS) 
              Networks", RFC 4377, February 2006. 

        [3]   Vigoureus, M., et al., "Requirements for OAM in MPLS 
              Transport Networks", work in progress. 

      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires April, 2009              [Page 16] 
          




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        October, 2008 
         

        [4]   Handley, M., et al., "Internet Denial-of-Service 
              Considerations", RFC 4732, November 2006. 

        [5]   Jones, G., "Operational Security Requirements for Large 
              Internet Service Provider (ISP) IP Network 
              Infrastructure", RFC 3871, September 2004. 

        [6]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
              Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997. 

        [7]   ITU-T Recommendation G.7712/Y.1703, "Architecture and 
              Specification of Data Communication Network", June 2008. 

     12.2. Informative References 

        [8]   ITU-T Recommendation M.3010, "Principles for a 
              telecommunication management network", April 2005. 

        [9]   ITU-T Recommendation M.3060/Y.2401, "Principles for the 
              Management of Next Generation Networks", March 2006. 

        [10]  ITU-T Recommendation G.8601, "Architecture of service 
              management in multi bearer, multi carrier environment", 
              June 2006. 

     13. Author's Addresses 

        Editors: 

        Scott Mansfield 
        Ericsson 
        5000 Ericsson Drive 
        Warrendale, PA, 15086 
        Phone: +1 724 742 6726 
        EMail: Scott.Mansfield@Ericsson.com 
         
        Hing-Kam (Kam) Lam 
        Alcatel-Lucent 
        600-700 Mountain Ave 
        Murray Hill, NJ, 07974 
        Phone: +1 908 582 0672 
        Email: hklam@Alcatel-Lucent.com 
         
        Eric Gray 
        Ericsson 
        900 Chelmsford Street 
        Lowell, MA, 01851 
      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires April, 2009              [Page 17] 
          




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        October, 2008 
         

        Phone: +1 978 275 7470 
        Email: Eric.Gray@Ericsson.com 
         
        Author(s): 
         
        Contributor(s): 
         
     Intellectual Property Statement 

        The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of 
        any Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be 
        claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the 
        technology described in this document or the extent to which any 
        license under such rights might or might not be available; nor 
        does it represent that it has made any independent effort to 
        identify any such rights.  Information on the procedures with 
        respect to rights in RFC documents can be found in BCP 78 and 
        BCP 79. 

        Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
        assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
        attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the 
        use of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
        specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR 
        repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

        The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention 
        any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other 
        proprietary rights that may cover technology that may be 
        required to implement this standard.  Please address the 
        information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

     Disclaimer of Validity 

        This document and the information contained herein are provided 
        on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
        REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, 
        THE IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM 
        ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO 
        ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT 
        INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY 
        OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

     Copyright Statement 

        Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 

      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires April, 2009              [Page 18] 
          




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        October, 2008 
         

        This document is subject to the rights, licenses and 
        restrictions contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth 
        therein, the authors retain all their rights. 

     Acknowledgment 

        Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
        Internet Society. 

         





































      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires April, 2009              [Page 19] 
         
