


Network Working Group                                       E. Osterweil
Internet-Draft                                             Verisign Labs
Intended status: Informational                                   S. Rose
Expires: February 27, 2015                                 D. Montgomery
                                                                    NIST
                                                         August 26, 2014


        Enterprise Requirements for Secure Email Key Management
                 draft-osterweil-dane-ent-email-reqs-00

Abstract

   Individuals and organizations have expressed a wish to have the
   ability to send encrypted and/or digitally signed email end-to-end.
   One key obstacle to end-to-end email security is the difficulty in
   discovering, obtaining, and validating email credentials across
   administrative domains.  This document addresses foreseeable adoption
   obstacles for DANE's cryptographic key management for email in
   enterprises, and outlines requirements.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 27, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Osterweil, et al.       Expires February 27, 2015               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft  Ent Reqs for Secure Email Key Management     August 2014


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     1.1.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Requirements for Both . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Requirements for Authorities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Requirements for Relying Parties  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   8.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

































Osterweil, et al.       Expires February 27, 2015               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft  Ent Reqs for Secure Email Key Management     August 2014


1.  Introduction

   The management of security protections for email constituencies can
   vary by organization and by type of organization.  Some organizations
   can have large sets of users with prescribed controls and policies,
   some may have a lot of churn in their users, and there are many other
   ways in which deployments may differ.

   As a result of the variability of deployments, aligning key
   management semantics with the behaviors of email users (and their
   organizations) can be an important differentiator when administrators
   choose a solution in which to invest.  Designs and cryptographic
   protocols that do not fit the requirements of users run the risk that
   deployments may falter and/or may not gain traction.

   This document addresses foreseeable requirements for DANE's
   cryptographic key management for email in enterprises, and outlines
   requirements.  This document generally categorizes requirements as
   being relevant to the domain authorities, the Relying Parties (RPs),
   or both.  In the following text, "domain authorities" refers to the
   owners of a given domain, which may not necessarily be the operators
   of the authoritative DNS servers for the zone(s) that make up the
   domain.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


2.  Requirements for Both

   REQ-1  Credentials stored can be either entire credential (i.e. the
          key/certificate) or one-way hash of the credential.

              Intuition: This can reduce the size of DNS responses.

   REQ-2  The Protocol MUST be able to handle the use of DNS redirection
          via CNAME/DNAME and wildcards.

              Intuition: Managing user domain names may be a different
              cardinality than number of S/MIME certificates.  For
              example, if the domain's users employ the same certificate
              for both digital signature and encryption, a DNAME record
              enables a single Resource Record (RR) for each user.





Osterweil, et al.       Expires February 27, 2015               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft  Ent Reqs for Secure Email Key Management     August 2014


3.  Requirements for Authorities

   REQ-3   The protocol MUST support incremental rollout of DANE-centric
           cryptographic protections, whereby not all users in an
           enterprise may be cut over to a DANE solution at the same
           time and MUST be backwards compatible

               Intuition: Enterprise operations may wish be able to
               enroll subsets of all of their users in a DANE
               architecture without disrupting existing email
               cryptographic services for all users.

   REQ-4   The protocol MUST have the ability to either scope a
           Certification Authority (CA) or local Trust Anchor (TA) in
           use for a given domain.

               Intuition: Enterprises may issue certificates from a TA
               and prefer to authorize that certificate in DNS (instead
               of End Entity certificates for every user).

   REQ-5   The protocol SHOULD have the ability to signal that a
           particular key/certificate is no longer to be trusted or is
           revoked.

               Intuition: Allows default TA authorizations to be
               overridden by revocation.

   REQ-6   The protocol SHOULD have the ability to signal that a
           particular email address is not (or no longer) a valid sender
           for the given domain.

               Intuition: Allows for authenticated denial of existence
               of a network identity.

   REQ-7   The protocol MUST allow for separate management, publication,
           and learning of keys that are used for signing versus
           encryption.

               Intuition: Separating, scaling, delegating, and general
               management for different keys in different ways and in
               different branches of the DNS allows administrators to
               manage different material in different systems if needed.

   REQ-8   The protocol MUST have the ability to delegate authority for
           user names.

               Intuition: Some enterprises may wish to use a service
               provider.



Osterweil, et al.       Expires February 27, 2015               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft  Ent Reqs for Secure Email Key Management     August 2014


   REQ-9   The protocol MUST have the ability to manage keys in
           different ways for different user names.

               Intuition: Not all members of a medium/large enterprise
               may be migrated onto a DANE system overnight, and must
               operate alongside current email key management.  This
               could include users that use a different email security
               protocol.

   REQ-10  The protocol MUST have the ability to signal that a given
           network identity (or entire zone) only sends digitally signed
           messages.

               Intuition: A domain owner may wish to signal that their
               email security policy is to sign all outgoing message so
               a receiver can infer an unsigned message is likely a
               phishing attempt.


4.  Requirements for Relying Parties

   REQ-11  Key material for DANE-enabled email users MUST be verifiably
           discoverable and learnable using just an email address.

               Intuition: Email addresses are all the RP has, but may
               point to external management systems.

   REQ-12  The protocol SHOULD have the ability to provide opportunistic
           encryption at the user's discretion.

               Intuition: Compliance controls (for example) may mandate
               the encryption of all messages under certain
               circumstances.

   REQ-13  The protocol MUST support default verification configurations
           (such as enterprise TA or stapling) with user-specific
           overrides.  Overrides MUST include specifying specific
           cryptographic information for specific users and disallowing
           users (either specific cryptographic or entirely).

   REQ-14  The protocol MUST be resistant to downgrade attacks targeting
           the DNS response.

               Intuition: If DNSSEC is stripped, the protocol MUST alert
               the user or refuse to send an unencrypted email message.






Osterweil, et al.       Expires February 27, 2015               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft  Ent Reqs for Secure Email Key Management     August 2014


   REQ-15  The protocol MUST provide separate semantics to discover
           certificates that are used for specific purposes.

               Intuition: keep DNS response size minimal.

   REQ-16  Encryption keys MUST be discoverable separately from
           signature keys.  Possible means includes (but not limited to)
           naming conventions, sub-typing or unique RR types for each
           use

               Intuition: Not all certificates for a user may be needed
               for all circumstances.  Fetching them separately can be a
               management, a scaling, or even a security concern.


5.  Acknowledgements

   TBD


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document only discusses requirements for publishing and querying
   for security credentials used in email.  No new IANA actions are
   required in this document, but specifications addressing these
   requirements may have IANA required actions.

   This section should be removed in final publication.


7.  Security Considerations

   The motivation for this document is to outline requirements needed to
   facilitate the secure publication and learning of cryptographic keys
   for email, using DANE semantics.  There are numerous documents that
   more generally address security considerations for email.  By
   contrast, this document is not proposing a protocol or any facilities
   that need to be secured.  Instead, these requirements are intended to
   inform security considerations in follow-on works.


8.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.






Osterweil, et al.       Expires February 27, 2015               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft  Ent Reqs for Secure Email Key Management     August 2014


Authors' Addresses

   Eric Osterweil
   Verisign Labs
   Reston, VA
   US

   Email:


   Scott Rose
   NIST
   100 Bureau Dr.
   Gaithersburg, MD  20899
   US

   Email: scottr@nist.gov


   Doug Montgomery
   NIST
   100 Bureau Dr.
   Gaithersburg, MD  20899
   US

   Email: dougm@nist.gov

























Osterweil, et al.       Expires February 27, 2015               [Page 7]

