


MANET Autoconfiguration (Autoconf)                     E. Baccelli (Ed.)
Internet-Draft                                                     INRIA
Expires: September 6, 2007                                       K. Mase
                                                      Niigata University
                                                              S. Ruffino
                                                          Telecom Italia
                                                                S. Singh
                                                                 Samsung
                                                           March 5, 2007


 Address Autoconfiguration for MANET: Terminology and Problem Statement
                  draft-baccelli-autoconf-statement-02

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 6, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).









Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement          March 2007


Abstract

   Traditional dynamic IPv6 address assignment solutions are not adapted
   to mobile ad hoc networks.  This document elaborates on this problem,
   states the need for new solutions, and requirements to these
   solutions.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Deployment Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1.  Standalone MANET . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  Connected MANET  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.3.  Deployment Scenarios Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.1.  MANET Autoconfiguration Goals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.2.  Existing Solutions' Shortcomings . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       4.2.1.  Lack of Multi-hop Support  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       4.2.2.  Lack of Dynamic Topology Support . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       4.2.3.  Lack of Network Merging Support  . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       4.2.4.  Lack of Network Partitionning Support  . . . . . . . .  7
     4.3.  MANET Autoconfiguration Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       4.3.1.  Address and Prefix Generation  . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       4.3.2.  Address Uniqueness Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       4.3.3.  Gateway Related Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 15


















Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement          March 2007


1.  Introduction

   Mobile ad hoc networks (also known as MANETs [2] [1]) are networks
   composed of mobile devices that communicate over wireless media,
   which dynamically self-organize multi-hop IP communication between
   each other, and such regardless of the availability of a connection
   to any infrastructure.

   However, prior to participation in IP communication, each MANET
   interface that does not benefit from appropriate static configuration
   needs to automatically acquire at least one IP address, that may be
   required to be unique within a given scope.

   Standard automatic IPv6 address/prefix assignment solutions [5], [3]
   [4] do not work "as-is" on MANETs due to ad hoc networks' unique
   characteristics [2], and new mechanisms are therefore needed.  This
   document thus details and categorizes the issues that need to be
   addressed.

































Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement          March 2007


2.  Terminology

   In this document, several words are used to signify the requirements
   of the specification.  These words are often capitalized.  The key
   words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
   "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document
   are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   In addition, this document uses the MANET architecture terminology
   defined in [2], as well as the following terms :

   Local address  - An IP address configured on an interface of a router
      in a MANET and valid for communication inside this MANET.  A local
      address MUST NOT be used for communication including routers
      outside the MANET.

   Global address  - An IP address configured on a MANET router and
      valid for communication with routers in the Internet, as well as
      internally within the MANET.

   Internet gateway  - A router connected to a MANET as well as to the
      Internet, and which is capable of providing bidirectional
      connectivity between the Internet and MANET .  These gateways are
      expected to provide topologically correct IPv6 prefixes.  Internet
      gateways mostly run ad hoc routing protocols, but they can also
      run infrastructure network protocols (e.g.  OSPF).

   Standalone MANET  - An independent ad hoc network which has no
      connectivity, neither direct nor via Internet gateways, to any
      other IP networks such as the Internet.

   Network merger  - The process by which two or more previously
      disjoint ad hoc networks get connected.

   Network partitioning  - The process by which an ad hoc network splits
      into two or more disconnected ad hoc networks.















Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement          March 2007


3.  Deployment Scenarios

   Automatic configuration of IP addresses and/or prefixes on MANET
   interfaces is necessary in a number of deployment scenarios.  This
   section outlines the different categories of scenarios that are
   considered.

3.1.  Standalone MANET

   Standalone MANETs are not connected to any external network: all
   traffic is generated by MANET nodes and destined to nodes in the same
   MANET.

   Routers joining a standalone MANET may either have (i) no previous
   configuration, or (ii) pre-configured local or global IP addresses
   (or prefixes).  Due to potential network partitions and mergers,
   standalone MANETs may be composed of routers of either either types.

   Typical instances of this scenario include private or temporary
   networks, set-up in areas where neither wireless coverage nor network
   infrastructure exist (e.g. emergency networks for disaster recovery,
   or conference-room networks).

3.2.  Connected MANET

   Connected MANETs have, contrary to standalone MANETs, connectivity to
   one or more external networks (typically the Internet), by means of
   one or more gateways.  MANET routers may generate traffic destined to
   remote hosts accross these external networks, as well as to
   destination inside the MANET.

   Again, routers joining a connected MANET may either (i) have no
   previous configuration, or (i) already own pre-configured local or
   global IP addresses (or prefixes).

   Typical instances of this scenario include public wireless networks
   of scattered fixed WLAN Access Points participating in a MANET of
   mobile users, and acting as Internet Gateways.  Another example of
   such a scenario is coverage extension of a fixed wide-area wireless
   network, where one or more mobile routers in the MANET are connected
   to the Internet through technologies such as UMTS or WiMAX.

3.3.  Deployment Scenarios Selection

   Both "Standalone MANET" and "Connected MANET" scenarii are
   to be addressed by solutions for MANET autoconfiguration.





Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement          March 2007


4.  Problem Statement

   This section details the goals of MANET autoconfiguration, and
   highlights the shortcomings of existing autoconfiguration solutions.
   A taxonomy of autoconfiguration issues on MANETs is then elaborated.

4.1.  MANET Autoconfiguration Goals

   A MANET router needs to configure an IPv6 prefix(es) on its host
   interface and/or an IPv6 address on its loopback interface.  Besides,
   it needs to configure a /128 and/or a link local address on its MANET
   interface.  A MANET router may also configure a prefix shorter than
   /128 on its MANET interface provided prefix uniqueness is guaranteed
   [2].

   The primary goal of MANET autoconfiguration is thus to provide
   mechanisms for IPv6 prefix allocation and address assignment, that
   are suited for mobile ad hoc environments.

   These mechanisms must address the distributed, multi-hop nature of
   MANETs [2], and be able to follow topology and connectivity changes
   by (re)configuring addresses and/or prefixes accordingly.

   Solutions must achieve their task with (i) low overhead, due to
   scarse bandwidth, and (ii) low delay, due to the dynamicity of the
   topology.

4.2.  Existing Solutions' Shortcomings

   Traditional dynamic IP address assignment solutions, such as [5], [3]
   or [4], do not work as-is on MANETs due to these networks' unique
   properties.  This section overviews the shortcomings of these
   solutions in mobile ad hoc environments.

4.2.1.  Lack of Multi-hop Support

   Traditional solutions assume that a broadcast directly reaches every
   router or host on the network, whereas this generally is not the case
   in MANETs (see [2]).  Some routers in the MANET will typically assume
   multihop broadcast, and expect to receive through several
   intermediate relayings by peer MANET routers.  For example, in Fig.
   1, the MANET router MR3 cannot communicate directly with a DHCP
   server [4] that would be available through the Internet gateway.








Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement          March 2007


                                                       ----- MR1...MR3
                                                      /      .
              +-------------+         +------------+ /       .
              |             |   p2p   |            |/        .
              |  ISP Edge   |   Link  | Internet   |         .
              |   Router    +---------+  gateway   |\        .
              |             |         |            | \       .
              +-------------+         +------------+  \----- MR2

                       Fig. 1. Connected MANET router topology.



4.2.2.  Lack of Dynamic Topology Support

   A significant proportion of the routers in the MANET may be mobile
   with wireless interface(s), leading to ever changing neighbor sets
   for most MANET routers (see [1]).  Therefore, network topology may
   change rather dynamically compared to traditional networks, which
   invalidates traditional delegation solutions that were developed for
   infrastructure-based networks, which assume the existence of a
   permanent hierarchy among devices and the permanent reachability of a
   configuration server.  For instance, in Fig. 1, even if MR1 would be
   able to delegate prefixes to MR3 with DHCP [4], it cannot be assumed
   that MR1 and MR3 will not move and become unable to communicate
   directly.

4.2.3.  Lack of Network Merging Support

   Network merging is a potential event that was not considered in the
   design of traditional solutions, and that may greatly disrupt the
   autoconfiguration mechanisms in use (see [2]).  Examples of network
   merging related issues include cases where a MANET A may feature
   routers and hosts that use IP addresses that are locally unique
   within MANET A, but this uniqueness is not guaranteed anymore if
   MANET A merges with another MANET B. If address uniqueness is
   required within the MANET (see Section 4.3.2), issues arise that were
   not accounted for in traditional networks and solutions.

4.2.4.  Lack of Network Partitionning Support

   Network partinionning is a potential event that was not considered in
   the design of traditional solutions, and that may invalidate usual
   autoconfiguration mechanisms (see [2]).  Examples of related issues
   include cases such as a standalone MANET, whereby connection to the
   infrastructure is not available, possibly due to network
   partitnionning and loss of connectivity to an Internet gateway.  The
   MANET must thus function without traditional server availability.



Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement          March 2007


   While stateless protocols such as [5] and [3] could provide IP
   address configuration (for MANET interfaces, loopback interfaces),
   these solutions do not provide any mechanism for allocating "unique
   prefix(es)" to routers in order to enable the configuration of host
   interfaces.  Moreover, [5] and [3] test address uniqueness via
   messages that are sent to neighbors only, and as such cannot detect
   the presence of duplicate addresses configured within the network but
   located several hops away.  However, since MANETs are generally
   multi-hop, detection of duplicate addresses over several hops is a
   feature that is required in most cases of MANET interface address
   assignment (see Section 4.3.2).



                          ----- MR1...MR3...MR5
                         /      .
                        /       .
                       /        .
                    MR4         .
                       \        .
                        \       .
                         \----- MR2

                       Fig. 2. Standalone MANET router topology.




4.3.  MANET Autoconfiguration Issues

   Taking into account the shortcomings of traditional solutions, this
   section categorizes general issues with regards to MANET
   autoconfiguration.

4.3.1.  Address and Prefix Generation

   The distributed nature of MANETs brings the need for address
   generation algorithms that are not always based on traditional
   central server schemes and hierarchies to provide MANET routers with
   addresses and prefixes.  In addition, the multi-hop aspect of mobile
   ad hoc networking makes it difficult to totally avoid address and
   prefix duplication a priori over all the MANET.

4.3.2.  Address Uniqueness Requirements

   If address uniqueness is required within a specific scope, and if the
   address/prefix generation mechanism in use does not totally avoid
   address/prefix duplication, then additional issues arise.  This



Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement          March 2007


   section overviews these problems.

   Pre-service Issues -- One category of problems due to address
   uniqueness requirements are called pre-service issues.  Conceptually,
   they relate to the fact that before a generated address is actually
   used, it should be verified that it will not create an address
   conflict within the specified scope.  This is essential in the
   context of routing, where it is desireable to reduce the risks of
   loops due to routing table pollution with duplicate addresses.

   In-Service Issues -- Another category of problems due to address
   uniqueness requirements are called in-service issues.  They come from
   the fact that even if an address is currently used and unique within
   the specified scope, it cannot be ensured that it will indeed remain
   unique over time.  Phenomena such as MANET merging and MANET
   partitionning bring the need for a continuous checking for address
   uniqueness within the specified scope.

4.3.3.  Gateway Related Issues

   Another category of problems concern Internet gateways management.

   Gateway Mobility -- Gateways may be mobile and may therefore leave
   the MANET.  In this case, global addresses used by routers in the
   MANET may no longer be valid.

   Gateway Multiplicity -- In the case where multiple gateways are
   available in the MANET, specific problems arise.  One problem is the
   way in which global prefixes are managed within the MANET.  If one
   prefix is used for the whole MANET, partitioning of the MANET may
   invalid routes in the Internet towards MANET routers.  On the other
   hand, use of multiple network prefixes guarantees traffic is
   unambiguously routed towards the gateway owning one particular
   prefix, but asymmetry in the routers' choice of ingress/egress
   gateway can lead to non-optimal paths followed by inbound/outbound
   data traffic.  When a device changes its gateway, some routes may be
   broken, affecting MANET packet forwarding performance and
   applications.

   IPv6 Specifications -- Additional problems come from issues with
   current IPv6 specifications.  For example, the strict application of
   [5] may lead to check every IPv6 unicast address for uniqueness: in a
   multiple-gateway / multiple-prefixes MANET, this could bring to a
   large amount of control signalling, due to frequent reconfiguration.
   Moreover, IPv6 does not currently specify an address scope that is
   appropriate to fit the scope of a MANET, which could lead to
   undesireable behavior such as gateways leaking MANET local traffic
   outside the MANET.



Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement          March 2007


5.  Security Considerations

   Address configuration in MANET could be prone to security attacks, as
   in other type of IPv6 networks.  Security threats to IPv6 neighbor
   discovery are discussed in [6]: in particular, analysis includes
   trust model and threats for a specific ad hoc network scenario, where
   all the routers share a common link (i.e. they are one hop away from
   each other, full-meshed connectivity is available).  Although the
   document does not explicitly address MANETs, where routers can be
   multiple hop away from each other, the trust model it provides could
   be valid also in the context of MANET autoconfiguration.  It is also
   worth noting that, in case of MANET connected to the Internet, other
   threats defined in [6] could apply here, e.g. attacks involving
   routers and DoS attacks on Duplicate Address Detection procedures.

   The security analysis has to be further extended to include threats,
   specific to multi-hop networks and related to the address
   configuration process in particular.  However, general security
   issues of ad hoc routing protocols' operations are not in the scope
   of MANET autoconfiguration.































Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires September 6, 2007              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement          March 2007


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document does currently not specify IANA considerations.
















































Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires September 6, 2007              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement          March 2007


7.  Informative References

   [1]  Macker, J. and S. Corson, "MANET Routing Protocol Performance
        Issues and Evaluation Considerations", RFC 2501, January 1999.

   [2]  Macker, J., Chakeres, I., and T. Clausen, "Mobile Ad hoc Network
        Architecture", ID draft-ietf-autoconf-manetarch, February 2007.

   [3]  Narten, T., Nordmark, E., and W. Simpson, "Neighbor Discovery
        for IPv6", RFC 2461, December 1998.

   [4]  Droms, R., Bound, J., Volz, B., Lemon, T., Perkins, C., and M.
        Carney, "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6",
        RFC 3315, July 2003.

   [5]  Narten, T. and S. Thomson, "IPv6 Stateless Address
        Autoconfiguration", RFC 2462, December 1998.

   [6]  Nikander, P., Kempf, J., and E. Nordmark, "IPv6 Neighbor
        Discovery (ND) Trust Models and Threats", RFC 3756, May 2004.































Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires September 6, 2007              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement          March 2007


Contributors

   This document is the result of joint efforts, including those of the
   following contributers, listed in alphabetical order: C. Adjih
   (INRIA), T. Clausen (Ecole Polytechnique), C. Perkins (Nokia), P.
   Ruiz (University of Murcia), P. Stupar (Telecom Italia), D. Thaler
   (Microsoft).












































Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires September 6, 2007              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement          March 2007


Authors' Addresses

   Emmanuel Baccelli
   INRIA

   Phone: +33 1 69 33 55 11
   Email: Emmanuel.Baccelli@inria.fr


   Kenichi Mase
   Niigata University

   Phone: +81 25 262 7446
   Email: Mase@ie.niigata-u.ac.jp


   Simone Ruffino
   Telecom Italia

   Phone: +39 011 228 7566
   Email: Simone.Ruffino@telecomitalia.it


   Shubhranshu Singh
   Samsung

   Phone: +82 31 280 9569
   Email: Shubranshu@gmail.com























Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires September 6, 2007              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement          March 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires September 6, 2007              [Page 15]

