



Network Working Group                                      S. Hollenbeck
Internet-Draft                                             Verisign Labs
Intended status: Informational                          December 3, 2014
Expires: June 6, 2015


      Extension Registry for the Extensible Provisioning Protocol
                        draft-ietf-eppext-reg-10

Abstract

   The Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP) includes features to add
   functionality by extending the protocol.  It does not, however,
   describe how those extensions are managed.  This document describes a
   procedure for the registration and management of extensions to EPP
   and it specifies a format for an IANA registry to record those
   extensions.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 6, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of




Hollenbeck                Expires June 6, 2015                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           EPP Extension Registry            December 2014


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Extension Specification and Registration Procedure  . . . . .   3
     2.1.  Extension Specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
       2.1.1.  Designated Expert Evaluation Criteria . . . . . . . .   3
     2.2.  Registration Procedure  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
       2.2.1.  Required Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
       2.2.2.  Registration Form . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       2.2.3.  Registration Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
       2.2.4.  Updating Registry Entries . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   3.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   6.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     6.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     6.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   Appendix A.  Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12

1.  Introduction

   Domain name registries implement a variety of operational and
   business models.  The differences in these models made it impossible
   to develop a "one size fits all" provisioning protocol, so the
   Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP, [RFC5730]) was designed to
   focus on a minimal set of common functionality with built-in
   extension capabilities that allow new features to be specified on an
   "as needed" basis.  Guidelines for extending EPP are documented in
   Informational RFC 3735 [RFC3735].

   RFCs 3735 and 5730 do not describe how extension development can be
   managed and coordinated.  This has led to a situation in which server
   operators can develop different extensions to address similar needs,
   such as the provisioning of Value Added Tax (VAT) information.
   Clients then need to support multiple extensions that serve similar
   purposes, and interoperability suffers.

   An IANA registry can be used to help manage and coordinate the
   development of protocol extensions.  This document describes an IANA
   registry that can be used to coordinate the development of EPP
   extensions.






Hollenbeck                Expires June 6, 2015                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           EPP Extension Registry            December 2014


2.  Extension Specification and Registration Procedure

   This section describes the format of an IANA registry and the
   procedures used to populate and manage registry entries.

2.1.  Extension Specification

   This registry uses the "Specification Required" policy described in
   RFC 5226 [RFC5226].  An English language version of the extension
   specification will referenced from the registry, though non-English
   versions of the specification can also be provided.  Note that
   Section 2.1 of RFC 3735 [RFC3735] provides specific guidelines for
   documenting EPP extensions.

   Note that the "Specification Required" policy implies review by a
   Designated Expert.  Section 3 of RFC 5226 describes the role of
   Designated Experts and the function they perform.

2.1.1.  Designated Expert Evaluation Criteria

   A high-level description of the role of the Designated Expert is
   described in Section 3.2 RFC 5226.  Specific guidelines for the
   appointment of Designated Experts and evaluation of EPP extensions
   are provided here.

   The IESG should appoint a small pool of individuals (perhaps 3 - 5)
   to serve as designated experts as described in Section 3.2 of RFC
   5226.  The pool should have a single administrative chair who is
   appointed by the IESG.  The designated experts should use the
   existing eppext mailing list (eppext@ietf.org) for public discussion
   of registration requests.  This implies that the mailing list should
   remain open after the work of the EPPEXT working group has concluded.

   Extensions should be evaluated for architectural soundness using the
   guidelines described in RFC 3735 [RFC3735], including the Security
   Considerations section of that document.  Expert evaluation should
   explicitly include consideration of the privacy consequences of
   proposed extensions, and, at a minimum, ensure that any privacy
   considerations are fully documented in the relevant specification(s).

   The results of the evaluation should be shared via email with the
   registrant and the eppext mailing list.  Issues discovered during the
   evaluation can be corrected by the registrant and those corrections
   can be submitted to the designated experts until the designated
   experts explicitly decide to accept or reject the registration
   request.  The designated experts must make an explicit decision and
   that decision must be shared via email with the registrant and the
   eppext mailing list.  If the specification for an extension is an



Hollenbeck                Expires June 6, 2015                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           EPP Extension Registry            December 2014


   IETF Standards Track document, no review is required by the
   Designated Expert.

   Designated experts should be permissive in their evaluation of
   requests to register extensions that have been implemented and
   deployed by at least one registry/registrar pair.  This implies that
   it may indeed be possible to register multiple extensions that
   provide the same functionality.  Requests to register extensions that
   have not been deployed should be evaluated with a goal of reducing
   functional duplication.  A potential registrant who submits a request
   to register a new, un-deployed extension that includes similar
   functionality to an existing, registered extension should be made
   aware of the existing extension.  The registrant should be asked to
   reconsider their request given the existence of a similar extension.
   Should they decline to do so perceived similarity should not be a
   sufficient reason for rejection as long as all other requirements are
   met.

2.2.  Registration Procedure

   The registry contains information describing each registered
   extension.  Registry entries are created and managed by sending forms
   to IANA that describe the extension and the operation to be performed
   on the registry entry.

2.2.1.  Required Information

   Name of Extension: A case-insensitive, ASCII text string that
   contains the name of the extension specification.  Non-ASCII
   representations of the extension name can be included in the "Notes"
   described below.

   Document Status: The document status ("Informational", "Standards
   Track", etc.) of the specification document.  For documents that are
   not RFCs, this will always be "Informational".

   Reference: A reference to the specification of this extension.  This
   could be an RFC number or some other pointer to the document defining
   the extension.

   Registrant Name and Email Address: The name and email address of the
   person that is responsible for managing the registry entry.  If the
   registration is of an IETF Standards Track document, this can simply
   be listed as "IESG, <iesg@ietf.org>".

   TLDs: A text string containing the top-level domain name (or domain
   names), including the preceding ".", for which the extension has been
   specified (e.g., ".org").  If there are multiple TLDs, they are given



Hollenbeck                Expires June 6, 2015                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           EPP Extension Registry            December 2014


   as a list of domain names separated by commas, (e.g. ".com, .net").
   Internationalized Domain Name (IDN) TLDs should be specified in
   A-label [RFC5890] format.  If the extension is not associated with a
   specific top-level domain, the case-insensitive text string "Any" can
   be used to indicate that.

   IPR Disclosure: A pointer to any Intellectual Property Rights (IPR)
   disclosure document(s) related to this extension, or "None" if there
   are no such disclosures.  This can be an IPR disclosure filed with
   the IETF in accordance with RFC 3979 [RFC3979] as updated by RFC 4879
   [RFC4879] if the extension is part of an IETF Contribution, or can be
   other IPR disclosure documents identifying the claimed intellectual
   property rights and terms of use for extensions that are not part of
   an IETF Contribution.

   Status: Either "Active" or "Inactive".  The "Active" status is used
   for extensions that are currently implemented and in use.  The
   "Inactive" status is used for extensions that are not implemented or
   are otherwise not being used.

   Notes: Either "None" or other text that describes optional notes to
   be included with the registered extension.  If the Status value is
   "Inactive" text should be included to describe how and when this
   state was reached.

2.2.2.  Registration Form

   The required information must be formatted consistently using the
   following form.  Form field names and values may appear on the same
   line:

   -----BEGIN FORM-----
   Name of Extension:
   <text string> (quotes are optional)

   Document Status: <document status>

   Reference: <RFC number, URL, etc.>

   Registrant Name and Email Address:
   <registrant name>, <email address>

   TLDs: "Any"|<one or more TLD text strings separated by commas>

   IPR Disclosure: "None"|<URL>

   Status: "Active"|"Inactive"




Hollenbeck                Expires June 6, 2015                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           EPP Extension Registry            December 2014


   Notes: "None"|<optional text>
   -----END FORM-----

















































Hollenbeck                Expires June 6, 2015                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           EPP Extension Registry            December 2014


   Example form with RFC specification:

   -----BEGIN FORM-----
   Name of Extension:
   "An Extension RFC for the Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP)"

   Document Status:
   Standards Track

   Reference:
   http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfcXXXX

   Registrant Name and Email Address:
   IESG, <iesg@ietf.org>

   TLDs: Any

   IPR Disclosure: None

   Status: Active

   Notes: None
   -----END FORM-----

   Example form with non-RFC specification:

   -----BEGIN FORM-----
   Name of Extension:
   "An Example Extension for the .example Top-Level Domain"

   Document Status:
   Informational

   Reference:
   http://www.example.com/html/example-epp-ext.txt

   Registrant Name and Email Address:
   John Doe, jdoe@example.com

   TLDs: .example

   IPR Disclosure:
   http://www.example.com/ipr/example-epp-ext-ipr.html

   Status: Active

   Notes: None
   -----END FORM-----



Hollenbeck                Expires June 6, 2015                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           EPP Extension Registry            December 2014


2.2.3.  Registration Processing

   Registrants should send each registration form to IANA with a single
   record for incorporation into the registry.  Send the form via email
   to <iana@iana.org>, and include a subject line indicating whether the
   enclosed form represents an insertion of a new record (indicated by
   the word "INSERT" in the subject line) or a replacement of an
   existing record (indicated by the word "MODIFY" in the subject line).
   At no time can a record be deleted from the registry.  On receipt of
   the registration request, IANA will initiate review by the designated
   expert(s), who will evaluate the request using the criteria in
   Section 2.1.1, in consultation with the eppext mailing list.

2.2.4.  Updating Registry Entries

   When submitting changes to existing registry entries, include text in
   the "Notes" field of the registration form describing the change.
   Under normal circumstances, registry entries are only be updated by
   the registrant.  If the registrant becomes unavailable or otherwise
   unresponsive, the designated expert can submit a registration form to
   IANA to update the registrant information.  Entries can change state
   from "Active" to "Inactive" and back again as long as state change
   requests conform to the processing requirements identified in this
   document.  In addition to entries that become "Inactive" due to a
   lack of implementation, entries for which a specification becomes
   consistently unavailable over time should be marked "Inactive" by the
   designated expert until such time as the specification again becomes
   reliably available.

3.  IANA Considerations

   IANA is requested to create a new protocol registry to manage EPP
   extensions.  This registry should appear under its own heading on
   IANA's protocol listings, using the same title as the name of the
   registry.  The information to be registered and the procedures to be
   followed in populating the registry are described in Section 2.

   Name of registry: Extensions for the Extensible Provisioning Protocol

   Section at http://www.iana.org/protocols:
     Registry Title: Extensions for the Extensible Provisioning Protocol
     Registry Name: Extensions for the Extensible Provisioning Protocol
     Registration Procedure: Specification Required
     Reference: this draft

   Required information: See Section 2.2.1.





Hollenbeck                Expires June 6, 2015                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           EPP Extension Registry            December 2014


   Review process: "Specification Required" as described in RFC 5226
   [RFC5226].

   Size, format, and syntax of registry entries: See Section 2.2.1.

   Initial assignments and reservations:

      -----BEGIN FORM-----
      Name of Extension:
      "Domain Registry Grace Period Mapping for the
      Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP)"

      Document Status:
      Standards Track

      Reference:
      http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3915

      Registrant Name and Email Address:
      IESG, <iesg@ietf.org>

      TLDs: Any

      IPR Disclosure: None

      Status: Active

      Notes: None
      -----END FORM-----






















Hollenbeck                Expires June 6, 2015                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           EPP Extension Registry            December 2014


      -----BEGIN FORM-----
      Name of Extension:
      "E.164 Number Mapping for the
      Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP)"

      Document Status:
      Standards Track

      Reference:
      http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4114

      Registrant Name and Email Address:
      IESG, <iesg@ietf.org>

      TLDs: Any

      IPR Disclosure: None

      Status: Active

      Notes: None
      -----END FORM-----

      -----BEGIN FORM-----
      Name of Extension:
      "ENUM Validation Information Mapping for the
      Extensible Provisioning Protocol"

      Document Status:
      Standards Track

      Reference:
      http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5076

      Registrant Name and Email Address:
      IESG, <iesg@ietf.org>

      TLDs: Any

      IPR Disclosure: None

      Status: Active

      Notes: None
      -----END FORM-----






Hollenbeck                Expires June 6, 2015                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           EPP Extension Registry            December 2014


      -----BEGIN FORM-----
      Name of Extension:
      "Domain Name System (DNS) Security Extensions Mapping for the
      Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP)"

      Document Status:
      Standards Track

      Reference:
      http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5910

      Registrant Name and Email Address:
      IESG, <iesg@ietf.org>

      TLDs: Any

      IPR Disclosure: None

      Status: Active

      Notes: None
      -----END FORM-----

   In addition, the form used to populate and manage the registry is to
   be added to the table of Protocol Registration Forms maintained by
   IANA.

4.  Security Considerations

   This document introduces no new security considerations to EPP.
   However, extensions should be evaluated according to the Security
   Considerations of RFC 3735 [RFC3735].

5.  Acknowledgements

   The information described in the registry is based on a suggestion
   posted to the provreg mailing list by Jay Daley in August 2013.

6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC3979]  Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF
              Technology", BCP 79, RFC 3979, March 2005.

   [RFC4879]  Narten, T., "Clarification of the Third Party Disclosure
              Procedure in RFC 3979", BCP 79, RFC 4879, April 2007.




Hollenbeck                Expires June 6, 2015                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           EPP Extension Registry            December 2014


   [RFC5226]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 5226,
              May 2008.

   [RFC5730]  Hollenbeck, S., "Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP)",
              STD 69, RFC 5730, August 2009.

   [RFC5890]  Klensin, J., "Internationalized Domain Names for
              Applications (IDNA): Definitions and Document Framework",
              RFC 5890, August 2010.

6.2.  Informative References

   [RFC3735]  Hollenbeck, S., "Guidelines for Extending the Extensible
              Provisioning Protocol (EPP)", RFC 3735, March 2004.

Appendix A.  Change Log

   Initial -00:  First working group version.
   -01:  Added initial registry entries to Section 3.
   -02:  Spelling corrections.  Added Section 2.1.1.  Added "Notes"
      field to the registration template.
   -03:  Added reference to Section 2.1 of RFC 3735 in Section 2.1.
   -04:  Added "Status" field to the registration template.  Fixed typo
      in Section 2.1.1.  Reformatted examples and initial registry
      entries.
   -05:  Added text to clarify how existing registry entries can and
      can't be edited.
   -06:  Modified text in Section 2.1.1 to make it clear that it is
      possible to register functionally similar extensions.
   -07:  Address WG last call comments.
   -08:  Address AD review comments.
   -09:  Address IETF last call and IESG review comments.
   -10:  Re-address IETF last call and IESG review comments.  Added text
      to note that the extension name must be represented using ASCII
      characters.

Author's Address

   Scott Hollenbeck
   Verisign Labs
   12061 Bluemont Way
   Reston, VA  20190
   US

   Email: shollenbeck@verisign.com
   URI:   http://www.verisignlabs.com/




Hollenbeck                Expires June 6, 2015                 [Page 12]
