


Internet Engineering Task Force                       D. Harrington, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                 Huawei Technologies (USA)
Intended status: Best Current                            January 8, 2007
Practice
Expires: July 12, 2007


            A Template for Documents Containing a MIB Module
               draft-harrington-text-mib-doc-template-02

Status of This Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 12, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB)
   for use with network management protocols.  In particular it defines
   objects for managing [TODO].

   [TODO]: describe what functionality will be managed using this MIB
   module.  It can be good to mention the protocol being managed, and
   whether there is a particular aspect of the protocol to be managed,



Harrington                Expires July 12, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      MIB Module Document Text Template       January 2007


   or a particular goal of the module.  But keep it brief.

Note: Forward to RFC Editor

   Note to RFC Editor - throughout this template, there are numerouse
   sample "Note to RFC Editor" that should NOT be removed from this
   template before publication of the template.  These need to retain
   the "Note to RFC Editor" format to match the boilerplate included in
   the template.

   For simplicity, there are NO notes to the RFC Editor in this document
   that should be removed, except THIS section - the complete section
   entitled "Note: Foreward to RFC Editor".

Note: Foreword to template users

   This template helps authors write the surrounding text needed in a
   MIB module document, but does not provide a template for writing the
   MIB module itself.

   Throughout this template, the marker "[TODO]" is used as a reminder
   to the template user to indicate an element or text that requires
   replacement or removal by the template user before submission to the
   internet draft editor.  All [TODO] markers should be resolved and
   removed before you submit your document to the internet-draft editor.

   [TODO] THIS section, the complete section entitled "Note: Foreward to
   template users" should be removed by the template user from their
   document before submission.

   [TODO] Remove all page headings from the template document, and
   replace them with the appropriate headings for your document.

   For updated information on MIB module guidelines and templates, see
   [RFC4181] and http://www.ops.ietf.org/.

   For information on writing internet drafts or RFCs, see
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-guidelines.txt and RFC2223(bis), and
   look at http://www.ietf.org/ID-Checklist.html for issues to note when
   writing drafts.

   This template is not meant to be a conclusive list of everything
   needed to write MIB module documents, but to summarize the often-
   needed basic features to get a document containing a MIB module
   started.  An important purpose of the template is to aid authors in
   developing a document that is laid out in a manner consistent with
   other documents containing MIB modules.  Documents submitted for
   advancement to the standards track typically require review by a MIB



Harrington                Expires July 12, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      MIB Module Document Text Template       January 2007


   Doctor.  This template standardizes the layout and naming of
   sections, includes the appropriate boilerplate text, and facilitates
   the development of tools to automate the checking of MIB module
   documents, to speed the WG and IESG review processes.

   An XML template is also available.  For information on XML2RFC, see
   RFC2629 [RFC2629],
   http://xml.resource.org/public/rfc/html/rfc2629.html and "bis":
   http://xml.resource.org/authoring/draft-mrose-writing-rfcs.html.
   Also see http://xml.resource.org/authoring/README.html for 'rfc'
   option strings.  The benefit of using the XML version of the template
   is that comments in the XML describe how to fill in each section of
   the template, and then XML2RFC will generate the actual internet-
   draft with your information.  XML2RFC automatically handles much of
   the boilerplate, references, and idnits issues for you.

   [TODO]: please remove this Note prior to publication.


































Harrington                Expires July 12, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      MIB Module Document Text Template       January 2007


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.  The Internet-Standard Management Framework . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Conventions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Structure of the MIB Module  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     5.1.  Textual Conventions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     5.2.  The [TODO] Subtree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     5.3.  The Notifications Subtree  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   6.  Relationship to Other MIB Modules  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     6.1.  Relationship to the SNMPv2-MIB . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     6.2.  Relationship to the IF-MIB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     6.3.  MIB modules required for IMPORTS . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   7.  Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   9.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   10. Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   11. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   12. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     12.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     12.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Appendix A.  Change Log  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Appendix B.  Open Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11



























Harrington                Expires July 12, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      MIB Module Document Text Template       January 2007


1.  Introduction

   This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB)
   for use with network management protocols.  In particular it defines
   objects for managing the [TODO]

2.  The Internet-Standard Management Framework

   For a detailed overview of the documents that describe the current
   Internet-Standard Management Framework, please refer to section 7 of
   RFC 3410 [RFC3410].

   Managed objects are accessed via a virtual information store, termed
   the Management Information Base or MIB.  MIB objects are generally
   accessed through the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP).
   Objects in the MIB are defined using the mechanisms defined in the
   Structure of Management Information (SMI).  This memo specifies a MIB
   module that is compliant to the SMIv2, which is described in STD 58,
   RFC 2578 [RFC2578], STD 58, RFC 2579 [RFC2579] and STD 58, RFC 2580
   [RFC2580].

3.  Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

4.  Overview

   [TODO] The narrative part MUST include an overview section that
   describes the scope and field of application of the MIB modules
   defined by the specification.  See RFC4181 section 3.2 for a
   discussion of the Narrative section

5.  Structure of the MIB Module

   [TODO] The narrative part SHOULD include one or more sections to
   briefly describe the structure of the MIB modules defined in the
   specification.

5.1.  Textual Conventions

5.2.  The [TODO] Subtree

   [TODO] copy this section for each subtree in the MIB module, and
   describe the purpose of the subtree.  For example, the fooStats
   subtree provides information for identifying fault conditions and
   performance degradation of the foo functionality.



Harrington                Expires July 12, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      MIB Module Document Text Template       January 2007


5.3.  The Notifications Subtree

   [TODO] describe the notifications defined in the MIB module, and
   their purpose.

6.  Relationship to Other MIB Modules

   [TODO]: The narrative part MUST include a section that specifies the
   relationship (if any) of the MIB modules contained in this document
   to other standards, particularly to standards containing other MIB
   modules.

   [TODO] If the MIB modules defined by the specification import
   definitions from other MIB modules or are always implemented in
   conjunction with other MIB modules, then those facts must be noted in
   the narrataive section, as must any special interpretations of
   objects in other MIB modules.  Note that citations may NOT be put
   into the MIB module portions of the document, but documents used for
   Imported items are Normative references, so the citations must exist
   in the narrative section of the document.  For example, some modules
   are always implemented in conjunction with the IF-MIB [RFC2863] and
   are REQUIRED to document how certain objects in the IF-MIB are used.
   In addition, media-specific MIB modules that rely on the ifStackTable
   [RFC2863] and the ifInvStackTable [RFC2864] to maintain information
   regarding configuration and multiplexing of interface sublayers MUST
   contain a description of the layering model.

   Some management objects defined in other MIB modules are applicable
   to an entity implementing this MIB.  In particular, it is assumed
   that an entity implementing the SAMPLE-MIB module will also implement
   the 'system' group of the SNMPv2-MIB [RFC3418] and the 'interfaces'
   group of the IF-MIB [RFC2863].

6.1.  Relationship to the SNMPv2-MIB

   The 'system' group in the SNMPv2-MIB [RFC3418] is defined as being
   mandatory for all systems, and the objects apply to the entity as a
   whole.  The 'system' group provides identification of the management
   entity and certain other system-wide data.  The SAMPLE-MIB does not
   duplicate those objects.

6.2.  Relationship to the IF-MIB

   [TODO] This section is included as an example; If the MIB module is
   not an adjunct of the Interface MIB, then this section should be
   removed.

   The Interface MIB [RFC2863] requires that any MIB module which is an



Harrington                Expires July 12, 2007                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      MIB Module Document Text Template       January 2007


   adjunct of the Interface MIB clarify specific areas within the
   Interface MIB.  These areas were intentionally left vague in the
   Interface MIB to avoid over constraining the MIB, thereby precluding
   management of certain media-types.

   Section 4 of [RFC2863] enumerates several areas which a media-
   specific MIB must clarify.  The implementor is referred to [RFC2863]
   in order to understand the general intent of these areas.

6.3.  MIB modules required for IMPORTS

   [TODO]: Citations are not permitted within a MIB module, but any
   module mentioned in an IMPORTS clause or document mentioned in a
   REFERENCE clause is a Normative reference, and must be cited
   someplace within the narrative sections.  If there are imported items
   in the MIB module, such as Textual Conventions, that are not already
   cited, they can be cited in text here.  Since relationships to other
   MIB modules should be described in the narrative text, this section
   is typically used to cite modules from which Textual Conventions are
   imported.

   The following MIB module IMPORTS objects from SNMPv2-SMI [RFC2578],
   SNMPv2-TC [RFC2579], SNMPv2-CONF [RFC2580], and IF-MIB [RFC2863]

7.  Definitions

   [TODO]: put your valid MIB module here.  A list of MIB verification
   tools is available at http://tools.ietf.org/




8.  Security Considerations

   [TODO] Each specification that defines one or more MIB modules MUST
   contain a section that discusses security considerations relevant to
   those modules.  This section MUST be patterned after the latest
   approved template (available at
   http://www.ops.ietf.org/mib-security.html).  Remember that the
   objective is not to blindly copy text from the template, but rather
   to think and evaluate the risks/vulnerabilities and then state/
   document the result of this evaluation.

   [TODO] if you have any read-write and/or read-create objects, please
   include the following boilerplate paragraph.

   There are a number of management objects defined in this MIB module
   with a MAX-ACCESS clause of read-write and/or read-create.  Such



Harrington                Expires July 12, 2007                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      MIB Module Document Text Template       January 2007


   objects may be considered sensitive or vulnerable in some network
   environments.  The support for SET operations in a non-secure
   environment without proper protection can have a negative effect on
   network operations.  These are the tables and objects and their
   sensitivity/vulnerability:

   o  [TODO] writeable MIB objects that could be especially disruptive
      if abused MUST be explicitly listed by name and the associated
      security risks MUST be spelled out; RFC 2669 has a very good
      example.

   o  [TODO] list the writable tables and objects and state why they are
      sensitive.

   [TODO] else if there are no read-write objects in your MIB module,
   use the following boilerplate paragraph.

   There are no management objects defined in this MIB module that have
   a MAX-ACCESS clause of read-write and/or read-create.  So, if this
   MIB module is implemented correctly, then there is no risk that an
   intruder can alter or create any management objects of this MIB
   module via direct SNMP SET operations.

   [TODO] if you have any sensitive readable objects, please include the
   following boilerplate paragraph.

   Some of the readable objects in this MIB module (i.e., objects with a
   MAX-ACCESS other than not-accessible) may be considered sensitive or
   vulnerable in some network environments.  It is thus important to
   control even GET and/or NOTIFY access to these objects and possibly
   to even encrypt the values of these objects when sending them over
   the network via SNMP.  These are the tables and objects and their
   sensitivity/vulnerability:

   o  [TODO] you must explicitly list by name any readable objects that
      are sensitive or vulnerable and the associated security risks MUST
      be spelled out (for instance, if they might reveal customer
      information or violate personal privacy laws such as those of the
      European Union if exposed to unathorized parties)

   o  [TODO] list the tables and objects and state why they are
      sensitive.

   [TODO] discuss what security the protocol used to carry the
   information should have.  The following three boilerplate paragraphs
   should not be changed without very good reason.  Changes will almost
   certainly require justification during IESG review.




Harrington                Expires July 12, 2007                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      MIB Module Document Text Template       January 2007


   SNMP versions prior to SNMPv3 did not include adequate security.
   Even if the network itself is secure (for example by using IPSec),
   even then, there is no control as to who on the secure network is
   allowed to access and GET/SET (read/change/create/delete) the objects
   in this MIB module.

   It is RECOMMENDED that implementers consider the security features as
   provided by the SNMPv3 framework (see [RFC3410], section 8),
   including full support for the SNMPv3 cryptographic mechanisms (for
   authentication and privacy).

   Further, deployment of SNMP versions prior to SNMPv3 is NOT
   RECOMMENDED.  Instead, it is RECOMMENDED to deploy SNMPv3 and to
   enable cryptographic security.  It is then a customer/operator
   responsibility to ensure that the SNMP entity giving access to an
   instance of this MIB module is properly configured to give access to
   the objects only to those principals (users) that have legitimate
   rights to indeed GET or SET (change/create/delete) them.

9.  IANA Considerations

   [TODO] In order to comply with IESG policy as set forth in
   http://www.ietf.org/ID-Checklist.html, every Internet-Draft that is
   submitted to the IESG for publication MUST contain an IANA
   Considerations section.  The requirements for this section vary
   depending what actions are required of the IANA. see RFC4181 section
   3.5 for more information on writing an IANA clause for a MIB module
   document.

   [TODO} select an option and provide the necessary details.

   Option #1:


        The MIB module in this document uses the following IANA-assigned
        OBJECT IDENTIFIER values recorded in the SMI Numbers registry:

        Descriptor        OBJECT IDENTIFIER value
        ----------        -----------------------

        sampleMIB  { mib-2 XXX }

   Option #2:

   Editor's Note (to be removed prior to publication): the IANA is
   requested to assign a value for "XXX" under the 'mib-2' subtree and
   to record the assignment in the SMI Numbers registry.  When the
   assignment has been made, the RFC Editor is asked to replace "XXX"



Harrington                Expires July 12, 2007                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      MIB Module Document Text Template       January 2007


   (here and in the MIB module) with the assigned value and to remove
   this note.

   Note well: prior to official assignment by the IANA, a draft document
   MUST use placeholders (such as "XXX" above) rather than actual
   numbers.  See RFC4181 Section 4.5 for an example of how this is done
   in a draft MIB module.

   Option #3:

   This memo includes no request to IANA.

10.  Contributors

   This template is based on contributions from the MIb Doctors,
   especially Juergen Schoenwaelder, Dave Perkins, C.M.Heard and Randy
   Presuhn.

11.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Marshall Rose for developing the XML2RFC format.

   [TODO]This acknowledgement can be removed from your MIB module
   document.

12.  References

12.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.

   [RFC2863]  McCloghrie, K. and F. Kastenholz, "The Interfaces Group
              MIB", RFC 2863, June 2000.

   [RFC3418]  Presuhn, R., "Management Information Base (MIB) for the
              Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP)", STD 62,
              RFC 3418, December 2002.

   [RFC4181]  Heard, C., "Guidelines for Authors and Reviewers of MIB
              Documents", BCP 111, RFC 4181, September 2005.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2578]  McCloghrie, K., Ed., Perkins, D., Ed., and J.
              Schoenwaelder, Ed., "Structure of Management Information
              Version 2 (SMIv2)", STD 58, RFC 2578, April 1999.



Harrington                Expires July 12, 2007                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      MIB Module Document Text Template       January 2007


   [RFC2579]  McCloghrie, K., Ed., Perkins, D., Ed., and J.
              Schoenwaelder, Ed., "Textual Conventions for SMIv2",
              STD 58, RFC 2579, April 1999.

   [RFC2580]  McCloghrie, K., Perkins, D., and J. Schoenwaelder,
              "Conformance Statements for SMIv2", STD 58, RFC 2580,
              April 1999.

12.2.  Informative References

   [RFC3410]  Case, J., Mundy, R., Partain, D., and B. Stewart,
              "Introduction and Applicability Statements for Internet-
              Standard Management Framework", RFC 3410, December 2002.

Appendix A.  Change Log

   The following changes have been made from draft-xxx-xxx-xxx-12 .

   [TODO] replace this list with your own list

   1.  Updated the introductry boilerplate text, the security
       considerations section and the references to comply with the
       current IETF standards and guidelines.

   2.  Additions and clarifications in various description clauses.

Appendix B.  Open Issues

   [TODO] This list of open issues should be cleared and removed before
   this document hits the IESG.

   1.  Contributor addresses need to be updated

Author's Address

   David Harrington (editor)
   Huawei Technologies (USA)
   1700 Alma Drive, Suite 100
   Plano, TX 75075
   USA

   Phone: +1 603 436 8634
   EMail: dharrington@huawei.com








Harrington                Expires July 12, 2007                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft      MIB Module Document Text Template       January 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).







Harrington                Expires July 12, 2007                [Page 12]


