


SIPPING Working Group                                       S. Niccolini
Internet-Draft                                                J. Quittek
Intended status: Informational                                J. Seedorf
Expires: August 18, 2008                                             NEC
                                                       February 15, 2008


        Signaling TO Prevent SPIT (SPITSTOP) Reference Scenario
                  draft-niccolini-sipping-spitstop-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 18, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   This memo discusses the need for standards that support SPam over
   Internet Telephony (SPIT) prevention applications.  After explaining
   the general need for SPIT prevention applications the memo provides a
   reference scenario for potential communication between entities that
   may be involved in SPIT prevention.  Within this scenario the need
   for standardizing communication is analyzed for each pair of
   communicating entities.  The analysis is intended to serve as a



Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 18, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario         February 2008


   starting point for discussing the requirements for signaling
   standards as well as for architectural considerations, that support
   SPIT prevention applications.

   This memo is not intended to suggest any solution of SPIT signaling
   issues.  Such work, if necessary at all, should be object of separate
   documents.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  The SPIT Threat  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2.  Communication Need for SPIT Prevention . . . . . . . . . .  4

   2.  Reference Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5

   3.  Signaling Interfaces Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.1.  Interfaces on the Signaling Path . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       3.1.1.  Downstream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       3.1.2.  Upstream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     3.2.  Off-Path Interfaces between Proxy Servers  . . . . . . . . 12
     3.3.  Interfaces to Special SPIT Prevention Entities . . . . . . 13

   4.  Need for Standardization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     4.1.  Preliminary Protocol Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . 14

   5.  Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

   8.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 18














Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 18, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario         February 2008


1.  Introduction

   Email is an essential mean for world-wide communication.  The
   openness of the Internet make use of email easy but also makes it
   easy to mis-use it, particular to annoy users with spam email.
   Today, there is more spam email transmitted by the public Internet
   than regular email.

   Internet telephony is on its way to replace the traditional circuit-
   switched telephony.  There is a strong concern that this migration to
   the open Internet will result in Spam over Internet Telephony (SPIT)
   that potentially will be annoy the users even more than spam email
   does today.  If there are more SPIT calls than regular calls in the
   telephony world, then phones will ring all day making it hard to use
   this medium in a convenient and productive way.

   This memo discusses the need for producing standards that help
   preventing SPIT in the future.  Although SPIT is not an actual
   problem today, it has a big potential to become one very soon.  At
   this point in time it will be good to be prepared and have technology
   already available that protects users from SPIT.

1.1.  The SPIT Threat

   Most of the spam emails are generated by so-called bot nets.  Bot
   nets are networks of hosts that have been invaded by a spammer in
   order to use them for sending spam email without the knowledge of or
   admission by the regular administrators of these hosts.  Bot nets can
   easily be used for initiating spam voice calls instead of or in
   addition to sending spam email.

   Today, there is already voice spam in the switched telephony network.
   Many households in Europe receive between 1 and 10 automated spam
   calls per month.  During such a call, a prerecorded messages is
   played to the callee without supporting any interaction.  However,
   these calls create significant cost for the caller, at least if they
   are made in numbers of thousands or hundred thousands.

   With the ongoing migration from traditional connection-switched
   telephony to packet-switched Internet telephony the cost of spam
   calls will drop drastically.  The infrastructure for generating Spam
   over Internet Telephony (SPIT) is already there in form of the
   existing bot nets.  A recent study [RFC5039] estimated that the cost
   per delivery of SPIT call will be up to four order of magnitude
   cheaper than the costs per delivery of spam over circuit-switched
   telephony.  This is expected to cause a flood of SPIT calls as soon
   as Internet telephony becomes the dominating telephony technology.




Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 18, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario         February 2008


   For dealing with this problem, particularly for preventing unwanted
   SPIT, not all methods that are used today for blocking spam email can
   be applied.  Particularly, content checking, that is a basic method
   for detecting email spam, is not applicable, because content of a
   call is not available for checking before the phone rings.  And
   stopping the phone from ringing for spam calls is one of the major
   goals of SPIT prevention.  Therefore, further methods are needed.  An
   overview of methods that are currently available for SPIT prevention
   is given in [RFC5039].

   The number of SPIT prevention methods listed there is quite large.
   Still, it is not considered to be a complete list or a list that is
   exhaustive enough for preventing SPIT sufficiently.  On the contrary,
   this list shows that there are still a lot of opportunities left for
   SPIT generators to place SPIT calls successfully.

1.2.  Communication Need for SPIT Prevention

   An important aspect in this context has not been investigated in
   detail yet.  It is sharing of information between entities that are
   involved in preventing SPIT.  They may have a need to exchange
   information related to SPIT.  The range of information to be
   exchanged includes information about

   o  SPIT events that actually occurred,
   o  indicators concerning callers to be sources of SPIT,
   o  indicators concerning concrete calls to be SPIT,
   o  etc.

   This memo investigates the need of communication between entities
   involved in SPIT prevention and the need of standards for this
   communication.  For this purpose, a reference scenario is defined in
   Section 2 that serves for identifying which communications interfaces
   may be required for sharing SPIT-related information between involved
   entities.  Based on this scenario, requirements for individual
   interfaces are discussed in Section 3.

   Currently, the requirements are stated on a high level.  Future
   revisions of this memo may elaborate the requirements in more detail.
   Which (kind of) communication protocol should be chosen for meeting
   the requirements is not subject of this memo.

   However, this memo is supposed to stimulate discussion on the need of
   standardization work in this area.  The standardization work should
   both identify the reference architecture, the best suited protocols
   for such information sharing at each interface and if extensions to
   such protocols for the support of SPIT information sharing is needed.
   If no suitable protocols matching the requirements for a particular



Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 18, 2008                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario         February 2008


   interface is found a suggestion for the design of a new protocol
   suited to such information sharing should be initiated.


2.  Reference Scenario

   For our reference scenario we consider four kinds of communicating
   entities:

   o  the caller User Agent (UA) that generates SPIT,
   o  Proxy Servers (PS) forwarding call signaling,
   o  specialized SPIT prevention entities,
   o  the callee User Agent (UA).

   With the goal of avoiding that the callee's phone rings for SPIT
   calls, SPIT prevention devices should detect a SPIT message already
   based on the INVITE method that is sent in order to initiate the SPIT
   call.  This goal can only be achieved along the path the INVITE
   message is forwarded from the caller towards the callee.  This path
   starts at the caller UA, then potentially includes a set of
   forwarding PS, and terminates latest at the callee UA.

   Please note that the described reference scenario can be easily
   mapped to the framework overview described in
   [I-D.tschofenig-sipping-framework-spit-reduction], the major
   difference is that the framework discussed in such a draft takes into
   account only one domain boundary while the reference scenario here
   described is more general and assumes that interactions among
   multiple domains could be used in order to allow distributed
   decisions.





















Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 18, 2008                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario         February 2008


                          +--------+
                          |        |
                          | caller |
                          |   UA   |
                          |        |
                          +--------+                           |d   ^
                           #   | ^                             |o   |
                           #   | |                             |w   |u
                           #   | |                             |n   |p
                           #  -------(a)                       |s   |s
                           #   | |                             |t   |t
                           #   | |                             |r   |r
                    (d)    V   v |     (e)                     |e   |e
       +--------+    |    +--------+    |    +--------+        |a   |a
       |        |    |    |        |    |    | SPIT   |        |m   |m
       | Other  |<---|----| Proxy  |----|--->| Prev.  |        |    |
       | Proxy  |----|--->| Server |<---|----| Entity |        v    |
       |        |    |    |        |    |    |        |
       +--------+         +--------+         +--------+
                           #   | ^
                           #   | |
                           #   | |
                           #  -------(b)                         # S
                           #   | |                               # I
                           #   | |                               # P
                    (d)    V   v |     (e)                       #
       +--------+    |    +--------+    |    +--------+          # I
       |        |    |    |        |    |    | SPIT   |          # N
       | Other  |<---|----| Proxy  |----|--->| Prev.  |          # V
       | Proxy  |----|--->| Server |<---|----| Entity |          # I
       |        |    |    |        |    |    |        |          # T
       +--------+         +--------+         +--------+          # E
                           #   | ^                               #
                           #   | |                               # m
                           #   | |                               # e
                           #  -------(c)                         # t
                           #   | |                               # h
                           #   | |                               # o
                           V   v |     (f)                       # d
                          +--------+    |    +--------+          #
                          |        |    |    | SPIT   |          V
                          | callee |----|--->| Prev.  |
                          |   UA   |<---|----| Entity |
                          |        |    |    |        |
                          +--------+         +--------+






Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 18, 2008                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario         February 2008


    Figure 1: SPIT prevention reference scenario with two proxy servers

   Entities on the path from caller to callee may share information
   related to SPIT prevention.  Related communication may happen already
   before a certain INVITE methods is transmitted or it may be initiated
   by this message.  If this communication includes transmitting
   information in the same direction as the INVITE message along the
   path, then we talk about downstream communication.  Transmitting
   information in the opposite direction we call upstream communication.

   The SPIT prevention reference scenario shown in Figure 1 contains a
   caller UA, a callee UA and two PS on the path of the INVITE message
   from caller UA to callee UA.  This number of PS was chosen because it
   contains exactly one instance of each pair of interacting kinds of
   entities along the path of the INVITE message:

   o  at interface (a) the caller UA is interacting with a PS,
   o  at interface (b) two consecutive PS are interacting with each
      other,
   o  at interface (c) a PS is interacting with the callee UA.

   The number of two PS matched the common SIP signaling trapezoid.
   However, any number of proxy servers greater than zero can be applied
   to the scenario.  If there is only one PS present, then the interface
   (b) is not instantiated.  If there are two or more PS on the path,
   then interface (b) is used between each consecutive pair of them.  In
   general, the INVITE message could be sent directly from caller UA to
   callee UA without involving any PS.  A direct call would be possible
   if the caller UA sends the INVITE directly to the callee UA, anyway
   such IP address retrieval is prone to errors either because of
   possible change of IP address during time of callee UA or because of
   Network Address Translator along the path masking the real IP
   address.  The direct call case becomes even less relevant if the
   callee UAs are configured to accept INVITEs only from their proxy
   servers.  For these reasons we decided not to include an interface
   for direct communication between caller UA and callee UA in the
   reference scenario.

   Each proxy server on the signaling path of the INVITE message may
   communicate with off-path entities in order to help the task of SPIT
   identification and prevention.

   These entities include one or more specific SPIT prevention entities
   that are consulted by the proxy server using interface (e) in order
   to get an indication or estimation of a given INVITE message to
   belong to a SPIT call (e.g. using authorization policies ).

   These entities also include one or more cooperating PS with which



Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 18, 2008                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario         February 2008


   information about SPIT calls (or call attempts) is shared using
   interface (d) in order to improve the SPIT prevention accuracy.  An
   example for such a cooperation would be a set of PS in a single
   administrative domain sharing information about known sources of SPIT
   (federation of black listing services across PS).

   The callee UA may also interact with a specific SPIT prevention
   entity similar to the PS (e.g. a local one located near the user
   agent in the access domain).  Since in this case, the offered service
   might be more personalized than in the case of the PS, we use a
   different interface (f) for our reference model.  This does not
   preclude that instantiations of (e) and (f) may have identical
   functions (e.g. using the same authorization policies language
   [I-D.tschofenig-sipping-spit-policy]).


3.  Signaling Interfaces Considerations

   This section discusses the interactions between entities of the
   reference scenario that is shown in Figure 1.  The interfaces are
   grouped into three sections.

   1.  The first one deals with interfaces (a), (b), and (c) which all
       serve for exchanging information between consecutive entities
       along the path of the INVITE message of a particular call (e.g.
       spam scores or spam feedbacks with well defined semantics ).
   2.  Interface (d) has a similar function but is off-path and not
       necessarily related to individual (SPIT) calls (e.g. black
       listing services across PS).
   3.  Interfaces (e) and (f) are used by PS or the callee UA when they
       need to decide whether or not to consider a particular call
       request as SPIT (e.g. authorization policies).

3.1.  Interfaces on the Signaling Path

   At all three interfaces (a), (b), and (c) information may be
   exchanged in upstream direction as well as in downstream direction.

3.1.1.  Downstream

   There are several considerations of downstream communication that
   apply to all three interfaces.  We first describe them before
   pointing out differences between the three interfaces.








Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 18, 2008                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario         February 2008


   All Interfaces (a), (b), and (c)

      Downstream information is sent along with an INVITE in order to
      provide information about the INVITE to belong to a SPIT call
      (e.g. indicate that a caller is exceeding a sending treshold, that
      the caller did not pass a specific test like a CAPTCA test ,
      etc.).  A sender or forwarder of an INVITE may, for example, want
      to signal such information to the downstream entity (be it PS or
      UA) but still not have sufficient certainty or not have legal
      rights for blocking a SPIT call.

      In any case, interface (a), (b), or (c) would allow to pass such
      information further along the path of the INVITE.  Even if such
      information does not always lead to achieving a clear idea on the
      nature of the requested call (e.g. the final decision is taken
      only by downstream entities, like the UA), the transmitted
      information can be recorded by the receivers of this information
      and used for improving future judgments of call requests for SPIT
      prevention.

      In addition such interfaces would allow to pass statistics about
      the recent behavior of the sender.  An example of these statistics
      would consist in the rate of (SPIT) calls initiated by the sender
      during the last time slot, the ratio between regular calls and
      SPIT calls initiated by the sender during the last time slot, etc.
      The above mentioned statistics can also be bundled together and
      passed only after the expiration of a timeout in order to increase
      scalability.

      Besides the estimation and the statistics itself, also the source
      of the estimation may be transmitted.  This way, an entity can
      indicate, whether it has been involved in producing the estimate,
      or just forwarded the received estimation along the path of the
      INVITE.

   Interface (a)

      This interface is instantiated between the caller UA and the first
      PS along the INVITE path.  The relevance of interface (a) seems to
      be rather limited.  It does not seem a good idea to have the
      caller UA neither estimating itself the likelihood of the INVITE
      to belong to a SPIT call not transmitting statistics about the its
      recent behavior.  Moreover the instantiation of such an interface
      could be maliciously used by entities initiating SPIT without the
      PS having the proper means to judge if the information passed is
      trustable or not.





Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 18, 2008                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario         February 2008



   Interface (b)

      This interface is instantiated if there are two or more PS on the
      path.  In this case interface (b) is used between each consecutive
      pair of them.  It is used to send downstream information about the
      infomration associated with an INVITE (e.g. the caller has a bad
      reputation according ot the originating domain) and about most
      relevant statistics of the INVITE initiator recent behavior.  If
      also the source of the estimation and statistics is transmitted, a
      receiving PS may be able to judge how much trust to associate with
      the indications based on local policies.  Still depending on local
      policies and legal rights the PS can decide to carry out
      additional tests on the INVITE, initiate communication to other
      entities (see Section 3.2 or Section 3.3 ), or block the call.

   Interface (c)

      This interface is instantiated between the last PS and the callee
      UA.  It is used to send downstream information about the
      information associated with an INVITE (e.g. the caller did not
      pass a CAPTCHA ) and about most relevant statistics of the INVITE
      initiator recent behavior.  If also the source of the estimation
      and statistics is transmitted, the callee UA can judge how much
      trust to associate to the indications based on local policies.
      Still depending on local policies and legal rights the callee UA
      can decide to carry out additional tests on the INVITE, initiate
      communication to other entities (see Section 3.3), or block the
      call without having the phone ringing.

3.1.2.  Upstream

   As for downstream communication above, we first describe
   considerations that are common for all three interfaces before them
   before pointing out differences between them.

   All Interfaces (a), (b), and (c)

      Upstream information is sent by entities after receiving an INVITE
      as feedback to the entity from which they received it.  It may
      contain a feedback on the INVITE received.  This feedback may be
      sent before the call is established (if at all), after it was
      blocked, while the call is established, and after the call has
      been terminated.  This information can help the sender in better
      judging following calls that are forwarded and the users sending
      the call initiation request or to block subsequent calls of the
      same caller for the callee (feedback to insert users in black
      lists hosted at the PS).  An example for the delivery of feedback



Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 18, 2008               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario         February 2008


      information is reported in separate documents .

      In addition to the feedback associated to a particular INVITE,
      such interfaces, similar to downstream communication of
      statistics, would allow to feed back statistics about the recent
      behavior of the sender.  An example of these statistics would
      consist in the rate of SPIT calls (estimated using the feedback
      mechanism) initiated by the sender during the last time slot, the
      ratio between regular calls and SPIT calls initiated by the sender
      during the last time slot, etc.  The above mentioned statistics
      can also be bundled together and passed only after the expiration
      of a timeout in order to increase scalability.

      Similar to downstream communication of information and statistics,
      the source of the feedback information may be contained.  This is
      particularly interesting if the feedback was generated by the
      callee who received the call.

   Interface (a)

      This interface is instantiated between the first PS along the
      INVITE path and the caller UA.  The relevance of interface (a)
      seems to be rather limited.  It does not seem to be a good idea to
      give feedback to an initiator of SPIT on if and why requested
      calls have been blocked.  This would allow the SPIT initiator to
      use this feedback for improving methods that bypass SPIT
      prevention systems in the network.

      A potential argument for sending a notification about detected
      SPIT to the SPIT generator would be that many legal operators of
      SPIT generating hosts might not be aware of this.  Today, this is
      the case for email spam.  Most of them are generated by bot nets
      where the legal operators of the contained hosts are not aware of
      their hosts being used for this purpose.  However, in case of SPIT
      generation, it must be assumed that the generating software is
      either a software not in control of the legal operator or it is
      controlling the caller UA and capable of suppressing any feedback
      that should not be seen by the legal operator.  Therefore, this
      means would probably not show the desired results.

   Interface (b)

      This interface is instantiated if there are two or more PS on the
      path.  In this case interface (b) is used between each consecutive
      pair of them.  It is used to feed back information about a certain
      INVITE (e.g. callee indicated the call as SPIT) and about most
      relevant statistics of the INVITE initiator recent behavior.  If
      also the source of the information and statistics is transmitted,



Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 18, 2008               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario         February 2008


      the PS can judge how much trust to associate to the indications
      based on local policies and act consequently.  Still depending on
      local policies and legal rights the PS can decide to carry out
      additional tests on selected subsequent INVITEs, initiate
      communication to other entities (see Section 3.2 or Section 3.3),
      or block selected subsequent calls.

   Interface (c)

      This interface is instantiated between the callee UA and the last
      PS along the INVITE path.  It is used to feed back information
      about an INVITE (e.g. it belonged to a SPIT call) and about most
      relevant statistics of the INVITE initiator recent behavior (even
      if in this case the statistics can be rather limited since are
      generated by the callee UA directly which has a narrow view on all
      the traffic).  This feedback is supposed to be a very important
      one since it is the one directly generated by the callee UA (be it
      the software or the human itself).  The PS will therefore
      associate high trust to such a feedback and act consequently.
      Still depending on local policies and legal rights the PS can
      decide to carry out additional tests on selected subsequent
      INVITEs, initiate communication to other entities (see Section 3.2
      or Section 3.3 ), or block selected subsequent calls.

3.2.  Off-Path Interfaces between Proxy Servers

   The basic idea of interface (d) is similar to the interface (b) where
   different PS exchange SPIT-related information.  The difference to
   (b) is that for (d) this exchange is not bound to the path of an
   INVITE message.  At interface (d) information will be shared among PS
   that collaborate on SPIT prevention (e.g. federations).  While the
   (b) interface can potentially be an inter-domain interface, (d) is
   rather seen as an intra-domain interface where collaborating proxies
   of a domain enforce a domain-wide SPIT prevention policy.  For such a
   purpose, information needs to be exchanged rather on collected
   information than on single events of an observed INVITE message,
   although this case should not be excluded.

   Interface (d) has two major purposes. the first is the exchange of
   information regarding certain caller UAs or certain administrative
   domains estimated to produce SPIT.  This does not necessarily require
   exchanging observations per INVITE message, but rather on a regular
   basis or incident-driven, for example whenever a PS detects a
   correlation between several calls that have been classified as SPIT.

   The exchange of such information may, for example, lead to a
   classification of a source address or a source network as source of
   SPIT which requires and update of blacklists and SPIT detection



Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 18, 2008               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario         February 2008


   mechanisms.

   Consequently, the second major purpose of interface (d) is exchanging
   information that updates or synchronizes the prevention mechanisms
   that are acting at different PS.  This includes particularly
   blacklist and whitelist entries, but also other SPIT prevention
   mechanisms may make use of exchanged information.

   Still, interface (d) may also serve for exchanging estimated results
   associated to single calls, for example for collecting this
   information at a central repository that serves for updating domain-
   wide SPIT prevention policies.

3.3.  Interfaces to Special SPIT Prevention Entities

   Communication to special SPIT prevention entities can be performed
   either by a proxy server via interface (e) or by the callee UA via
   interface (f).  We first discuss considerations that apply to both
   interfaces before pointing out differences between the two.

   Both Interfaces (e) and (f)

      The service offered by special SPIT prevention entities is related
      to the estimation of an INVITE to belong to a SPIT call.  This
      communication is supposed to be instantiated in order to off-load
      computational intensive tasks to an external entity.

      The communication with this SPIT prevention entity follows the
      client-server scheme.  The PS or UA acting as client requests an
      estimation for a given INVITE message to belong to a SPIT call.
      The estimation is performed by the SPIT prevention entity acting
      as server.  A request may include call parameters to be used by
      the server when performing the estimations.

   Interface (e)

      This interface is instantiated between a proxy server and a
      special SPIT prevention entity in order to request for SPIT
      estimations.  In addition to the above considerations it is
      necessary to note that such service could be less personalized
      with respect to the service offered over the interface (f) since
      the estimations have to be general in order to deal with all the
      users served by the proxy server using such an interface.
      Otherwise the instantiated functions seems to be identical.







Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 18, 2008               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario         February 2008



   Interface (f)

      This interface is instantiated between a UA and a special SPIT
      prevention entity in order to request for SPIT estimations.  In
      addition to the above considerations it is necessary to note that
      such service should be more personalized with respect to the
      service offered over the interface (e) since the estimations have
      to be specific to the callee requesting them over the interface.
      Otherwise the instantiated functions seems to be identical.


4.  Need for Standardization

   The considerations above indicate that there is an actual need for
   standardization of communication information.

   The strongest need seems to be for interfaces (b) and (c) in upstream
   direction for providing feedback on calls or call attempts.  But also
   in downstream direction, there seems to be an obvious need to support
   this communication by providing a standard for it.  This concerns
   both in intra- and inter-domain communication.

   The situation is very different for Interface (a).  The
   considerations in Section 3.1 indicate that it might even be a bad
   idea to provide any feedback via (a) at all.  Therefore, we do not
   see a need to work on standards for interface (a).

   Interface (d) seems to be useful but with a more limited scope of
   application within a (federated) administrative domain (intra-
   domain).  Still for interoperability between different devices it
   appears to be beneficial to have a standard way of sharing SPIT-
   related information.

   For the remaining interfaces (e) and (f) we do not yet see a clear
   need for interoperability.  SPIT prevention engines to which
   functions are outsourced by a PS or callee UA may typically be part
   of a solution that is offered together with the PS or with a set of
   SIP UAs.  For these cases proprietary communication protocols appear
   to be sufficient.  Still need for standardization may arise at later
   stages when SPIT prevention entities become more common.

4.1.  Preliminary Protocol Considerations

   The fact that the communication over interfaces (b) and (c) follows
   the same path as the SIP signaling itself may influence the choice of
   the signaling protocols used for exchanging information at the
   interfaces.  An obvious choice to be discussed would be embedding the



Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 18, 2008               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario         February 2008


   SPIT information directly in the SIP messages flowing among the
   entities anyway.

   For the other interfaces (d), (e) and (f) other signaling protocols
   may be preferable since the communication will happen anyway not
   synchronously with the SIP messages used to initiate the session.  An
   example could be the exchange of XML files among different entities.


5.  Conclusions

   This memo addresses the necessity of providing standards for
   communication between entities involved in SPIT prevention.  For this
   purpose a reference scenario is defined with involved entities and
   interfaces between them.  For each interface the need for it and the
   need for standards for is discussed.

   This memo is intended to stimulate a discussion on SPIT prevention
   and to reach consensus on the identification of standardization goals
   and reference architectures in this area.  Some of the considerations
   in Section 3 seem to indicate that there is an actual need to
   standardize communication for some of the discussed interfaces.  This
   memo does ot try to standardize any solution to the problems
   identified.  The necessary work outcoming from the discussion
   stimulated will have to be carried out in separate documents.


6.  Security Considerations

   This memo discusses the exchange of information related to SPIT
   prevention.  This includes information on particular calls or call
   attempts as well as information on call initiators potentially being
   a source of SPIT.

   Exchanging per-call information may violate the privacy of a caller.
   Therefore, instantiations of the discussed exchange of information
   need to be carefully checked for compliance with legal regulations of
   information privacy.  Also, since this information may be sensitive,
   appropriate steps should be undertaken to provide confidentiality
   when it is transmitted over the Internet.

   Both, per-call information and information of a caller being a source
   of SPIT may be a target of denial-of-service attacks.  If such
   messages are faked, a regular caller may be blocked network-wide and
   not able anymore to perform calls.  Therefore, integrity and
   authenticity need to be provided when this kind of information is
   transmitted over the Internet.




Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 18, 2008               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario         February 2008


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.


8.  Informative References

   [RFC5039]  Rosenberg, J. and C. Jennings, "The Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP) and Spam", RFC 5039, January 2008.

   [I-D.tschofenig-sipping-framework-spit-reduction]
              Tschofenig, H., Schulzrinne, H., Wing, D., Rosenberg, J.,
              and D. Schwartz, "A Framework to tackle Spam and Unwanted
              Communication for Internet  Telephony",
              draft-tschofenig-sipping-framework-spit-reduction-02 (work
              in progress), November 2007.

   [I-D.tschofenig-sipping-spit-policy]
              Tschofenig, H., Wing, D., Schulzrinne, H., Froment, T.,
              and G. Dawirs, "A Document Format for Expressing
              Authorization Policies to tackle Spam and  Unwanted
              Communication for Internet Telephony",
              draft-tschofenig-sipping-spit-policy-02 (work in
              progress), November 2007.


Authors' Addresses

   Saverio Niccolini
   NEC Laboratories Europe, NEC Europe Ltd.
   Kurfuersten-Anlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 (0) 6221 4342 118
   Email: niccolini@nw.neclab.eu
   URI:   http://www.nw.neclab.eu














Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 18, 2008               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario         February 2008


   Juergen Quittek
   NEC Laboratories Europe, NEC Europe Ltd.
   Kurfuersten-Anlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 (0) 6221 4342 115
   Email: niccolini@nw.neclab.eu
   URI:   http://www.nw.neclab.eu


   Jan Seedorf
   NEC Laboratories Europe, NEC Europe Ltd.
   Kurfuersten-Anlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 (0) 6221 4342 221
   Email: seedorf@nw.neclab.eu
   URI:   http://www.nw.neclab.eu































Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 18, 2008               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft         SPITSTOP Reference Scenario         February 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 18, 2008               [Page 18]


