



Network Working Group                                        H. Birkholz
Internet-Draft                                            Fraunhofer SIT
Intended status: Informational                                M. Wiseman
Expires: July 8, 2018                                 GE Global Research
                                                           H. Tschofenig
                                                                ARM Ltd.
                                                        January 04, 2018


        Reference Terminology for Remote Attestation Procedures
               draft-birkholz-attestation-terminology-01

Abstract

   This document is intended to illustrate and remediate the impedance
   mismatch of terms related to remote attestation procedures used in
   different domains today.  New terms defined by this document provide
   a consolidated basis to support future work on attestation procedures
   in the IETF and beyond.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 8, 2018.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2018 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Birkholz, et al.          Expires July 8, 2018                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              RATS Terminology                January 2018


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Requirements notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.  Basic Roles of RATS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Computing Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.1.  Formal Semantic Relationships . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.2.  Characteristics of a Computing Context  . . . . . . . . .   6
   4.  Computing Context Identity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5.  Attestation Workflow  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  Reference Use Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     6.1.  The Lying Endpoint Problem  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     6.2.  Who am I a talking to?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   7.  Trustworthiness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   8.  Remote Attestation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     8.1.  Building Block Terms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   9.  IANA considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   10. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   11. Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   12. Change Log  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   13. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     13.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     13.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14

1.  Introduction

   During its evolution, the term Remote Attestation has been used in
   multiple contexts and multiple scopes and in consequence accumulated
   various connotations with slightly different semantic meaning.
   Correspondingly, Remote Attestation Procedures (RATS) are employed in
   various usage scenarios and different environments.

   In order to better understand and grasp the intend and meaning of
   specific RATS in the scope of the security area - including the
   requirements that are addressed by them - this document provides an
   overview of existing work, its background, and common terminology.
   As the contribution, from that state-of-the-art a set of terms that
   provides a stable basis for future work on RATS in the IETF is
   derived.

   The primary application of RATS is to increase the trust and
   confidence in the integrity of the object characteristics and
   properties of a system entity that is intended to interact and



Birkholz, et al.          Expires July 8, 2018                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              RATS Terminology                January 2018


   exchange data with other system entities remotely.  How an objects's
   characteristics are attested remotely and which characteristics are
   actually chosen to be attested varies with the requirements of the
   use cases, or -- in essence -- depends on the risk that is intended
   to be mitigated via RATS.  Effectively, RATS are a vital tool to be
   used to increase the confidence in the level of trust of a system
   that is supposed to be a trusted system.

   In the remainder of this document a system that is capable to provide
   an appropriate amount of information about its integrity is
   considered to be a trustworthy system - or simply trustworthy.

   The primary characteristics of a trustworthy system are commonly
   based on information about the integrity of its intended composition,
   its enrolled and subsequently installed software components, and the
   scope of known valid states that a trustworthy system is supposed to
   operate in.

   It is important to note that the activity of attestation itself in
   principle only provides the evidence that proves the integrity of a
   (subset) of a system's object characteristics.  The provided evidence
   is used as a basis for further activities.  Specific RATS define the
   higher semantic context about how the evidence is utilized and what
   RATS actually can accomplish; and what they cannot accomplish,
   correspondingly.  Hence, this document is also intended to provide a
   map of terms, concepts and applications that illustrate the ecosystem
   of current applications of RATS.

   In essence, a prerequisite for providing an adequate set of terms and
   definitions in the domain of RATS is a general understanding and a
   common definitions of "what" RATS can accomplish "how" RATS can to be
   used.

   Please note that this document is still missing multiple reference
   and is considered "under construction".  The majority of definitions
   is still only originating from IETF work.  Future iterations will
   pull in more complementary definitions from other SDO (e.g.  Global
   Platform, TCG, etc.) and a general structure template to highlight
   semantic relationships and capable of resolving potential
   discrepancies will be introduced.  A section of context awareness
   will provide further insight on how attestation procedures are vital
   to ongoing work in the IETF (e.g.  I2NSF & tokbind).  The definitions
   in the section about RATS are still self-describing in this version.
   Additional explanatory text will be added to provide more context and
   coherence.






Birkholz, et al.          Expires July 8, 2018                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              RATS Terminology                January 2018


1.1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC
   2119, BCP 14 [RFC2119].

2.  Basic Roles of RATS

   The use of the term Remote Attestation Procedures always implies the
   involvement of at least two parties that each take on a specific role
   in corresponding RATS - the Attestee role and the Verifier role.
   Depending on the object characteristics attested and the nature of
   the parties, information is exchanged via specific types of
   Interconnects between them.  The type of interconnect ranges from GIO
   pins, to a bus component, to the Internet, or from a direct physical
   connection, to a wireless association, to a world wide mesh of peers.
   In other words, virtually every kind communication path
   (Interconnect) can be used by system entities that take on the role
   of Attestee and Verifier (in fact, a single party can take on both
   roles at the same time, but there is only a limited use to this
   architecture).

   Attestee:  The role that designates the subject of the remote
      attestation.  A system entity that is the provider of evidence
      takes on the role of an Attestee.

   Verifier:  The role that designates the system entity that is the
      appraiser of the evidence provided by the Attestee.  A system
      entity that is the consumer of evidence takes on the role of a
      Verifier.

   Interconnect:  A channel of communication between Attestee and
      Verifier that enables the appraisal of evidence created by the
      Attestee by a remote Verifier.

3.  Computing Context

   This section introduces the term Computing Context in order to
   simplify the definition of RATS terminology.

   The number of approaches and solutions to create things that provide
   the same capabilities as a "simple physical device" continuously
   increases.  Examples include but are not limited to: the
   compartmentalization of physical resources, the separation of
   software instances with different dependencies in dedicated
   containers, and the nesting of virtual components via hardware-based
   and software-based solutions.



Birkholz, et al.          Expires July 8, 2018                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              RATS Terminology                January 2018


   System entities are composed of system entities.  In essence, every
   physical or logical device is a composite of system entities.  In
   consequence, a composite device also constitutes a system entity.
   Every component in that composite is a potential Computing Context
   capable of taking on the roles of Attestee or Verifier.  The scope
   and application of these roles can range from:

   o  continuous mutual attestation procedures of every system entity
      inside a composite device, to

   o  sporadic remote attestation of unknown parties via heterogeneous
      Interconnects.

   Analogously, the increasing number of features and functions that
   constitute components of a device start to blur the lines that are
   required to categorize each solution and approach precisely.  To
   address this increasingly challenging categorization, the term
   Computing Context defines the characteristics of the system entities
   that can take on the role of an Attestee and/or the role of a
   Verifier.  This approach is intended to provide a stable basis of
   definitions for future solutions that continuous to remain viable
   long-term.

   Computing Context :  An umbrella term that combines the scope of the
      definitions of endpoint [ref NEA], device [ref 1ar], and thing
      [ref t2trg], including hardware-based and software-based sub-
      contexts that constitute independent, isolated and distinguishable
      slices of a Computing Context created by compartmentalization
      mechanisms, such as Trusted Execution Environments (TEE), Hardware
      Security Modules (HSM) or Virtual Network Function (VNF) contexts.

3.1.  Formal Semantic Relationships

   The formal semantic relationship of a Computing Context and the
   definitions provided by RFC 4949 is a as follows.

   The scope of the term computing context encompasses

   o  an information system,

   o  an object and in consequence a system component or a composite of
      system sub-components, and

   o  a system entity or a composite of system entities.

   Analogously, a sub-context is a subsystem and as with system
   components, computing contexts can be nested and therefore be




Birkholz, et al.          Expires July 8, 2018                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              RATS Terminology                January 2018


   physical system components or logical ("virtual") system
   (sub-)components.

   The formal semantic relationship is based on the following
   definitions from RFC 4949.

   (Information) System:  An organized assembly of computing and
      communication resources and procedures - i.e., equipment and
      services, together with their supporting infrastructure,
      facilities, and personnel - that create, collect, record, process,
      store, transport, retrieve, display, disseminate, control, or
      dispose of information to accomplish a specified set of functions.

   Object:  A system component that contains or receives information.

   Subsystem:  A collection of related system components that together
      perform a system function or deliver a system service.

   System Component:  A collection of system resources that (a) forms a
      physical or logical part of the system, (b) has specified
      functions and interfaces, and (c) is treated (e.g., by policies or
      specifications) as existing independently of other parts of the
      system.  (See: subsystem.)

      An identifiable and self-contained part of a Target of Evaluation.

   System Entity:  An active part of a system - [...] (see: subsystem) -
      that has a specific set of capabilities.

3.2.  Characteristics of a Computing Context

   While the semantic relationships highlighted above constitute the
   fundamental basis to provide a define Computing Context, the
   following list of object characteristics is intended to improve the
   application of the term and provide a better understanding of its
   meaning:

   A computing context:

   o  provides its own independent environment in regard to executing
      and running software,

   o  provides its own isolated control plane state (by potentially
      interacting with other Computing

   o  Contexts) and may provide a dedicated management interface by
      which control plane behavior can be effected,




Birkholz, et al.          Expires July 8, 2018                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              RATS Terminology                January 2018


   o  can be identified uniquely and therefore reliably differentiated
      in a given scope, and

   o  does not necessarily has to include a network interface with
      associated network addresses (as required, e.g. by the definition
      of an endpoint) - although it is very likely to have (access to)
      one.

   In contrast, a docker [ref docker, find a more general term here]
   context is not a distinguishable isolated slice of an information
   system and therefore is not an independent Computing Context. [more
   feedback on this statement is required as the capabilities of docker-
   like functions evolve continuously]

   Examples include: a smart phone, a nested virtual machine, a
   virtualized firewall function running distributed on a cluster of
   physical and virtual nodes, or a trust-zone.

4.  Computing Context Identity

   The identity of a Computing Context provides the basis for creating
   evidence about data origin authenticity.  Confidence in the identity
   assurance level [NIST SP-800-63-3] or the assurance levels for
   identity authentication [RFC4949] impacts the confidence in the
   evidence an Attestee provides.

5.  Attestation Workflow

   This section introduces terms and definitions that are required to
   illustrate the scope and the granularity of RATS workflows in the
   domain of security automation.  Terms defined in the following
   sections will be based on this workflow-related definitions.

   In general, RATS are composed of iterative activities that can be
   conducted in intervals.  It is neither a generic set of actions nor
   simply a task, because the actual actions to be conducted by RATS can
   vary significantly depending on the protocols employed and types of
   Computing Contexts involved.

   Activity:  A sequence of actions conducted by Computing Contexts that
      compose a remote attestation procedure.  The actual composition of
      actions can vary, depending on the characteristics of the
      Computing Context they are conducted by/in and the protocols used
      to utilize an Interconnect.  A single activity provides only a
      minimal amount of semantic context, e.g.defined by the activity's
      requirements imposed on the Computing Context, or via the set of
      actions it is composed of.  Example: The conveyance of




Birkholz, et al.          Expires July 8, 2018                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              RATS Terminology                January 2018


      cryptographic evidence or the appraisal of evidence via imperative
      guidance.

   Task:  "A piece of work to be done or undertaken."

      In the scope of RATS, a task is a procedure to be conducted.
      Example: A Verifier can be tasked with the appraisal of evidence
      originating from a specific type of Computing Contexts providing
      appropriate identities.

   Action:  "The accomplishment of a thing usually over a period of
      time, in stages, or with the possibility of repetition."

      In the scope of RATS, an action is the execution of an operation
      or function in the scope of an activity conducted by a Computing
      Context.  A single action provides no semantic context by itself,
      although it can limit potential semantic contexts of RATS to a
      specific scope.  Example: Signing an existing public key via a
      specific openssl library, transmitting data, or receiving data are
      actions.

   Procedure:  "A series of actions that are done in a certain way or
      order."

      In the scope of RATS, a procedure is a composition of activities
      (sequences of actions) that is intended to create a well specified
      result with a well established semantic context.  Example: The
      activities of attestation, conveyance and verification compose a
      remote attestation procedure.

6.  Reference Use Cases

   This document provides NNN prominent examples of use cases
   attestation procedures are intended to address:

   o  Verification of the source integrity of a computing context via
      data integrity proofing of installed software instances that are
      executed, and

   o  Verification of the identity proofing of a computing context.

   These use case summary highlighted above is based in the following
   terms defined in RFC4949 and complementary sources of terminology:

   Assurance:  An attribute of an information system that provides
      grounds for having confidence that the system operates such that
      the system's security policy is enforced [RFC4949] (see Trusted
      System below).



Birkholz, et al.          Expires July 8, 2018                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              RATS Terminology                January 2018


      In common criteria, assurance is the basis for the metric level of
      assurance, which represents the "confidence that a system's
      principal security features are reliably implemented".

      The NIST Handbook [get ref from 4949] notes that the levels of
      assurance defined in Common Criteria represent "a degree of
      confidence, not a true measure of how secure the system actually
      is.  This distinction is necessary because it is extremely
      difficult-and in many cases, virtually impossible-to know exactly
      how secure a system is."

      Historically, assurance was well-defined in the Orange Book
      [http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/history/dod85.pdf] as
      "guaranteeing or providing confidence that the security policy has
      been implemented correctly and that the protection-relevant
      elements of the system do, indeed, accurately mediate and enforce
      the intent of that policy.  By extension, assurance must include a
      guarantee that the trusted portion of the system works only as
      intended."

   Confidence:  The definition of correctness integrity in [RFC4949]
      notes that "source integrity refers to confidence in data values".
      Hence, confidence in an attestation procedure is referring to the
      degree of trustworthiness of an attestation activity that produces
      evidence (attestee), of an conveyance activity that transfers
      evidence (interconnect), and of a verification activity that
      appraises evidence (verifier), in respect to correctness
      integrity.

   Identity:  [pull relevant rfc4949 parts here]

   Identity Proofing:  A process that vets and verifies the information
      that is used to establish the identity of a system entity.

   Source Integrity:  The property that data is trustworthy (i.e.,
      worthy of reliance or trust), based on the trustworthiness of its
      sources and the trustworthiness of any procedures used for
      handling data in the system.

   Data Integrity:  (a) The property that data has not been changed,
      destroyed, or lost in an unauthorized or accidental manner.  (See:
      data integrity service.  Compare: correctness integrity, source
      integrity.)

      (b) The property that information has not been modified or
      destroyed in an unauthorized manner.





Birkholz, et al.          Expires July 8, 2018                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              RATS Terminology                January 2018


   Correctness:  The property of a system that is guaranteed as the
      result of formal verification activities.

   Correctness integrity:  The property that the information represented
      by data is accurate and consistent.

   Verification:  (a) The process of examining information to establish
      the truth of a claimed fact or value.

      (b) The process of comparing two levels of system specification
      for proper correspondence, such as comparing a security model with
      a top-level specification, a top-level specification with source
      code, or source code with object code.

6.1.  The Lying Endpoint Problem

   A very prominent goal of attestation procedures - and therefore a
   suitable example used as reference in this document - is to address
   the "lying endpoint problem".

   Information created, relayed, or, in essence, emitted by a computing
   context does not have to be correct.  There can be multiple reasons
   why that is the case and the "lying endpoint problem" represents a
   scenario, in which the reason is the compromization of computing
   contexts with malicious intend.  A compromised computing context
   could try to "pretend" to be integer, while actually feeding
   manipulated information into a security domain, therefore
   compromising the effectiveness of automated security functions.
   Attestation - and remote attestation procedures specifically - is an
   approach intended to identify compromised software instances in
   computing contexts.

   Per definition, a "lying endpoint" cannot be "trusted system".

   Trusted System:  A system that operates as expected, according to
      design and policy, doing what is required - despite environmental
      disruption, human user and operator errors, and attacks by hostile
      parties - and not doing other things.

   Remote attestation procedures are intended to enable the consumer of
   information emitted by an computing context to assess the validity
   and integrity of the information transferred.  The approach is based
   on the assumption that if evidence can be provided in order to prove
   the integrity of every software instance installed involved in the
   activity of creating the emitted information in question, the emitted
   information can be considered valid and integer.





Birkholz, et al.          Expires July 8, 2018                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              RATS Terminology                January 2018


   In contrast, such evidence has to be impossible to create if the
   software instances used in a computing context are compromised.
   Attestation activities that are intended to create this evidence
   therefore also to also provide guarantees about the validity of the
   evidence they can create.

6.2.  Who am I a talking to?

   [working title, write up use case here, ref teep requirements]

7.  Trustworthiness

   A "lying endpoint" is not trustworthy.

   Trusted System:  A system that operates as expected, according to
      design and policy, doing what is required - despite environmental
      disruption, human user and operator errors, and attacks by hostile
      parties - and not doing other things.

   Trustworthy:  pull in text here

8.  Remote Attestation

   Attestation:  An object integrity authentication facilitated via the
      creation of a claim about the properties of an attestee, such that
      the claim can be used as evidence.

   Conveyance:  The transfer of evidence from the attestee to the
      verifier.

   Verification:  The appraisal of evidence by evaluating it against
      declarative guidance.

   Remote Attestation:  A procedure composed of the activities
      attestation, conveyance and verification.

8.1.  Building Block Terms

   [working title, pulled from various sources, vital]

   Attestation Identity Key (AIK):  A special purpose signature
      (therefore asymmetric) key that supports identity related
      operations.  The private portion of the key pair is maintained
      confidential to the computing context via appropriate measures
      (that have a direct impact on the level of confidence).  The
      public portion of the key pair may be included in AIK credentials
      that provide a claim about the computing context.




Birkholz, et al.          Expires July 8, 2018                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              RATS Terminology                January 2018


   Claim:  A piece of information asserted about a subject.  A claim is
      represented as a name/value pair consisting of a Claim Name and a
      Claim Value [RFC7519]

      In the context of SACM, a claim is also specialized as an
      attribute/value pair that is intended to be related to a statement
      [I-D.ietf-sacm-terminology].

   Computing Context Characteristics:  The composition, configuration
      and state of a computing context.

   Evidence:  A trustworthy set of claims about an computing context's
      characteristics.

   Identity:  A set of claims that is intended to be related to an
      entity. [merge with RFC4949 defintion above]

   Integrity Measurements:  Metrics of computing context characteristics
      (i.e. composition, configuration and state) that affect the
      confidence in the trustworthiness of a computing context.  Digests
      of integrity measurements can be stored in shielded locations
      (e.g. a PCR of a TPM).

   Reference Integrity Measurements:  Signed measurements about a
      computing context's characteristics that are provided by a vendor
      or manufacturer and are intended to be used as declarative
      guidannce [I-D.ietf-sacm-terminology] (e.g. a signed CoSWID).

   Trustworthiness:  The qualities of computing context characteristics
      that guarantee a specific behavior specified by declarative
      guidance.  Trustworthiness is not an absolute property but defined
      with respect to a computing context, corresponding declarative
      guidance, and has a scope of confidence.  A trusted system is
      trustworthy. [refactor defintion with RFC4949 terms]

      Trustworthy Computing Context: a computing context that guarantees
      trustworthy behavior and/or composition (with respect to certain
      declarative guidance and a scope of confideence).  A trustworthy
      computing context is a trusted system.

      Trustworthy Statement: evidence that trustworthy conveyed by a
      computing context that is not necessarily trustworthy. [update
      with tamper related terms]








Birkholz, et al.          Expires July 8, 2018                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft              RATS Terminology                January 2018


9.  IANA considerations

   This document will include requests to IANA:

   o  first item

   o  second item

10.  Security Considerations

   There are always some.

11.  Acknowledgements

   Maybe.

12.  Change Log

   No changes yet.

13.  References

13.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC4949]  Shirey, R., "Internet Security Glossary, Version 2",
              FYI 36, RFC 4949, DOI 10.17487/RFC4949, August 2007,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4949>.

13.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-sacm-terminology]
              Birkholz, H., Lu, J., Strassner, J., Cam-Winget, N., and
              A. Montville, "Security Automation and Continuous
              Monitoring (SACM) Terminology", draft-ietf-sacm-
              terminology-14 (work in progress), December 2017.

   [RFC7519]  Jones, M., Bradley, J., and N. Sakimura, "JSON Web Token
              (JWT)", RFC 7519, DOI 10.17487/RFC7519, May 2015,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7519>.







Birkholz, et al.          Expires July 8, 2018                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft              RATS Terminology                January 2018


Authors' Addresses

   Henk Birkholz
   Fraunhofer SIT
   Rheinstrasse 75
   Darmstadt  64295
   Germany

   Email: henk.birkholz@sit.fraunhofer.de


   Monty Wiseman
   GE Global Research
   USA

   Email: monty.wiseman@ge.com


   Hannes Tschofenig
   ARM Ltd.
   110 Fulbourn Rd
   Cambridge  CB1 9NJ
   UK

   Email: hannes.tschofenig@gmx.net


























Birkholz, et al.          Expires July 8, 2018                 [Page 14]
