



RATS Working Group                                           H. Birkholz
Internet-Draft                                                  M. Eckel
Intended status: Standards Track                          Fraunhofer SIT
Expires: January 9, 2020                                   July 08, 2019


            An Information Model for Assertions used in RATS
                draft-birkholz-rats-information-model-00

Abstract

   This document defines a standardized information model (IM) for
   assertions that can be used in remote attestation procedures (RATS).
   The information elements defined include attestation assertions which
   provide information about system components characteristics, as well
   as commonly used attributes and attribute structures that are
   required by protocols facilitating remote attestation.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 9, 2020.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of




Birkholz & Eckel         Expires January 9, 2020                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    IMARA                        July 2019


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Document Structure  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  RATS Information Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   4.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   5.  Change Log  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   6.  Contributors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9

1.  Introduction

   Remote attestation procedures (RATS) are used to increase the trust
   in the trustworthiness of an attester.  This is typically
   accomplished by conveying attestation evidence from an attester to a
   verifier that is able to appraise the evidence.  The exact
   definitions of RATS roles, such as an attester or a verifier, are
   specified in the RATS architecture [I-D.birkholz-rats-architecture].
   This document defines the common information elements (IE) that are
   able to express the characteristics of an attester.  Ultimately,
   these IE can be used to compose attestation evidence (attestation
   assertions that are accompanied by a proof of their validity).

   In general, RATS convey information elements that:

   o  enable the functionality of remote attestation protocols,

   o  are able to express assertions about an attester's composition,
      configuration, or operational state,

   o  represent the provenance of assertions, including entities that
      provide assertions on behalf of the attester,

   o  compose a type of proof of validity with respect to other
      assertions, and that

   o  are either verifiable (via comparison with trusted reference
      values) or non-verifiable.






Birkholz & Eckel         Expires January 9, 2020                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    IMARA                        July 2019


1.1.  Document Structure

   Every information element listed is annotated with one or more of
   these attributes:

   Protocol (P):  This IE is used on a remote attestation protocol
      layer, typically on the control plane or as protocol-specific data
      plane content.

   Hardware (H):  This IE expresses characteristics about an attester's
      hardware components or the composition of its hardware components.

   Software (S):  This IE expresses characteristics about an attester's
      software components or their semantic relationship.  The term
      software component - in the scope of this document - subsumes
      firmware, bootloader, BIOS/(U)EFI, and microcode.

   Operational State (O):  This IE is used to convey information about
      the combination of applied configuration and system state as
      defined in [RFC8342].

   Verifiable (V):  This IE requires reference integrity measurements
      (RIM), compliance-policy, certification-path, or another type of
      trust-chain in order to be appraised appropriately by a verifier.

   Additionally, every IE definition includes a reference to the source
   of its definition, if it is not specified in this document for the
   first time (which is the most likely case).  If a source of a
   definition is not a specification or (proposed) standard, but a
   draft, a web resource, or source that cannot be attribute with a DOI
   or ISSN, the following attribute is associated.

   Unstable (U):  The source of the definition of this IE may change in
      the future and is not considered to be stable at the time of
      publication of this document.

   Information elements might reference other information elements or
   have to be associated in a set (with or without a specific order) in
   order to convey the intended meaning to a verifier.  Reference to
   other IE inside this documents simply use their name as reference.
   In consequence, an IE can be a superstructure composed of other IE
   with its own name (and potentially additional definition text that
   defines its purpose and or usage).

   The RATS Information Model allows for expressing a hierarchical
   taxonomy.  If an IE is a specialisation of another IE, the last
   sentence in the definition includes a "This IE is a specialization of
   _IE NAME_".



Birkholz & Eckel         Expires January 9, 2020                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    IMARA                        July 2019


   The ordering of IE is in descending alphabetical order; independent
   of source or semantic relationship to other IE, or other types of
   hierarchy.

2.  RATS Information Elements

   Age:  The latency between the creation of an assertion value (e.g. by
      asserters such as a hardware sensors or the Linux Integrity
      Measurement Architecture) including its composition into
      attestation evidence and its following conveyance to another RATS
      Actor/Role in RATS.  The Age IE does not require a threshold at
      which point another information element is considered "old" and an
      age information element has to be included.

      Reference: [I-D.ietf-rats-eat]

   Assertion Selection:  [P]

      A filter expression that enables the conveyance of a subset of all
      attestation assertions available to the attester, if requested by
      a verifier.

   Attestation Evidence:  [H, S, O, V]

      A composite IE that must include at least an Authentication-Secret
      Identifier, an Attester Identity, and at least one Attestation
      Assertion.  Attestation Evidence is always signed via the
      Authentication Secret and thereby binds the listed information
      elements cryptographically.  Attestation Evidence can only be
      trusted by a verifier if it is associated with a trust anchor the
      verifier also trusts.

   Attester Identifier:  [P, O, V]

      A value associated or bound to a distinguishable attester that is
      intended to uniquely identify it, but is not directly associated
      with a trust anchor.  Additional Endorsement Documents can
      increase the level of confidence in an Attester Identifier.

   Attester Identity:  [P, S, V]

      A document about a distinguishable attester issued and signed by a
      third party.  If not cryptographically associated with a trust
      anchor directly or indirectly, this IE is a specialization of
      Attester Identifier.

   Attestation Result:  [P]




Birkholz & Eckel         Expires January 9, 2020                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    IMARA                        July 2019


      A set of one or more values that are created by an appraisal
      action of a verifier.  Attestation Result is the most generic
      definition of the output of RATS and are typically consumed by
      relying parties.

   Authentication-Secret Identifier:  [O, V]

      An identifier that is associated with an authentication secret
      used to sign attestation evidence.

   Authorization Challenge:  [P]

      The input to an challenge-response protocol hand-shake.  This IE
      can be Nonce, but also the output of a local attestation
      procedure.

      Reference [I-D.tschofenig-rats-psa-token]

   Endorsement Document:  [P, H, S, V]

      A document about the capabilities and functionality of one or more
      sub-components of a distinguishable attester issued and signed by
      a third party.  Endorsement Documents are intended to render
      Attestation Evidence trustworthy.  If not cryptographically
      associated with a trust anchor directly or indirectly, this IE is
      a specialization of System Component Identifier.

   Location:  A global standardized set of coordinates and related
      attributes representing the geographic position of a device based
      on a geodetic system, such as Navstar GPS.  The coordinate values
      can have different meaning with respect to the geographic position
      of a device depending on the geodetic system used.  The default is
      WGS-84.

      The basic location attributes include: latitude, longitude,
      altitude, accuracy, altitude accuracy, heading, and velocity.

      Reference [I-D.ietf-rats-eat]

   Measured Boot Characteristics:  [H, S, V]

      If every piece of software is measured by a root-of-trust for
      measuring during boot time and across staged computing contexts
      (e.g.  UEFI, Bootloader, Kernel, Rich OS), associated information
      about how and in which operational states these measurements are
      conducted is vital to RATS.  This IE represents several states of
      a (composite) device with respect to measured boot (previously
      often called secure boot) including: "Secure Boot Enabled", "Debug



Birkholz & Eckel         Expires January 9, 2020                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    IMARA                        July 2019


      Disabled", "Debug Disabled Since Boot", "Debug Permanent Disable",
      "Debug Full Permanent Disable".

   Nonce:  [P]

      An information element with two major uses: the prevention of
      replay-attacks and as an IE that can be used in a challenge-
      response interaction model.  It is created by the requester to
      provide evidence about the freshness of the corresponding
      response.  It is important to highlight that a nonce by itself
      does not protect from relay-attacks.

   OEM Identifier:  [H, S, V]

      A organizationally unique identifier (OUI) assigned by the IEEE
      Registration Authority (IEEE RA).  This IE is associated with a
      device or a distinguishable sub-component of a composite device
      with its own computing context.  It intended to identify a
      device(component) during its life-cycle.  This is a specialization
      of System Component Identifier.

      Reference [I-D.ietf-rats-eat]

   Origination:  [P, S, V]]

      An IE representing attestation provenance.  Attestation Assertions
      or Attestation Evidence are produced by a specific source of
      information that is intended to be uniquely identifiable.  The
      source of information is a distinguishable computing context (see
      [I-D.birkholz-rats-architecture]) of a device or the sub-
      components of a composite device.

      Reference [I-D.ietf-rats-eat]

   Universal Entity ID:  [P, H, V]

      A unique identifier permanently associated with an individual
      manufactured entity / device, such as a mobile phone, a water
      meter, a Bluetooth speaker or a networked security camera.  This
      IE is intended to either identify an device or a submodule or
      subsystem of a device.  It does not identify types, models or
      classes of devices.  It is akin to a serial number, though it does
      not have to be sequential.  This IE is a specialization of System
      Component Identifier.

      Reference [I-D.ietf-rats-eat]

   Uptime:  [H, S]



Birkholz & Eckel         Expires January 9, 2020                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    IMARA                        July 2019


      An IE representing the number of seconds since the first computing
      context of a (composite) device is able to measure it.

      Reference [I-D.ietf-rats-eat]

   Security Level:  [H, S, V]

      A level of confidence with respect to the resilience against
      attacks intended to compromise attestation evidence.  A Security
      Level can be associated with an Origination.  This IE is context
      specific and requires a scope-specific definition of values as
      part of a security framework.  The [I-D.ietf-rats-eat] document,
      for example, provides an enumeration of security levels that is
      similar to the Metadata Service defined by the Fast Identity
      Online (FIDO) Alliance.

      Reference [I-D.ietf-rats-eat]

   Software Component Identifier:  [S, V]

      An IE representing one or more distinguishable Software Components
      [I-D.ietf-sacm-terminology] that were loaded and measured by an
      appropriate root-of-trust.  The use of this IE typically requires
      the use of Measured Boot.

      Reference [I-D.tschofenig-rats-psa-token]

   System Component Identifier:  [H, S, V]

      An identifier intended to uniquely identify a distinguishable
      system component.  System components can be hardware components or
      software components (e.g. a virtual machine).  The system
      component can be an "atomic" device (i.e. a composite device with
      only one hardware component) or a part of a composite device.

   Timestamp:  [P, S]

      A generic information element that represents a certain point of
      time in the past.  The level of confidence in the value of a
      timestamp is based on the trustworthiness of the source of time,
      which can be local or remote, a composite of multiple time sources
      to represent the state synchronization, as well as the precision
      and the accuracy of the source of time itself.

      Timestamps can be time-zone specific and therefore change their
      meaning if the definition of time zones changes.

   Verification Service Indicator:  [P, S, V]



Birkholz & Eckel         Expires January 9, 2020                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    IMARA                        July 2019


      This IE provides a hint (typically consumed by a Relying Party)
      that enables the discovery of an appropriate Verification Service
      or Remote Attestation Service, e.g. a URL.

      Reference [I-D.tschofenig-rats-psa-token]

3.  Security Considerations

   Probably none

4.  Acknowledgments

   TBD

5.  Change Log

   Initial version -00

6.  Contributors

   TBD

7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.birkholz-rats-architecture]
              Birkholz, H., Wiseman, M., Tschofenig, H., and N. Smith,
              "Architecture and Reference Terminology for Remote
              Attestation Procedures", draft-birkholz-rats-
              architecture-01 (work in progress), March 2019.

   [I-D.birkholz-rats-basic-yang-module]
              Birkholz, H., Eckel, M., Bhandari, S., Sulzen, B., Voit,
              E., and G. Fedorkow, "YANG Module for Basic Challenge-
              Response-based Remote Attestation Procedures", draft-
              birkholz-rats-basic-yang-module-00 (work in progress),
              March 2019.

   [I-D.birkholz-rats-tuda]
              Fuchs, A., Birkholz, H., McDonald, I., and C. Bormann,
              "Time-Based Uni-Directional Attestation", draft-birkholz-
              rats-tuda-00 (work in progress), March 2019.

   [I-D.ietf-rats-eat]
              Mandyam, G., Lundblade, L., Ballesteros, M., and J.
              O'Donoghue, "The Entity Attestation Token (EAT)", draft-
              ietf-rats-eat-01 (work in progress), July 2019.



Birkholz & Eckel         Expires January 9, 2020                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                    IMARA                        July 2019


   [I-D.tschofenig-rats-psa-token]
              Tschofenig, H., Frost, S., Brossard, M., Shaw, A., and T.
              Fossati, "Arm's Platform Security Architecture (PSA)
              Attestation Token", draft-tschofenig-rats-psa-token-02
              (work in progress), July 2019.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8342]  Bjorklund, M., Schoenwaelder, J., Shafer, P., Watsen, K.,
              and R. Wilton, "Network Management Datastore Architecture
              (NMDA)", RFC 8342, DOI 10.17487/RFC8342, March 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8342>.

7.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.birkholz-rats-reference-interaction-model]
              Birkholz, H. and M. Eckel, "Reference Interaction Model
              for Challenge-Response-based Remote Attestation", draft-
              birkholz-rats-reference-interaction-model-00 (work in
              progress), March 2019.

   [I-D.ietf-sacm-terminology]
              Birkholz, H., Lu, J., Strassner, J., Cam-Winget, N., and
              A. Montville, "Security Automation and Continuous
              Monitoring (SACM) Terminology", draft-ietf-sacm-
              terminology-16 (work in progress), December 2018.

   [I-D.richardson-rats-usecases]
              Richardson, M., Wallace, C., and W. Pan, "Use cases for
              Remote Attestation common encodings", draft-richardson-
              rats-usecases-03 (work in progress), July 2019.

Authors' Addresses

   Henk Birkholz
   Fraunhofer SIT
   Rheinstrasse 75
   Darmstadt  64295
   Germany

   Email: henk.birkholz@sit.fraunhofer.de







Birkholz & Eckel         Expires January 9, 2020                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                    IMARA                        July 2019


   Michael Eckel
   Fraunhofer SIT
   Rheinstrasse 75
   Darmstadt  64295
   Germany

   Email: michael.eckel@sit.fraunhofer.de












































Birkholz & Eckel         Expires January 9, 2020               [Page 10]
