


Network Working Group                                      V. Lehtovirta
Internet-Draft                              Ericsson Research NomadicLab
Intended status: Informational                         February 26, 2007
Expires: August 30, 2007


                Infrastructure aspects to media security
                    draft-lehtovirta-rtpsec-infra-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 30, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).














Lehtovirta               Expires August 30, 2007                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft  Infrastructure aspects to media security   February 2007


Abstract

   This document discusses some infrastructure aspects that should be
   considered in the media security requirements work.


Table of Contents

   1.  Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Termination of media security in a gateway . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Using shared keys to provide media security  . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Setting up media security with the help of a third party . . .  7
   6.  Termination of media streams in different devices  . . . . . .  8
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 12































Lehtovirta               Expires August 30, 2007                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft  Infrastructure aspects to media security   February 2007


1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].














































Lehtovirta               Expires August 30, 2007                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft  Infrastructure aspects to media security   February 2007


2.  Introduction

   Requirements related to the ongoing media security work are discussed
   for example in [I-D.wing-media-security-requirements].

   This document discusses some infrastructure aspects that should be
   considered in the media security requirements work.

   These aspects are:

   o  Termination of media security in a gateway

   o  Using shared keys to provide media security

   o  Setting up media security with the help of a third party

   o  Termination of media streams in different devices


































Lehtovirta               Expires August 30, 2007                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft  Infrastructure aspects to media security   February 2007


3.  Termination of media security in a gateway

   A typical case of using media security is the one where two entities
   are having a VoIP conversation over IP capable networks.  However,
   there are cases where the other end of the communication is not
   connected to an IP capable network.  In this kind of setting, there
   needs to be some kind of gateway at the edge of the IP network which
   converts the VoIP conversation to format understood by the other
   network.  An example of such gateway is a PSTN gateway sitting at the
   edge of IP and PSTN networks.

   If media security (e.g.  SRTP protection) is employed in this kind of
   gateway-setting, then media security and the related key management
   needs to be terminated at the gateway.  The other network (e.g.
   PSTN) may have its own measures to protect the communication, but
   this means that from media security point of view the media security
   is not employed end-to-end between the communicating entities.

   Therefore, media security solutions should cover the cases where
   media security is not employed end-to-end but is terminated in a
   gateway.






























Lehtovirta               Expires August 30, 2007                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft  Infrastructure aspects to media security   February 2007


4.  Using shared keys to provide media security

   There are environments where the communicating endpoints set up
   shared keys with the network infrastructure.  An example of such
   environment is the widely deployed GSM system and its 3G successor,
   the UMTS.  It would be beneficial if the shared keys between the
   endpoints and the network infrastructure in these kind of systems
   could be re-used to provide shared keys also between the
   communicating endpoints.

   Therefore, it might be justified to consider using shared keys in
   addition to public keys to provide media security in some
   environments.






































Lehtovirta               Expires August 30, 2007                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft  Infrastructure aspects to media security   February 2007


5.  Setting up media security with the help of a third party

   Setting up a secured connection to an arbitrary peer requires that
   the communicating entities have in some way agreed on key management
   credentials, e.g. shared keys or certificates.  From scalability
   point of view it is in practice not feasible to achieve this to an
   arbitrary peer without the help of some third party providing the
   credentials.

   To enable a scalable solution that allows to set up a secure
   connection to an arbitrary peer seems to require the help of some
   third party.







































Lehtovirta               Expires August 30, 2007                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft  Infrastructure aspects to media security   February 2007


6.  Termination of media streams in different devices

   In some cases, different media streams might be terminated in
   different devices.  For example, the video part of a multimedia
   session could terminate in one device, while the audio part would
   terminate in another device.  It should be possible to set up media
   security efficiently in such scenarios.












































Lehtovirta               Expires August 30, 2007                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft  Infrastructure aspects to media security   February 2007


7.  Security Considerations

   None.
















































Lehtovirta               Expires August 30, 2007                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft  Infrastructure aspects to media security   February 2007


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

8.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.wing-media-security-requirements]
              Wing, D., "Media Security Requirements",
              draft-wing-media-security-requirements-00 (work in
              progress), October 2006.






































Lehtovirta               Expires August 30, 2007               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft  Infrastructure aspects to media security   February 2007


Author's Address

   Vesa Lehtovirta
   Ericsson Research NomadicLab
   JORVAS  FIN-02420
   FINLAND

   Phone: +358 9 299 1
   Email: vesa.lehtovirta@ericsson.com










































Lehtovirta               Expires August 30, 2007               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft  Infrastructure aspects to media security   February 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Lehtovirta               Expires August 30, 2007               [Page 12]


