
INTERNET DRAFT
                                                               J. Postel
                                                                     ISI
                                                               July 1995

               Addendum to RFC 1602 -- Variance Procedure

			draft-postel-variance-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document describes a modification to the IETF procedures to
   allow an escape from a situation where the existing procedures are
   not working or do not seem to apply.  This is a modification to the
   procedures of RFC 1602 and 1603.

   This document is an Internet Draft. Internet Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
   and its Working Groups. Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet Drafts.

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months. Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
   other documents at any time. It is not appropriate to use Internet
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as a "working
   draft" or "work in progress".

Introduction

   The current IETF procedures are documented in "The Internet Standards
   Process -- Revision 2" [1], and "IETF Working Group Guidelines and
   Procedures" [2].

   There may be situations where following the procedures leads to a
   deadlock, or there may be situations where the procedures provide no
   guidance.  In these cases it may be appropriate to invoke the
   variance procedure described below.

   A revision of the rules specified in RFC 1602 is underway, but may
   take some time. This document describes an interim amendment to RFC
   1602, to avoid having to wait for this major revision in a state of
   paralysis.

Guiding Principles

   Any variance from following the written rules must be a public
   process with opportunity for all concerned parties to comment.

   The variance procedure should be similar to existing mechanisms and
   involve existing bodies.



Expiration Date: January 1996                                   [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT             Variance Procedure                  July 1995


The Variance Procedure

   There are five aspects that are involved in the variance procedure:
   (1) detecting the problem, (2) proposing a solution, (3) public
   review, (4) accepting the solution, and (5) an appeal process.

   1. Detecting the problem

   The IESG is responsible for detecting the problem.

   2. Proposing the solution

   The IESG is responsible for proposing the solution.

   3. Public review

   There shall be an extended Last Call for public review.

   4. Accepting the solution

   The IESG is responsible for accepting the solution, and incorporating
   comments from the Last Call.

   5. The appeal procedure

   The IAB is responsible for hearing and deciding appeals.

Discussion

   When the IESG has determined that there is in a situation where the
   existing written rules do not apply or lead to a deadlock, the IESG
   may propose a solution to the problem.

   The solution may be developed by the IESG or suggested to the IESG.

   The solution may either (1) decide the particular instance of the
   matter, or (2) define a procedure for resolving matters of this kind.

   In any case, the proposed solution will be documented in an Internet
   draft and subjected to an extended Last Call.

   Depending on the results of the Last Call, the IESG will either
   accept the solution; or revise the proposal, update the Internet
   Draft, and initiate another extended Last Call.

   When the IESG accepts a solution the Internet Draft shall be
   forwarded to the RFC Editor and published as an RFC.




Expiration Date: January 1996                                   [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT             Variance Procedure                  July 1995


   The IAB shall be available to hear and decide on appeals of the use
   this variance procedure.

Acknowledgements

   The contributions of the IAB and the IESG -- and Brian Carpenter,
   Paul Mockapetris, Christian Huitema, and Robert Elz, in particular --
   are gratefully acknowledged.

References

   [1] IAB, and IESG, "Internet Standards Process -- Revision 2", RFC
       1602, IAB and IESG, March 1994.

   [2] Huizer, E., and D. Crocker, "IETF Working Group Guidelines and
       Procedures", RFC 1603, SURFnet and Silicon Graphics, Inc., March
       1994.

Security Considerations

   Security issues are not discussed in this memo.

Author's Addresses

      Jon Postel
      USC - ISI, Suite 1001
      4676 Admiralty Way
      Marina del Rey, CA  90292-6695
      Phone: 310-822-1511
      email: postel@isi.edu


















			draft-postel-variance-00.txt


Expiration Date: January 1996                                   [Page 3]
