



INTAREA Working Group                                          S. Bryant
Internet-Draft                               University of Surrey 5/6GIC
Intended status: Informational                               U. Chunduri
Expires: July 28, 2022                                             Intel
                                                               T. Eckert
                                                                A. Clemm
                                             Futurewei Technologies Inc.
                                                        January 24, 2022


                       Forwarding Layer Use Cases
                   draft-bryant-arch-fwd-layer-uc-03

Abstract

   This document considers the new and emerging use cases for IP.  These
   use cases are difficult to address with IP in its current format and
   demonstrate the need to evolve the protocol.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 28, 2022.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Forwarding Layer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  New Use Cases for packet networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.1.  Role of Fixed Networks in 5G and Beyond 5G  . . . . . . .   4
     2.2.  Convergence of Industrial Control Networks  . . . . . . .   5
     2.3.  Cloud Based Industrial Automation . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.4.  Volumetric Data Transmission  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.5.  ITU-T Focus Group Network-2030  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.6.  Emerging and New Media Applications . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   3.  Deployment Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.1.  Traditional Deployment Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       3.1.1.  Best-effort Internet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       3.1.2.  Enhanced Service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
       3.1.3.  Over-the-top (OTT) Providers  . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
       3.1.4.  Cooperating Providers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     3.2.  Emerging Deployment Models  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
       3.2.1.  Embedded Service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
       3.2.2.  Embedded Global Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
       3.2.3.  Changing Fixed Access Models (1 or 2 Providers) . . .  13
       3.2.4.  Single "Underlay" provider E2E for 5G/B5G network
               (Cellular/Access Networks)  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     3.3.  Envisioned New Deployment Models  . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
       3.3.1.  Network Slicing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
       3.3.2.  Private 5G Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     3.4.  Limited Domains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   4.  New Network  Services and Capabilities  . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     4.1.  New Services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     4.2.  New Capabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   7.  Appendix 1: Expanded Summary of Sub-G1 Use Cases  . . . . . .  19
     7.1.  Holographic-type communications . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     7.2.  Tactile Internet for Remote Operations  . . . . . . . . .  19
     7.3.  Space-Terrestrial Integrated Networks . . . . . . . . . .  20
     7.4.  ManyNets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
   8.  Appendix 2: Expanded Summary of Sub-G2 New Network
       Capabilities and Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
     8.1.  New Services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
       8.1.1.  High-Precision Communications Services  . . . . . . .  22
       8.1.2.  In-time Services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
       8.1.3.  On-time Services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
       8.1.4.  Coordinated Services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
       8.1.5.  Qualitative Communication Services  . . . . . . . . .  23



Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


     8.2.  New Capabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
       8.2.1.  Manage ability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
       8.2.2.  High Programmability and Agile Life-cycle . . . . . .  25
       8.2.3.  Security  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26
       8.2.4.  Trustworthiness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
       8.2.5.  Resilience  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
       8.2.6.  Privacy-Sensitive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
       8.2.7.  Accountability and Verifiability  . . . . . . . . . .  28
   9.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31

1.  Introduction

   There is an emerging set of new requirements that exceed the network
   and transport services of the current Internet, which currently only
   delivers "best effort" service.  While many controlled or private
   networks include further services, such as other DiffServ QoS in
   addition to best effort and traffic engineering with bandwidth
   guarantees, the solutions used today only support walled gardens and
   are thus they are not available to application service providers and
   consumers across the Internet.

   The purpose of this document is to look at current, evolving and
   future use cases that need to addressed by the Internet forwarding
   layer.  In parallel with this use case study, a study of the gaps
   between the capability of the existing IP forwarding layer and the
   requirements described in this use case study is provided in
   [I-D.bryant-arch-fwd-layer-ps].  It is thus the purpose of this text
   to provide the wider context for the forwarding layer problem
   statement.

   The purpose of this text is thus to stimulate discussion on the
   emerging contexts in which the forwarding layer will need to operate
   in the future.

1.1.  Forwarding Layer

   The term "forwarding layer" is used in this document to indicate that
   that development work will likely need to reach down to layer 2.5 in
   order to ensure that packets are handled correctly down to the
   physical layer, and that it is equally it is possible that
   development work will need to reach into the transport layer.  This
   is described in more detail in [I-D.bryant-arch-fwd-layer-ps].








Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


2.  New Use Cases for packet networks

   This section summarizes the use case areas that have been observed by
   the authors, and are considered relevant to any analysis of the gaps
   in forwarding layer capabilities.

   This section is structured into sub-sections discussing either group
   of use cases directly or the work of specific groups that are
   identifying use cases and that may also work on identifying issues
   and or proposed architectures or solutions for them.

   Subsections are ordered from what might be considered to be the most
   near-term use cases to the potentially most far reaching ones.

2.1.  Role of Fixed Networks in 5G and Beyond 5G

   The 5G and beyond 5G (B5G) services are not meant to be limited to
   the 5G-NR (new-radio).  In fact for those services relating to uRLLC,
   and mMTC packet networks have evolve along with the radio
   technologies.  While 5G-NR protocol stack has evolved to provide per-
   frame reliability and latency guarantees, the IP/MPLS transport
   network by-and-large remains best-effort.  It is no longer possible
   to solve network problems simply by increasing the capacity
   [SysArch5G].  The expectations 5G devices have of 5G networks, can
   not be met without improving IP/MPLS based back-haul networks.  For
   example, the 5G based systems involve machine to machine
   communications, generally using command-based smaller payloads.  In
   this case the overheads of packet headers and overlays become
   apparent when computing latency budget of such packets.

   The IETF has produced a large body of work on the deterministic needs
   of network applications [RFC8578].  These range from refinements and
   expansions of above summarized Audio/Video and AR/VR use cases over
   gaming into many more "industrial" use cases.  Industrial use cases
   generally involve industrial controllers for high-precision machinery
   and equipment, such as robotic arms, centrifuges, or manufacturing
   equipment for the assembly of electronic components.
   These use cases have in common that they require delivery of packets
   with very precise and "deterministic" performance characteristics, as
   the controlled equipment and the control loops involved have very
   exact timing requirements and are not tolerant of any latency
   variations, as otherwise control loop issues and other undesired
   effects may occur.
   Specifically, the use cases involve curtailing maximum latency that
   could be incurred.  However, deterministic networking, by itself,
   does not appear to be sufficient to meet all of the emerging needs.





Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


2.2.  Convergence of Industrial Control Networks

   Industrial control networks exist to serve specialist applications
   and are deployed in well controlled networks subject to tight timing
   and reliability constrains and tight security constraints.  They
   mostly use bespoke, application specific proprietary protocols.
   There is a desire to achieve economy of scale by using a single
   protocol, and to integrate the production network with the back-
   office network.  The obvious protocol to use would be IP, but to be
   deployed in this mixed application environment IP needs to satisfy
   the non-negotiable needs of the industrial control network such as
   timing, reliability and security.

2.3.  Cloud Based Industrial Automation

   Future industrial networks are significantly different from best
   effort networks in terms of performance and reliability requirements.
   This is discussed in [NET2030SubG1].  These networks need more than
   basic connectivity between the back office and the factory floors,
   instead they require integration from devices all the way through to
   the business systems.  This permits many new types of UI and full
   automatic operation and control of industrial processes without
   significant human intervention.  These networks need to deliver
   better than best effort performance, and require real-time, secure,
   and reliable factory-wide connectivity, as well as inter-factory
   connectivity at large scale.

   Such systems typically require low end-to-end latency to meet closed
   loop control requirements.  Such system also need low jitter
   connectivity.  IIoT systems, as an example contain many control sub-
   systems that run at cycle times ranging from sub-ms to 10 ms.  In
   such systems, end-to-end control requires in-time signaling delay at
   the same cycle time level, without malfunctions.  These low latency
   requirements of IIoT applications are increasingly not only relevant
   to internal system communications, but also becoming essential for
   the interconnection of remote systems.

   As another example, it is a fundamental requirement for multiple-axis
   applications to have time synchronization in order to permit
   cooperation between various devices, sometimes remotely.  In order to
   recover the clock signal and reach precise time synchronization, the
   machine control, especially the motion control sub-system, requires
   very small jitter at sub- microsecond level, and such small jitter is
   expected to have bounded limits under some critical situations.

   In some IIOT systems a service availability of 99.999999% is needed,
   as any break in communications may be reflected as a million-dollar
   loss.  At the same time, as part of the Industry 4.0 evolution,



Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


   operational technologies (OT) and information technology (IT) are
   converging.  In this model control functions traditionally carried
   out by customized hardware platforms, such as Programmable Logic
   Controllers (PLC), have been slowly virtualized and moved onto the
   edge or into the cloud in order to reduce the CAPEX and OPEX, and to
   provide increased system flexibility and capability and to allow 'big
   data' approaches.  This move of industrial system to the cloud places
   higher requirements on the underlying networks, as the latency,
   jitter, security and reliability requirements previously needed
   locally have to be implemented at larger scales.

2.4.  Volumetric Data Transmission

   Volumetric Data refers to cases where very large data sets need to be
   transferred continuously in real time.  One example is Immersive AR/
   VR media transmission Section 2.6.  Another example is V2X with many
   sensors continuously generating data which needs to made available
   for, amongst other reasons, technical analysis by the manufacturer as
   part of product development, and insurance purposes.

2.5.  ITU-T Focus Group Network-2030

   The ITU-T has been running a Focus Group (FG) Network-2030
   [FGNETWORK2030] to analyze the needs of networks in the period post
   2030.  This work started in July 2018 and submitted it report to
   ITU-T Study Group 13 in June 2020.  It has been an open process with
   contribution by a cross-section of the networking industry.  Because
   this is non-IETF work, this section summarizes the currently
   finalized key findings of the ITU-T Focus Group Network-2030 to make
   it easier for the reader to better understand the work.  Note that
   this work is still ongoing and additional findings may be published.

   The Focus Group Network 2030 considered a number of use cases that it
   was postulated would need to be addressed in the 2030 time-frame and
   the technology gaps that need to be bridged in order to address these
   needs.  It then considered a number of new network services that
   would be needed to support these services.

   An ongoing piece of work on the architecture of the network post 2030
   has not yet been completed at the time of writing and is only
   partially discussed in this document.

   The reader is referred to [WP], [NET2030SubG2], [UC] for information
   beyond that provided in this summary.

   ITU-T FG NET2030 Sub-group Sub-G1 (Sub-G1) considered a number of use
   cases that it considered to be representative of the network needs
   post 2030.  These needs are legitimate needs in their own right, but



Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


   as is always the case act as poster-children for new applications
   that will inevitable conceived in the light of the new network
   capabilities that we postulate to be necessary.

   o  Holographic-type communications (HCT)

   o  Tactile Internet for Remote Operations (TIRO)

   o  Network and Computing Convergence (NCC)

   o  Digital Twin (DT)

   o  Space-Terrestrial Integrated Networks (STIN)

   o  ManyNets

   o  Industrial IoT (IIoT) with cloudification.

   Further information on these use cases is provided in Section 7, and
   in the ITU documents [UC] and [WP].

   Note to the reader: Unlike ITU-T Study Groups which are restricted to
   members, ITU-T Focus Groups are open to anyone without payment.  At
   the time of writing, ITU-T Focus Group Network-2030 material that is
   not available for anonymous download, is accessible for free by
   joining the Study Group.

2.6.  Emerging and New Media Applications

   Audio/Video streaming for production, entertainment, remote
   observation, and interactive audio/video are the most ubiquitous
   applications on the Internet and private IP networks after web-
   services.  They have grown primarily through an evolution of the
   applications to work with the constraints of todays Internet and
   adopting pre-existing infrastructure such as content caches: best-
   effort streaming with adaptive video, no service guarantees for most
   services, and co-location of caches with large user communities.  In
   environments where more than best-effort services for these
   applications are required and deployment of current technologies to
   support them is feasible, it is done.  Examples include DiffServ or
   even on or off-path bandwidth reservations in controlled networks.

   Networked AR/VR is a very near term set of use cases, where solution
   models are very much attempting to use and expand existing solution
   approaches for video network streaming but where the limits of above
   current best practices are also amplified by the larger bandwidth
   requirements and stricter latency and jitter requirements of AR/VR.




Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


   To ensure a good user experience, for live Virtual Reality (VR), a
   much higher resolution than 8K video is required.  In addition to the
   high bandwidth requirements of VR, there needs to be a supporting
   transmission network to provide a communications path with bounded
   low latency as well.  This stringent VR latency requirement is a
   challenge to existing networks.

   In cellular networks, even though the the air interface link latency
   needed is significantly reduced e.g. with New Radio (5GNR), the end-
   to-end (E2E) requirements for live VR is harder to meet.  This is
   because of the fixed L2/IP/MPLS networks in front/mid/backhaul
   components, and because of the best effort nature of the packet
   delivery systems in these networks.

3.  Deployment Models

   In this section we look at a number of network deployment models.  We
   group these deployment models into three types:

   o  The traditional deployment models

   o  Emerging deployment model models

   o  Envisioned new deployment models

   The service requirements demanded from the networks and security
   implications vastly differ in these different deployment models.

   A few general observations are useful in providing context to this
   section:

   o  End to End traffic over the Internet backbone is becoming minority
      traffic.

   o  Commercial deployments do not operate the way they used to when
      many of the original Internet protocols and invariants were
      established.

   o  The application trajectory is for the applications to be hosted on
      (protected) servers a few hops from the user.

   o  Applications are becoming self-contained and use their own stack
      which is tunneled over UDP/IP to the server.








Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


3.1.  Traditional Deployment Models

   In this section we look at the traditional deployment models that
   have been in existence for many year and formed the foundation of
   Internet.

3.1.1.  Best-effort Internet

   In this model connectivity is edge-to-edge, and in the general case
   the edge connectivity is provided by a service provider who peers
   with a transit provider that provides connectivity to other service
   providers possibly via other transit providers.  This is shown in
   Figure 1.

   +---+                                                 +---+
   | H |                                                 |Svr|
   +-+-+                                                 +-+-+
     |      SP1            Internet              SP2       |
     |    ..........  .....................   .........    |
   +-+--+ .+----+  .  .+---+  +---+  +---+'   . +----+.  +-+-+
   | CE +--+ PE +------+AS1+--+AS2+--+AS3+------+ PE +---+ CE|
   +----+ .+----+  .  .+---+  +---+  +---+.   . +----+.  +---+
          ..........  .....................   .........

                Figure 1: An Edge-2-Edge Classical Internet

   This service is generally known as "best-effort" in that each element
   of the service path undertakes to do no more that try its best to
   provide equitable service to all traffic.  These are traditional E2E
   deployments where communication endpoints of the data traffic on
   different provider networks with regional, transit network providers
   through Internet Exchange Providers (IXPs) providing the global inter
   connection.  The term lower-common-denominator might be a better term
   in that the service quality is the service of the worst element of
   the path on a packet by packet basis.

   This model is in the process of being replaced by a model in which
   the most popular and important service are provided at the edge with
   Internet transit traffic being used where there is no alternative.

   In this case the provider controls only the path to the CE and can
   certify the correct operation of the service according to contract
   from that point but the user is responsible for providing the
   required service characteristics into their own network.

   In this network environment it is difficult to support any form of
   enhanced service since it is unlikely that the whole path is know to
   support extended capabilities in the forwarding plane.  It is not



Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


   infeasible, and it would be possible to set up such paths in
   principle given suitable enhancements to the routing system.  However
   such a scenario must be considered infeasible for the foreseeable
   future.

3.1.2.  Enhanced Service

   This is the traditional service provider deployment where various
   network services (VPN, security, Bandwidth..) are offered to the
   endpoints of the communication and other providers.  Such
   capabilities are purchased through contract with the service provider
   and are typically expensive.

   These networks predominantly use MPLS technology though native IP
   (IPv4/IPv6) with GRE and IPv6 with routing extension headers with
   SRv6 are being deployed recently.

                ..................................
         +---+ . +---+        Single        +---+ . +---+
         |CE1|---|PE1|---..  Provider  ..---|PE2|---|CE2|
         +---+ . +---+       Network        +---+ . +---+
                ..................................

                     Figure 2: An Edge-2-Edge Network

   In this case there is a single provider network in which E2E
   offerings and host session are initiated and terminated with in the
   single provider network.

3.1.3.  Over-the-top (OTT) Providers

   In this model the endpoints of the communication (virtual or physical
   hosts) consuming services through with in the OTT provider network
   servers (Cloud and Data Center (DC) networks); where the other
   endpoint can be in the same server form or on the DC Gateway or on
   the other end of the DC Server Farm connected through Data Center
   Interconnect (DCI).

   The local provider is thus just a connectivity provider to opaque
   traffic with no ability to enhance the service.  However the
   corollary to this is that whilst the the OTT provider has full
   control of what happens whilst the user data is within their network
   they have no control over how the user traffic transits to them
   across the "public" network.







Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


3.1.4.  Cooperating Providers

   Where two providers interconnect with no Internet Transit Network:
   Another variant of the E2E connectivity can be seen as evolving
   comprises only endpoints provider (access) network and receiver
   access provider network with global transit provided by one ISP.
   This case is more tractable provided there is co-operation between
   the providers.

3.2.  Emerging Deployment Models

   The emerging model is to provide the service close to the user by
   embedding that service with the service provider network.  This has
   three advantages, firstly that the service latency is lower, secondly
   that that there is less transit traffic that the network provider
   needs to manage or pay for, and thirdly that the service availability
   and reliability is in the hands of the network provider that the
   customer is contracted to.

3.2.1.  Embedded Service

   The industry move is towards content and application service
   providers embedding themselves within the edge network.  This is
   currently done to save bandwidth and improve response time.  As the
   need for high precision low latency networking develops the need for
   edge computing rises since the closer the client and the server the
   less the scope for network induced performance degradation.

   +---+
   | H |
   +-+-+
     |
     |    .....................................
   +-+--+ .+----+        +---+                .
   | CE +--+ PE |--------+Svr|                .
   +----+ .+----+        +---+   Provider 1   .
          .....................................

                       Figure 3: An Edge-2-Provider

   In this network the server S (owned by the content and applications
   provider) has a contractual relationship with provider 1 and is thus
   able to negotiate the network characteristics needed to meet its
   service requirement.  This model in which the server brokers the user
   to network interface (UNI) requirements removes many of the
   objections to the classical UNI model in which the client requests
   the service requirements.  In this model the host authenticates
   itself with the server, having formed a previous business



Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


   relationship (for example by purchasing a holographic conferencing
   service).  The server has a relationship with Provider1, and thus is
   a trusted party able to request that the service be set up between
   itself and and its client, paying as necessary.  As this is a
   requested paid service traversing a limited distance over a defined
   network, a bespoke packet protocol can, if necessary, be used with in
   a contained and constrained way.

   How the server communicates with any other part of the application
   domain is out of scope for this document and possibly out of scope
   for Provider 1.

   This takes us to consider the embedded global service described in
   {#EGS}.

3.2.2.  Embedded Global Service

   +---+
   | H1|
   +-+-+
     |
     |    ......................................
   +-+--+ . +----+        +---+                .
   | CE +---+ PE |--------+ S1|                .
   +----+ . +----+        +-+-+   Provider 1   .
          ..................|...................
                            |
                            |Private Peering
                            |
          ..................|...................
   +----+ . +----+        +-+-+                .
   | CE +---+ PE |--------+ S2|                .
   +----+ . +----+        +---+   Provider 2   .
     |    ......................................
     |
   +-+-+
   | H |
   +-+-+

                    Figure 4: Edge-2-Edge via Provider

   In this network model, the server S1 (owned by the content and
   applications provider) has a contractual relationship with provider 1
   and is thus able to negotiate the network characteristics needed to
   meet its service requirement.  It is servicing the needs of host H1.

   Similarly that same provider has a contractual relationship with
   provider 2 where it is servicing the needs of host H2.



Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


   By a method outside the scope of this document and outside the scope
   of the global Internet the contents and applications provider has a
   private path between S1 and S2.

   This scenario shown in Figure 4 is important because it removes the
   overwhelming issues associated with providing enhanced service across
   the global Internet.  Furthermore it describes a model where there is
   commercial incentive, at scale, for the edge providers (Provider 1
   and 2 above) to invest in providing and enhanced access service.

3.2.3.  Changing Fixed Access Models (1 or 2 Providers)

   The preceding sections are the basis for a change in the network
   fixed access model.

   The access network either connects to a data center gateway or one is
   embedded in the access network.  This gateway either passes the
   traffic to a locally connected data center that provides the required
   service or passes it over a private global data center interconnect
   to a partner data center for service provision.  Such a connection
   provides service model in which the required service level cane be
   more readily addressed.

      H  H
      |  |
      |  |
   Access NW
            \
             \
            DC-GW==Private Global==DC-GW
            //         DCI              \\
    DC Fabric                            DC Fabric
    | | | | |                            | | | | |
    S S S S S                            S S S S S

                   Figure 5: Changing Fixed Access Model

3.2.4.  Single "Underlay" provider E2E for 5G/B5G network (Cellular/
        Access Networks)

   The preceding sections are the basis for the emerging change in the
   structure of the 5B and Beyond 5G (B5G) network design.

   Endpoints (UE's) connecting to the provider wireless or wired
   networks, where service is terminated inside the provider network end
   points.  Based on the service offerings connection termination can
   happen close to the Radio/access nodes with multi-access edge
   computing (MEC) clouds or in the provider core network (core-cloud)



Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


   before going to the Internet eventually.  Example of these
   deployments include BNG, 4G and 5G wireless access/RAN/backhaul
   networks.

   Thus in Figure 6 user equipment connects to the customer site
   provider edge via the radio network.  This in turn is connected to
   the aggregation PE which in turn determines if the traffic should be
   routed to a local data center for processing, or passed to a core
   data center.  At the core DC the traffic may be processed locally,
   passed out to the Internet, passed to a peer DC via a private DCI, or
   processed locally with the help of resources access via that external
   interconnects.

   User Equipment(UE)
   Phone/eMBB
   /                     Compute       Compute
   \ Vehicle             Storage       Storage
   / /                      |             |      / Internet
   \ \ Drone/UAV            |             |     /
   / / /                  DC Fabric   DC Fabric{
   \ \ \ IIOT               |             |     \
   / / / /                  |             |      \ Private Global
   \ \ \ \                  |             |             DCI
    Radio --------CS PE----Aggr PE-----Core PE

               Figure 6: 4G and 5G underlay provider network

3.3.  Envisioned New Deployment Models

   The emerging network deployment models are a potential vector for
   fundamental change in the way the network operates.

3.3.1.  Network Slicing

   Network slicing is a method of creating a private subset of a public
   network.  Unlike VPNs it is not a simple over the top approach,
   instead it is more integrated with the base network in terms of the
   way the base network provides services and allocates resources.  A
   network slice provides significant isolation between one slice and
   another and between the slice and best effort users of the network.
   In an ideal slice, the users of one slice have no way of knowing
   anything about the traffic in any other slice.  Such a service could
   be offered through statistical multiplexing techniques with real
   bandwidth permanently allocated to each slice, but this would not
   easily offer the statistical multiplexing that make packet networking
   so economic and so flexible.  In particular it would not be easy to
   transparently "borrow" unused committed bandwidth in a way that was
   undetectable.  It seems likely that to create a high fidelity slice



Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


   will require new properties in the packet layer, either through
   extension of the existing packet protocols, or through the
   introduction of an alternative design.  A useful discussion of
   network slicing relevant to this context can be found in
   [I-D.ietf-teas-enhanced-vpn].

   Largely popularized as part of 5G the concept of network slicing has
   wider applicability.

3.3.2.  Private 5G Networks

   A use case is emerging for 5G technology in private networks.  The
   interest is in the protection and security that comes with the use of
   licensed spectrum.  Unlicensed spectrum offers no protection against
   other users of that spectrum and thus another aspect of best effort
   comes into play, not only is the network best effort with respect to
   traffic within the network (an addressable problem) but the radio is
   best effort with respect to radio traffic from adjacent networks.
   Without extensive radio shielding of the facility a user cannot know
   if the spectrum is available for their use at any time, and they have
   to suffer interference from adjacent users, who may be benignly using
   the spectrum for legitimate purposes, as is their equal right, or may
   be using it to cause service disruption to a commercial enterprise.

   5G runs on licensed and hence protected spectrum.  In return for the
   paying the license fee the spectrum owner has a statutory protection
   against interference.

   Thus it is interesting to note that a major UK car plant just
   announced the use of 5G to provide connectivity for equipment at
   their manufacturing facility.

   Such applications of 5G are not as architecturally constrained as
   public 5G deployments and thus have the ability to make different
   fundamental choices regarding their packet protocols.

3.4.  Limited Domains

   [RFC8799] provides a useful insight into the emergence of limited
   domains in which fewer (or different) constraints on protocol design
   and operation apply.  Limited domains offer an opportunity to deploy
   specialist forwarding layer protocols, designed to meet specific
   objectives, which are not readily addressed by general purpose
   protocols such as IPv4|6 without the need to worry about inter-
   working and inter-operation across the big I Internet.






Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


   Such domains can be considered sandboxes in which new proposals can
   be deployed without the wider concerns of full-scale Internet
   deployment.

4.  New Network Services and Capabilities

   In order to support the use cases presented in Section 2, a number of
   new network services will be needed.  Likewise, a number of
   additional more general network capabilities will becoming
   increasingly important.  Neither services nor capabilities are
   sufficiently supported to the degree that will be required by
   Internet technology in use today.

   This section describes these services and capabilities at a high
   level.  It builds on a corresponding analysis that was conducted at
   ITU-T FG-NET2030; readers are referred Section 8 for further detail
   and, of course, to output produced by that group [NET2030SubG2] for a
   more complete explanation of their considerations.

4.1.  New Services

   [NET2030SubG2] identifies a number of network services that will be
   needed to support many of the new use cases.  These network services
   are divided into two categories:

   o  Foundational Services (FS) require which dedicated support on some
      or all network system nodes which are delivering the service
      between two or more application system nodes.

   o  Compound Services (CS) are composed of one or more foundational
      services, and are used to make network services easier to consume
      by certain applications or categories of use cases.  An example of
      a CS would be a Tactile Internet Service which consisted of
      tactile control channel and a haptic feedback channel.

   The following are a set of Foundational Services :

   o  High-Precision Communications Services: services with precisely
      defined service level objectives related to end-to-end latency.
      Three high-precision communications services that have so far been
      proposed:

      *  In-time Services: services that require end-to-end latency
         within a quantifiable limit.  This service is similar to the
         service provided by DetNet [RFC8655] but with more demanding
         applications which need to be satisfied over IP.





Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


      *  On-time Services: services require end-to-end-latency to be of
         an exact duration.

      *  Coordinated Services: Coordinated services require multiple
         interdependent flows to be delivered with the same end-to-end
         latency, regardless of any (potential additional) service level
         objective.

   o  Qualitative Communication Services: services that are able to
      suppress retransmission of less relevant portions of the payload
      in order to meet requirements on latency by applications that are
      tolerant to this.

   These are described in more detain in Section 8.1.

4.2.  New Capabilities

   [NET2030SubG2] identifies also a number of network capabilities that
   will become increasingly important going forward, in addition to the
   support for any particular services.
   A number of those need to be taken into consideration from the very
   beginning when thinking about how future data-planes need to evolve.
   These capabilities are described in more detail in Section 8.2.

   o  Manageability: Many of the services that need to be supported in
      the future will require advances in measurements and telemetry
      will be required in order to monitor and validate that promised
      service levels are indeed being delivered.  These will requires
      advanced instrumentation that is ideally built.

   o  High Programmability and Agile Life-cycle: Methods to provide
      operators need to be able to rapidly nd easily introduce new
      network services and adapt to new contexts and application needs.

   o  Security and Trustworthiness: New mechanisms are needed to
      authorize packets to enter the network from a host or from another
      network, and for them to then receive the required premium service
      that can operate.  This must operate without impacting the latency
      and MTU requirements.  This security mechanism has to protect both
      the network, the user data and the user privacy, but still expose
      sufficient information to the network that the correct premium
      service can be delivered.

   o  Resilience: Ultra-low-latency requirements and the huge increase
      of bandwidth demands of new services such as holographic type
      communication services make retransmission as a mechanism to
      recover data that was lost in transit increasingly less feasible.




Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


      Therefore, network resilience and avoidance of loss becomes more
      importance that it is for best effort networks.

   o  Privacy-Sensitive: There is a growing awareness of the lack of
      privacy in the Internet and its implications.
      New network services have to be sensitive to and comply with
      heightened user privacy expectations.
      At the same time, the need for privacy needs to be balanced with
      legitimate needs of network providers to operate and maintain
      their networks, which requires some visibility into what is
      happening on the network and how it is being used.  There are a
      variety of privacy-related requirements that ensue, such as:

      *  Anonymization

      *  Opaque User data

      *  Secured Storage

      *  Flow anonymization

   o  Accountability and Verifiability: Provision of the methods to
      account for an verify delivery of premium services.

5.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not request any allocations from IANA.

6.  Security Considerations

   Security is likely to be more significant with the applications being
   considered in this work.  With interest in tightly controlled access
   and latency, and contractual terms of business it is going to be
   necessary to have provable right of access to network resources.
   However heavyweight security is a contra-requirement to the light-
   weight process needed for power efficiency, fast forwarding and low
   latency.  Addressing this will require new insights into network
   security.

   Further information on the issue of providing security in latency
   sensitive environments can be found in [RFC9055] which are a sub-set
   of the considerations applicable to the new use cases considered in
   this text.








Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


7.  Appendix 1: Expanded Summary of Sub-G1 Use Cases

7.1.  Holographic-type communications

   This work projects that we will move towards a holographic society
   where users remotely interact with the physical world over the
   network.  In industry the digital twin model will enable the control
   of real objects through digital replicas.  Tele-presence will move to
   a new level with multi-site collaborations becoming much closer to
   physical meetings that can take place without the time and
   environmental cost of physical travel. 3D medical scans will become
   full 3D views rather than the body/ organ slices that too many of us
   are regrettably familiar with.  It is easy to imagine that this
   technology will take message delivery to a completely new level.

   Analysis of these concepts results in the conclusion that the
   following key network requirements are necessary:

   o  Ultra-high bandwidth (BPS class)

   o  Ultra-low latency (sub-ms)

   o  Multi-stream synchronization

   o  Enhanced network security

   o  Enhanced network reliability

   o  Edge computation

7.2.  Tactile Internet for Remote Operations

   Two cases were proposed as examples of this class of application.
   The first is remote industrial management which involves the real-
   time monitoring and control of industrial infrastructure operations.
   The second involves remote robotic surgery.  Remote robotic surgery
   within an operating suite complex is a standard practice today,
   however there are cases where it would be desirable to extend the
   range of this facility.

   Analysis of these concepts results in the conclusion that the
   following key network requirements are necessary:

   o  Ultra-high bandwidth (Tbps class)

   o  Ultra-low latency (sub-ms)

   o  Sensory input synchronization



Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


   o  Enhanced network security

   o  Enhanced network reliability

   o  Differentiated prioritization levels

7.3.  Space-Terrestrial Integrated Networks

   The game-changer in the area of space-terrestrial networking is the
   active deployment of huge clusters of cheap Low Earth Orbit (LEO)
   satellite constellations.  These LEOs have a number of properties
   that make them attractive, but arguably the most important is that
   they combine global coverage with low latency.  Studies [Handley]
   show that for distances over 3000Km latency via a LEO cluster is
   lower than the latency of terrestrial networks.  The up-link to a LEO
   cluster has to constantly change the point of attachment to the
   cluster as the satellites that form the cluster rapidly move across
   the sky relative to both the ground and relative to the satellites in
   other orbits.  In this scenario a number of access and connection
   models need to be considered.

   Analysis of these concepts results in the conclusion that the
   following key network requirements are necessary:

   o  A suitable addressing and routing mechanism to deal with a network
      that is constantly in flux.

   o  Sufficient bandwidth capacity on the satellite side to support the
      new application needs

   o  A suitable satellite admission system

   o  Edge computation and storage

7.4.  ManyNets

   There is evidence that there is a change in direction from the
   Internet as a single hetrogenious network back to a true Internet,
   that is an interconnection of a number of networks each optimized for
   its local use but capable of inter-working.

   For example, satellite and the terrestrial networks adopt different
   protocol architecture, which causes the difficulty to internetwork
   between them, yet the common goal is to provide access to the
   Internet.  Secondly, there will be a massive number of IoT-type
   devices connecting to the networks but the current interconnection
   schemes are too complex for these services.  There are further trends
   in 5G/B5G back-haul infrastructure, requiring diverse set of resource



Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


   guarantees in networks to support different industry verticals.  The
   collection of such special purpose networks, existing together and
   requiring interconnection among themselves are called ManyNets.

   Much closer the traditional Internet model is the move to edge
   computing services in which the client traffic is terminated at a
   compute node very close to access edge.  [DOT] Any resultant
   application traffic is a private matter between the application on
   the edge server and the servers it communicates with in the
   fulfillment of those needs.  Furthermore the application on the
   client may be using a tunnel to the edge compute server.  In such a
   network the protocol used inside the tunnel and the protocol used
   between the servers executing the service is a private matter.

   The ManyNets concept aims to support flexible methods to support the
   communication among such heterogeneous devices and their networks.

8.  Appendix 2: Expanded Summary of Sub-G2 New Network Capabilities and
    Services

   This appendix expands on the ITU-T Sub-G2 new network capabilities
   and services introduced in Section 4 It builds upon the analysis that
   was conducted at ITU-T FG-NET2030; readers are also referred to
   output produced by that group [NET2030SubG2] for more detail.

8.1.  New Services

   [NET2030SubG2] identifies a number of network services that will be
   needed to support many of the new use cases.  These network services
   are divided into two categories:

   o  Foundational Services (FS) require which dedicated support on some
      or all network system nodes which are delivering the service
      between two or more application system nodes.  FS cannot be
      decomposed into other services.  For example, IP packet routing
      and forwarding are is a (pre-existing) foundational network
      services.

   o  Compound Services (CS) are composed of one or more foundational
      services.  CS are "convenience services" that make network
      services easier to consume by certain applications or categories
      of use cases, but do not by themselves introduce new network
      services or requirements into network system nodes.  One example
      would be a Tactile Internet Service which consists of two
      communications channels, one for tactile control and the other for
      haptic feedback.





Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


   The following sections focus on Foundational Services only, as these
   are the ones that provide the basic building blocks with which the
   needs of all other services can be addressed, and which are the ones
   that potentially introduce new foundational requirements on network
   system nodes.

8.1.1.  High-Precision Communications Services

   High-Precision Communications Services refers to services that have
   precisely defined service level objectives related to end-to-end
   latency, in many cases coupled with stringent requirements regarding
   to packet loss and to bandwidth needs.  These requirements are in
   stark contrast to the best effort nature with related to existing
   network services.
   Of course, existing services often go to great lengths in order to
   optimize service levels and minimize latency, and QoS techniques aim
   to mitigate adverse effects of e.g. congestion by applying various
   forms of prioritization and admission control.  However,
   fundamentally all of these techniques still constitute patches that,
   while alleviating the symptoms of the underlying best-effort nature,
   do not address the underlying cause and fall short of providing
   service level guarantees that will not be just of a statistical
   nature but that will be met by design.

   The high-precision communications services that have been identified
   are described in the following three sub-sections.

8.1.2.  In-time Services

   In-time services require end-to-end latency within a quantifiable
   limit.  They specific a service level objective that is not to be
   exceeded, such as a maximum acceptable latency (putting a hard
   boundary on the worst case).  In-time services are required by
   applications and use cases that have clear bounds on acceptable
   latency, beyond which the Quality of Experience would deteriorate
   rapidly, rendering the application unusable.  An example concerns use
   cases that involve providing tactile feedback to users.  Creating an
   illusion of touch requires a control loop with a hard-bounded round-
   trip time that is determined by human / biological factors, beyond
   which the sense of touch is lost and with it the ability to e.g.
   operate a piece of machinery from remote.  Because many such use
   cases are mission-critical (such as tele-driving or remote surgery),
   in addition any loss or need for retransmission is unacceptable.

   This service is similar to the service provided by DetNet [RFC8655]
   but with more demanding applications which need to be satisfied over
   IP.




Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


8.1.3.  On-time Services

   On-time services require end-to-end-latency to be of an exact
   duration, with the possibility of a small quantifiable variance as
   can be specified either by an acceptable window around the targeted
   latency or by a lower bound in addition to an upper bound.  Examples
   of use cases include applications that require synchronization
   between multiple flows that have the same in-time latency target, or
   applications requiring fairness between multiple participants
   regardless of path lengths, such as gaming or market exchanges when
   required by regulatory authorities.  The concept of a lowest
   acceptable latency imposes new requirements on networks to
   potentially slow down packets by buffering or other means, which
   introduces challenges due to high data rates and the cost e.g. of
   associated memory.

8.1.4.  Coordinated Services

   Coordinated services require multiple interdependent flows to be
   delivered with the same end-to-end latency, regardless of any
   (potential additional) service level objective.  Use cases and
   applications include applications that require synchronization
   between multiple flows, such as use cases involving data streams from
   multiple cameras and telemetry sources.  In the special case where an
   on-time service is required, no additional service is needed (as
   synchronization occurs by virtue of the fact that each flow adheres
   to the same SLO), but coordination may also be required in cases
   where no specific end-to-end latency is required, as long as all
   flows are serviced with service levels that are identical.

8.1.5.  Qualitative Communication Services

   Qualitative communication services (QCS) are able to suppress
   retransmission of portions of the payload that are deemed less
   relevant when necessary in order to meet requirements on latency by
   applications that are tolerant of certain quality degradation.  They
   may involve the application of network coding schemes.

   QCS is a new service type that is needed to support AR/VR,
   holographic-type communications Industrial Internet and services such
   as autonomous driving.  This needs the support of a new network
   capability that is as yet to be developed.

8.2.  New Capabilities

   [NET2030SubG2] identifies also a number of network capabilities that
   will become increasingly important going forward, in addition to the
   support for any particular services.  These were introduced in



Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


   Section 4.2.  A number of these capabilities need to be taken into
   consideration from the very beginning when thinking about how future
   data-planes need to evolve.
   While many of those capabilities are well known, the past has shown
   that retrofitting data-planes with such capabilities after the fact
   and in a way that is adequate to the problem at hand is very hard.

8.2.1.  Manage ability

   Many of the services that need to be supported in the future have in
   common that they place very high demands on latency and precision
   that need to be supported at very high scales, coupled with
   expectations of zero packet loss and much higher availability than
   today.

   In order to assure in-time and on-time services with high levels of
   accuracy, advances in measurements and telemetry will be required in
   order to monitor and validate that promised service levels are indeed
   being delivered.  This requires advanced instrumentation that is
   ideally built-in all the way to the protocol level.

   For example, the ability to identify and automatically eliminate
   potential sources of service-level degradations and fluctuations will
   become of increasing importance.  This requires the ability to
   generate corresponding telemetry data and the ability to observe the
   performance of packets as they traverse the network.  Some of the
   challenges that need to be addressed include the very high volume of
   data that gets generated and needs to be assessed, and the effects of
   the collection itself on performance.  In general, greater emphasis
   will need to be placed on the ability to monitor, observe, and
   validate packet performance and behavior than is the case today.  For
   seamless support, these capabilities will be inherently integrated
   with the forwarding function itself, for example delivered together
   with the packets.  Today's solution approach, IOAM, is a promising
   technology currently that points in the right direction, and that
   also highlights some of the challenges - from MTU considerations due
   to extending packet sizes to the ability to customize and obtain the
   "right" data.  It will therefore be not sufficient by itself.  Data
   to be generated from the network will need to be "smarter", i.e. more
   insightful and action-able.  This will require additional abilities
   to process data "on-device".  In additional, the need for new
   management functions may arise, such as functions that allow to
   validate adherence with agreed-upon service levels for a flow as a
   whole, and to prevent data or privacy leakage as well as provide
   evidence for the possibility or absence of such leakage.






Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


8.2.2.  High Programmability and Agile Life-cycle

   Operators need to be able to rapidly introduce new network services
   and adapt to new contexts and application needs.  This will require
   advances in network programmability.  Today's model of vendor-defined
   (supporting service features via new firmware or hardware-based
   networking features) or operator-defined (supporting service features
   via programmable software-defined networking (SDN) controllers,
   virtualized network functions (VNF) and Network Function
   Virtualization (NFV), and service function chaining (SFC) will no
   longer be sufficient.

   Software Defined Networking and Network Function Virtualization (NFV)
   have opened up the possibility to accelerate development life-cycles
   and enable network providers to develop new networking features on
   their own if needed.  Segment Routing is being evolved for that
   purpose as well.  Furthermore, network slicing promises more agility
   in the introduction of new network services.  However, the complexity
   of the associated controller software results in its own challenges
   with software development cycles that, while more agile than life-
   cycles before, are still prohibitive and that can only be undertaken
   by network providers, not by their customers.  Rapid customization of
   networking services for specific needs or adaptation to unique
   deployments are out of reach for network provider customers.  What is
   lacking is the ability for applications to rapidly introduce and
   customize novel behavior at the network flow level, without need to
   introduce application-level over-the-top (OTT) overlays.  Such a
   capability would be analogous to server-less computing that is
   revolutionizing cloud services today.  In addition, it should be
   noted that softwarized networks are built on relatively stable (and
   slowly evolving) underlying physical commodity hardware network
   infrastructure.  This is insufficient to deliver on new high-
   precision network services, which require hardware advances at many
   levels to provide programmable flow and QoS behavior at line rate,
   affecting everything from queuing and scheduling to packet processing
   pipelines.

   The evolution of forwarding planes should allow development life-
   cycles that are much more agile than today and move from "Dev Ops" to
   "Flow Ops" (i.e. dynamic programmability of networks at the flow
   level).
   This requires support of novel network and data-plane programming
   models which can possibly be delivered and effected via the
   forwarding plane itself.







Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                [Page 25]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


8.2.3.  Security

   The possibility of security threats increases with complexity of
   networks, the potential ramifications of attacks are growing more
   serious with increasing mission-criticality of networking services
   and applications.
   The forwarding plane plays a large role in the ability to thwart
   attacks.
   For example, the fact that source addresses are not authenticated in
   existing IP is at the root of a wide range security problems from
   phishing and fraudulent impersonation designed to compromise and
   steal user assets to amplification attacks designed to bring down
   services.
   Going forward, it is absolutely critical, then, to minimize the
   attack surface of the forwarding plane as it evolves.

   A key security aspects needed from the network point of view includes
   to verify if the packet is authorized to enter into the network and
   if it is sufficiently integrity protected.  However, when packets are
   emitted from the host for these new communication services, the
   network portion of the packet (e.g., an extension header or an
   overlay header) should not be encrypted because network nodes may
   need to interpret the header and provide the desired service.
   Lack of encryption and integrity validation, of course, would at the
   same time increase the threat surface and open up the possibility for
   attacks.
   Mechanisms for authorization and integrity protection must be
   developed to meet the line rate performance as services delivered can
   be time sensitive.  At the same time, the size of packets should not
   be significantly increased to avoid negative impact on utilization
   and overhead tax.
   This limits the options for additional security collateral that can
   be included with packets.

   Homomorphic forms of encryption may need to be devised in which
   network operations can be performed in privacy-preserving manner on
   encrypted packet headers and tunneled packets without exposing any of
   their contents.

   Another dimension to security arises when the end to end service that
   needs to be delivered crosses the administrative boundary of the
   originating host.  For those cases, additional mechanisms need to be
   specified to sufficiently ensure the privacy and confidentiality of
   the network layer information.  While there are lot of avenues to
   tackle these issues and some aspects are being looked into by various
   Standards Development Organizations, e.g.  IRTF PANRG on Path-Aware
   Networking, comprehensive solutions are yet to be worked out.




Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                [Page 26]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


   Any mechanisms specified for authorization, integrity protection, and
   network header confidentiality should be orthogonal to the transport
   layer and above transport layer security mechanisms set in place by
   the end host/user.  Regardless of whether or not the latest security
   advances in transport and layers above (e.g.  TLS1.3, QUIC or HTTPSx)
   are applied on the payload, network nodes should not have to act on
   this information to deliver new services to avoid layer violations.

8.2.4.  Trustworthiness

   As future network services are deployed, deployment scenarios will
   include cases in which packets need to traverse trust boundaries
   which are under different administrative domains.  As the forwarding
   plane evolves, it should do so in such a way that trustworthiness of
   packets is maintained - i.e. integrity of data is protected,
   tampering with packet meta-data (such as source authentication or
   service level telemetry) would be evident, and privacy of users is
   guarded.

8.2.5.  Resilience

   Ultra-low-latency requirements and the huge increase of bandwidth
   demands of new services such as holographic type communication
   services make retransmission as a mechanism to recover data that was
   lost in transit increasingly less feasible.  Therefore, network
   resilience and avoidance of loss becomes of paramount importance.

   There are many methods for providing network resilience.  This
   includes providing redundancy and diversity of both physical (e.g.
   ports, routers, line cards) and logical (e.g. shapers, policers,
   classifiers) entities.  It also includes the use of protocols that
   provide quick re-convergence and maintain high availability of
   existing connections after a failure event occurs in the network.
   Other techniques include packet replication or network coding and
   error correction techniques to overcome packet loss.
   As the forwarding plane evolves, mechanisms to provide network
   resilience should be inherently supported.

8.2.6.  Privacy-Sensitive

   Today, there is a growing awareness of the lack of privacy in the
   Internet and its implications.
   New network services have to be sensitive to and comply with
   heightened user privacy expectations.
   At the same time, the need for privacy needs to be balanced with
   legitimate needs of network providers to operate and maintain their
   networks, which requires some visibility into what is happening on
   the network and how it is being used.



Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                [Page 27]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


   Likewise, mechanisms to provide privacy must be provided in such a
   way to not compromise security, such as allowing anonymous attackers
   to prey on other users.

   An evolved forwarding plane must provide mechanisms that ensure users
   privacy by design and prevent illegitimate exposing of personally-
   identifiable information (PII), while preventing abuse of those
   mechanisms by attack exploits and while affording network providers
   with legitimate visibility into use of their network and services.

   There are a variety of privacy-related requirements that ensue, such
   as:

   o  Anonymization: To prevent tracking by eavesdropper by packet
      capture, visible information in packets such as source and
      destination addresses should be difficult (ideally: impossible) to
      directly correlate to PII.

   o  Opaque User data: Networks must not rely on the user data to
      provide or improve the service.  However, network providers may
      use specific service-visible data in packets.

   o  Secured Storage: Some services may require the network to slow
      down the delivery of the packets, implying the possibility that
      packets are temporarily buffered on the router.  The storage of
      those packets must be secured and prevented from extraction for
      deep inspection or analysis.

   o  Flow anonymization: Flows of information should be randomized in a
      dynamic manner so that it is difficult through traffic analysis to
      deduce patterns and identify the type of traffic.

   Potential mechanisms to consider include (but are not limited to)
   avoiding the need for long-lived addresses (to prevent trackablity)
   and the use of homomorphic encryption for packet headers and tunneled
   packets (in addition to traditional payload encryption) that allow to
   perform network operations in privacy-preserving manner without
   exposing meta-data carried in headers.

8.2.7.  Accountability and Verifiability

   Many new services demand guarantees instead of being accepting of
   "best effort".
   As a result, today's "best effort" accounting may no longer be
   sufficient.

   Today's accounting technology largely relies on interface statistics
   and flow records.



Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                [Page 28]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


   Those statistics and records may not be entirely accurate.
   For example, in many cases their generation involves sampling and is
   thus subject to sampling inaccuracies.
   In addition, this data largely accounts for volume but not so much
   for actual service levels (e.g. latencies, let alone coordination
   across flows) that are delivered.
   Service level measurements can be used to complement other statistics
   but come with significant overhead and also have various limitations,
   from sampling to the consumption of network and edge node processing
   bandwidth.
   Techniques that rely on passive measurements are infeasible in many
   network deployments and hampered by encryption as well as issues
   relating to privacy.

   Guarantees demand their price.  This makes it increasingly important
   both for providers and users of services to be able to validate that
   promised service levels were delivered on.
   For example, proof of service delivery (including proof of service
   level delivery) may need to be provided to account and charge for
   network services.
   This will require advances in accounting technology that should be
   considered as forwarding technology evolves, possibly providing
   accounting as a function that is intrinsically coupled with
   forwarding itself.

9.  Informative References

   [DOT]      Huston, G., "The Death of Transit and Beyond", n.d.,
              <https://hknog.net/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/01_GeoffHust
              on_TheDeath_of_Transit_and_Beyond.pdf>.

   [FGNETWORK2030]
              "Focus Group on Technologies for Network 2030", n.d.,
              <https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/focusgroups/net2030/Pages/
              default.aspx>.

   [Handley]  Handley, M., "Delay is Not an Option: Low Latency Routing
              in Space", n.d.,
              <http://nrg.cs.ucl.ac.uk/mjh/starlink-draft.pdf>.

   [I-D.bryant-arch-fwd-layer-ps]
              Bryant, S., Chunduri, U., Eckert, T., and A. Clemm,
              "Forwarding Layer Problem Statement", draft-bryant-arch-
              fwd-layer-ps-03 (work in progress), June 2021.







Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                [Page 29]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


   [I-D.ietf-teas-enhanced-vpn]
              Dong, J., Bryant, S., Li, Z., Miyasaka, T., and Y. Lee, "A
              Framework for Enhanced Virtual Private Network (VPN+)
              Services", draft-ietf-teas-enhanced-vpn-09 (work in
              progress), October 2021.

   [NET2030SubG1]
              ITU-T FGNet2030, "FG NET-2030 Sub-G1 Representative use
              cases and key network requirements for Network 2030",
              January 2021,
              <http://handle.itu.int/11.1002/pub/815125f5-en>.

   [NET2030SubG2]
              ITU-T FGNET2030, "New Services and Capabilities for
              Network 2030: Description, Technical Gap and Performance
              Target Analysis", October 2019, <https://www.itu.int/en/
              ITU-T/focusgroups/net2030/Documents/
              Deliverable_NET2030.pdf>.

   [RFC8578]  Grossman, E., Ed., "Deterministic Networking Use Cases",
              RFC 8578, DOI 10.17487/RFC8578, May 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8578>.

   [RFC8655]  Finn, N., Thubert, P., Varga, B., and J. Farkas,
              "Deterministic Networking Architecture", RFC 8655,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8655, October 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8655>.

   [RFC8799]  Carpenter, B. and B. Liu, "Limited Domains and Internet
              Protocols", RFC 8799, DOI 10.17487/RFC8799, July 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8799>.

   [RFC9055]  Grossman, E., Ed., Mizrahi, T., and A. Hacker,
              "Deterministic Networking (DetNet) Security
              Considerations", RFC 9055, DOI 10.17487/RFC9055, June
              2021, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9055>.

   [SysArch5G]
              "System architecture for the 5G System (5GS)", n.d.,
              <https://portal.3gpp.org/desktopmodules/Specifications/
              SpecificationDetails.aspx?specificationId=3144>.

   [UC]       ITU-T FGNET2030, "Use Cases and Requirements for Network
              2030 Summary report "Representative use cases and key
              network requirements for Network 2030"", January 2020,
              <https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-
              T/focusgroups/net2030/Documents/Technical_Report.pdf>.




Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                [Page 30]

Internet-Draft                   FWD PS                     January 2022


   [WP]       "Network 2030 - A Blueprint of Technology, Applications,
              and Market Drivers towards the Year 2030 and Beyond, a
              White Paper on Network 2030, ITU-T", May 2019,
              <https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-
              T/focusgroups/net2030/Documents/White_Paper.pdf>.

Authors' Addresses

   Stewart Bryant
   University of Surrey 5/6GIC

   Email: sb@stewartbryant.com


   Uma Chunduri
   Intel

   Email: umac.ietf@gmail.com


   Toerless Eckert
   Futurewei Technologies Inc.

   Email: tte@cs.fau.de


   Alexander Clemm
   Futurewei Technologies Inc.

   Email: ludwig@clemm.org





















Bryant, et al.            Expires July 28, 2022                [Page 31]
