
MMUSIC                                                          J. Luoma
Internet-Draft                                                     Nokia
Expires: June 8, 2004                                       J. Peltotalo
                                                            S. Peltotalo
                                        Tampere University of Technology
                                                        December 9, 2003


   A Metadata Framework for Internet Media Guides: Metadata Envelope
              draft-luoma-mmusic-img-metadata-envelope-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 8, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document defines the transfer envelope for Internet Media Guides
   (IMGs). IMG metadata describes files, resources and multimedia
   programs available for streaming or downloading via multicast or
   unicast. IMG metadata is encapsulated into, or associated with, an
   IMG transfer envelope before actual transport. The transfer envelope
   is a structure providing independence between IMG transport protocols
   and different metadata formats. The IMG transfer envelope may be
   structured for example as a wrapper based on the Extensible Markup
   Language (XML) syntax.




Luoma, et al.             Expires June 8, 2004                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 December 2003


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conventions Used in This Document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Use of IMG Transfer Envelope with IMG Operations . . . . . . .  9
   4.1 Initial Discovery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.2 Update Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.3 Versioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.  Format of the IMG Transfer Envelope  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   7.  Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   A.  XML Schema for the IMG Transfer Envelope . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   B.  Example of an IMG Transfer Envelope  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 20

































Luoma, et al.             Expires June 8, 2004                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 December 2003


1. Introduction

   This document defines the format and use of Internet Media Guide
   (IMG) transfer envelope. The scope and background of the work on
   Internet Media Guides have been described in the IMG requirements [2]
   and IMG framework [3] specifications.

   The purpose of the IMG metadata is to provide machine- and
   human-readable information describing the files, resources and
   multimedia programs available for streaming or downloading via
   multicast or unicast. IMG metadata is encapsulated into an IMG
   transfer envelope before it is passed to an IMG transport protocol,
   such as MUPPET [4]. The purpose of the transfer envelope is to
   provide independence of metadata formats from transport protocols,
   and to enable versioning, updating and expiring of transmitted
   metadata. The IMG transfer envelope may be structured for example as
   a wrapper based on the Extensible Markup Language (XML) syntax.


































Luoma, et al.             Expires June 8, 2004                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 December 2003


2. Conventions Used in This Document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].














































Luoma, et al.             Expires June 8, 2004                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 December 2003


3. Terminology

      Complete IMG Description

         Provides a complete syntax and semantics to describe a set of
         metadata, which does not need any additional information from
         other IMG Descriptions. It may contain either a full IMG or a
         subset thereof.

      Complete Transfer

         Transfer of the whole set of metadata comprising an IMG block.

      Delta IMG Description

         Provides an update to a Complete IMG Description, defining the
         difference from the Complete IMG Description in question. This
         description may be used to reduce network resource usage for
         instance when small and frequent changes occur to Complete IMG
         Description. Thus, this description itself cannot represent
         complete metadata set until it is combined with the
         corresponding Complete IMG Description.

      Delta Transfer

         Transfer of Delta IMG Description(s) to update an IMG block.

      Full IMG

         Represents a subset/whole of the sender's IMG database
         delivered within the scope of one IMG transport session. A
         sender will generally deliver only a subset of metadata from
         its whole database of IMG metadata as a full IMG, but a full
         IMG could also represent the whole IMG database of a particular
         sender. Different subsets of the sender's IMG database may be
         provided within different transport sessions; similarly, the
         same subset may be provided in more than one transport session.

      Internet Media Guide (IMG)

         An IMG is a generic term to describe the formation, delivery
         and use of IMG metadata. The definition of the IMG is
         intentionally left imprecise.

      IMG ANNOUNCE

         Unsolicited delivery of IMG metadata to an IMG receiver.
         References to parts of the IMG metadata may also be included,



Luoma, et al.             Expires June 8, 2004                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 December 2003


         instead of the actual metadata.

      IMG Block

         IMG block consists of one or more IMG Descriptions.

      IMG Description

         A collection of IMG metadata. There are the following subtypes
         of IMG Descriptions: Complete IMG Description, Delta IMG
         Description and IMG Pointer.

      IMG Element

         The smallest atomic element of IMG metadata that can be
         transmitted separately and referenced individually from other
         IMG elements.

      IMG Metadata

         A set of metadata consisting of one or more IMG elements. IMG
         metadata describes the features of multimedia content used to
         enable selection of and access to media sessions containing
         content. For example, metadata may consist of the URI, title,
         airtime, bandwidth needed, file size, text summary, genre, and
         access restrictions.

      IMG NOTIFY

         Delivery of an IMG update notification in response to an IMG
         SUBSCRIBE. Identifies the parts of the IMG metadata that have
         changed without delivering the updated IMG metadata.

      IMG Operation

         An atomic process for the IMG transport protocol to deliver IMG
         metadata or control IMG sender(s) or IMG receiver(s).

      IMG Pointer

         A reference, such as URI, that the receiver is able to address
         specific metadata with. An IMG pointer may be used to
         separately obtain IMG elements, or perform another IMG
         management function such as data expiry and erasure.

      IMG Proxy

         IMG proxy is a combined IMG receiver and IMG sender that can



Luoma, et al.             Expires June 8, 2004                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 December 2003


         filter from one or more IMG senders and output to one or more
         IMG transport sessions. Logically a proxy fits in between IMG
         senders and receivers. A proxy may also cache IMG metadata and
         may provide its own bandwidth control or congestion control
         schemes on the output.

      IMG QUERY

         Request to receive a delivery of IMG metadata.

      IMG Receiver

         A logical entity that receives media guides from an IMG sender,
         analogous to a client.

      IMG RESOLVE

         Delivery of IMG metadata in response to an IMG QUERY.
         References to parts of the IMG metadata may also be included,
         instead of the actual metadata.

      IMG Sender

         A logical entity that delivers IMG metadata to one or more IMG
         receivers, analogous to a server. A sender shall provide
         bandwidth control or congestion control schemes on the output.
         A sender can additionally be a receiver - see IMG transceiver.

      IMG SUBSCRIBE

         A request for notifications of changes in IMG metadata updates,
         from a receiver to a sender or proxy.

      IMG Transceiver

         A combination of an IMG receiver and sender. An IMG proxy is an
         example of an IMG transceiver.

      IMG Transport Protocol

         A protocol that transports IMG metadata from IMG sender to IMG
         receiver(s).

      IMG Transport Session

         An association between an IMG sender and one or more IMG
         receivers within the scope of an IMG transport protocol. An IMG
         transport session involves a series of IMG transport protocol



Luoma, et al.             Expires June 8, 2004                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 December 2003


         interactions that provide delivery of IMG metadata from the
         sender to the receiver(s).

      IMG Update Notification

         An IMG Description containing one or more IMG Pointers.













































Luoma, et al.             Expires June 8, 2004                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 December 2003


4. Use of IMG Transfer Envelope with IMG Operations

   IMG transfer envelope is used with the following logical IMG
   operations: IMG ANNOUNCE, IMG NOTIFY and IMG RESOLVE. The following
   sections describe the use of IMG transfer envelope to support both
   initial and update discovery of IMG.

4.1 Initial Discovery

   An IMG sender SHOULD make its full IMG available to IMG receivers
   using IMG ANNOUNCE and/or IMG RESOLVE. An IMG receiver may need to
   receive the full IMG when the terminal has just started receiving a
   particular IMG, or when its cached copy of the metadata cannot be
   synchronized with IMG updates or it has been outdated.

   The IMG sender should split its complete IMG to IMG blocks, each
   comprising one or more IMG elements. An IMG block is a unit for IMG
   transport protocols that can be uniquely identified and versioned.
   The complete transfer of an IMG block means the transfer of all the
   IMG metadata within an IMG block. The IMG receiver MUST maintain the
   version numbers of complete transfers for duplicate avoidance and
   update discovery. How the IMG receiver knows when it has received all
   the IMG blocks comprising a full IMG is out of scope of this
   document.

4.2 Update Discovery

   Once the IMG receiver has received and stored sufficient IMG metadata
   in its local database, it may try to detect any changes in the
   received IMG information. The following types of IMG metadata may be
   monitored for changes:

   1.  A sender's complete transfers (IMG ANNOUNCE or IMG RESOLVE)

   2.  A sender's delta transfers (IMG ANNOUNCE or IMG RESOLVE)

   3.  A sender's IMG update notifications (IMG NOTIFY, IMG ANNOUNCE or
       IMG RESOLVE)

   The receiver will learn of any changes in the IMG metadata by
   continuing to receive the complete transfers, for example by
   periodically using an IMG RESOLVE by receiving transmissions of the
   metadata via IMG ANNOUNCE. However, the use of delta transfers and/or
   IMG update notifications may provide more efficient means for update
   discovery. Delta transfer means transferring only the parts of the
   IMG metadata that have changed from the last version of the complete
   transfer, whereas sending an IMG update notification means
   transferring IMG Pointers identifying the parts of the IMG metadata



Luoma, et al.             Expires June 8, 2004                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 December 2003


   that have changed from the last version of the complete transfer.

   An IMG sender SHOULD provide IMG metadata delta transfers via IMG
   ANNOUNCE, IMG RESOLVE or both, in addition to complete transfers.
   After receiving sufficient IMG metadata, an IMG receiver may continue
   receiving only delta transfers, if available, instead of complete
   transfers. Each delta transfer consists of the IMG elements that have
   recently changed. The definition of 'recently changed metadata' shall
   be determined by the sender (this may be dependent on time, data size
   and/or number of transmissions.

   After each delta transfer, the IMG receiver MAY need to verify if it
   has missed an earlier delta transfer(s) to the particular IMG block;
   this can be accomplished by checking the majorVersion and
   minorVersion fields in the IMG transfer envelope. It is recommended
   that the IMG receiver attempts to recover the missing update by
   verifying the current versions of the relevant metadata (for example,
   by obtaining the complete transfer again, or by querying the versions
   of the locally cached IMG metadata).

   In addition to sending complete and delta transfers, an IMG sender
   MAY send IMG update notifications (IMG Pointers). These IMG update
   notifications consist of references to IMG elements that have changed
   recently (e.g., since the previous complete transfer). After
   receiving an IMG update notification and discovering the parts of IMG
   that have changed, an IMG receiver MAY obtain the update from
   complete or delta transfers using either IMG ANNOUNCE or IMG QUERY.

4.3 Versioning

   The version of a complete transfer is identified by the field
   majorVersion in the IMG transfer envelope. The version of a delta
   transfer or an IMG update notification is identified by the
   combination of the fields majorVersion and minorVersion in the IMG
   transfer envelope. In the case of delta transfer or IMG update
   notification, the field majorVersion identifies the version of the
   complete transfer that the delta transfer / IMG update notification
   pertains to.













Luoma, et al.             Expires June 8, 2004                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 December 2003


5. Format of the IMG Transfer Envelope

   An IMG block must be encapsulated into or associated with an IMG
   transfer envelope before it is passed to an IMG transport protocol
   for delivery. The transfer envelope enables each IMG block to be
   uniquely identified and versioned in a uniform way independent of the
   particular IMG transport protocol used for delivery. The same
   envelope format is used for the logical operations IMG ANNOUNCE, IMG
   NOTIFY and IMG RESOLVE.

   The following attributes can be associated with the IMG payload. The
   attributes are mandatory to include unless marked as optional.

   o  metadataID: A URI providing a unique identifier for the IMG block.

   o  majorVersion: Current version number of the complete transfer of
      IMG block. The version number is initially zero, and is increased
      by one whenever the complete transfer is changed.

   o  minorVersion (optional): Current version number of the delta
      transfer of IMG block. This field MUST be present for delta
      transfers and IMG update notifications (IMG Pointers), and MUST
      NOT be present for complete transfers. The value of this field is
      initially zero, and is increased by one whenever the delta
      transfer is changed. An updated delta transfer SHOULD be sent as
      soon as there has been a change in the contents of an IMG block.

   o  lastDelta: The value of "true" in this boolean field is used to
      inform receivers that there will be no more updates to delta
      transfers or IMG update notifications pertaining to the current
      version of the complete transfer; the version of the complete
      transfer will be updated instead, and any subsequent delta
      transfers or IMG update notifications will pertain to the next
      version of the complete transfer. Receivers of delta transfers are
      able to reconstruct the contents of the next complete transfer by
      updating the current version of a complete transfer with a delta
      transfer that has the same value of majorVersion and a value of
      "true" in the lastDelta flag.

   o  validFrom: The date and time from which the metadata is valid.

   o  validUntil: The date and time when the metadata expires.

   It shall be possible to provide signing and encryption to the IMG
   transfer envelope, limiting the capability of any intermediaries
   between the original IMG sender and the IMG receiver to read and
   modify IMG transfer envelope fields and the IMG block associated with
   it. Signing, encryption or both can be applied to the whole transfer



Luoma, et al.             Expires June 8, 2004                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 December 2003


   envelope or just to parts of it.

   An XML schema for the IMG transfer envelope is defined in Appendix A,
   providing a wrapper that can be used for encapsulating an IMG block
   before transmission. Appendix B provides a simple example of using
   this wrapper for IMG metadata.













































Luoma, et al.             Expires June 8, 2004                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 December 2003


6. Security Considerations

   IMG receivers should only trust IMG metadata received from a trusted
   source, with data integrity and authentication of the original IMG
   sender provided at IMG metadata level or by IMG transport. IMG
   receivers also should not trust IMG metadata modified by an IMG
   transceiver, unless the IMG transceiver is trusted and the integrity
   and authenticity of the changes can be similarly verified. However,
   to operate in a typical network environment lacking infrastructure
   for key distribution and trust verification, IMG receivers may also
   be configured to accept untrusted IMG metadata.

   There may also be need to provide access control to the content
   described by the IMG or to protect the confidentiality of an
   individual user requesting a particular subset of an IMG. Such
   privacy requirements are met by the use of encryption at IMG metadata
   level or by IMG transport.


































Luoma, et al.             Expires June 8, 2004                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 December 2003


7. Contributors

   Rod Walsh
   Nokia Research Center
   P.O. Box 100 (Visiokatu 1)
   FIN-33721 Tampere
   Finland
   EMail: rod.walsh@nokia.com

   Toni Paila
   Nokia Ventures Organization
   P.O. Box 209 (Itamerenkatu 11-13)
   FIN-00181 Helsinki
   Finland
   EMail: toni.paila@nokia.com




































Luoma, et al.             Expires June 8, 2004                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 December 2003


Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", RFC 2119, BCD 14, March 1997.

   [2]  Nomura, Y., Walsh, R., Luoma, J., Ott, J. and H. Schulzrinne,
        "Protocol Requirements for Internet Media Guides",
        draft-ietf-mmusic-img-req-01 (work in progress), December 2003.

   [3]  Nomura, Y., Walsh, R., Luoma, J., Asaeda, H. and H. Schulzrinne,
        "A Framework for the Usage of Internet Media Guides",
        draft-ietf-mmusic-img-framework-01 (work in progress), December
        2003.






































Luoma, et al.             Expires June 8, 2004                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 December 2003


Informative References

   [4]  Luoma, J., "MUPPET: Internet Media Guide Unidirectional
        Point-to-Multipoint Transport Protocol",
        draft-luoma-mmusic-img-muppet-03 (work in progress), October
        2003.

   [5]  Handley, M. and V. Jacobson, "SDP: Session Description
        Protocol", RFC 2327, April 1998.

   [6]  Ott, J., Bormann, C. and D. Kutscher, "Session Description and
        Capability Negotiation", draft-ietf-mmusic-sdpng-07 (work in
        progress), October 2003.


Authors' Addresses

   Juha-Pekka Luoma
   Nokia
   P.O. Box 100 (Visiokatu 1)
   Tampere  FIN-33721
   Finland

   EMail: juha-pekka.luoma@nokia.com


   Jani Peltotalo
   Tampere University of Technology
   P.O. Box 553 (Korkeakoulunkatu 1)
   Tampere  FIN-33101
   Finland

   EMail: jani.peltotalo@tut.fi


   Sami Peltotalo
   Tampere University of Technology
   P.O. Box 553 (Korkeakoulunkatu 1)
   Tampere  FIN-33101
   Finland

   EMail: sami.peltotalo@tut.fi









Luoma, et al.             Expires June 8, 2004                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 December 2003


Appendix A. XML Schema for the IMG Transfer Envelope

   Different formats can be provided for conveying the IMG transfer
   envelope parameters specified in Section 5. Figure 1 provides a
   non-normative example of an XML schema specifying the IMG transfer
   envelope syntax.

   	  <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
   	  <xs:schema xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"
   	    elementFormDefault="qualified"
   	    attributeFormDefault="unqualified">
   	  <xs:element name="imgTransferEnvelope">
   	    <xs:complexType>
   	      <xs:choice>
   	        <xs:element name="asciiPayload">
   	          <xs:complexType>
   	            <xs:attribute name="type"
   	              type="xs:string"
   	              use="required"/>
   	            <xs:string/>
   	          </xs:complexType>
   	        </xs:element>
   	        <xs:element name="xmlPayload">
   	          <xs:complexType>
   	            <xs:sequence>
   	              <xs:any maxOccurs="unbounded"
   	                processContents="skip"/>
   	            </xs:sequence>
   	          </xs:complexType>
   	        </xs:element>
   	      </xs:choice>
   	      <xs:attribute name="metadataID"
   	        type="xs:anyURI"
   	        use="required"/>
   	      <xs:attribute name="majorVersion"
   	        type="xs:positiveInteger"
   	        use="required"/>
   	      <xs:attribute name="minorVersion"
   	        type="xs:positiveInteger"
   	        use="optional"/>
   	      <xs:attribute name="lastDelta"
   	        type="xs:boolean"
   	        default="false"
   	        use="optional"/>
   	      <xs:attribute name="validFrom"
   	        type="xs:dateTime"
   	        use="optional"/>
   	      <xs:attribute name="validUntil"



Luoma, et al.             Expires June 8, 2004                 [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 December 2003


   	        type="xs:dateTime"
   	        use="required"/>
   	      <xs:anyAttribute processContents="skip"/>
   	    </xs:complexType>
   	  </xs:element>
   	  </xs:schema>

         Figure 1: The XML Schema of the IMG Transfer Envelope

   The fields of the IMG transfer envelope (represented as attributes in
   the XML schema) are used as described in Section 5, with the
   following additional notes.

   o  lastDelta (optional): if this attribute is not present, the value
      of "false" is assumed.

   The following additional fields in the XML schema enable either XML
   or plain ASCII payload to be used in the envelope payload.

   o  xmlPayload: The metadata payload in an XML based textual format.
      Any number of XML metadata formats for this field may be supported
      by senders and receivers, for example Session Description and
      Capability Negotiation (SDPng) [6]. Only well-formed XML must be
      used in this field. The XML payload MUST contain a reference to a
      valid XML schema, enabling receivers to determine the format of
      the XML payload.

   o  asciiPayload: The metadata payload in a textual, non-XML format.
      The MIME content type of the textual payload (for example,
      "application/sdp" referring to the Session Description Protocol
      [5] format) MUST be indicated using the "type" attribute.




















Luoma, et al.             Expires June 8, 2004                 [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 December 2003


Appendix B. Example of an IMG Transfer Envelope

   Figure 2 shows a non-normative example of a Complete IMG Description
   encapsulated within an IMG transfer envelope. In this example, the
   format defined in Appendix A is used for the IMG transfer envelope,
   and the SDP syntax [5] is used for the IMG Description.

   	  <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
   	  <imgTransferEnvelope
   	    xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
   	    xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="envelope.xsd"
   	    metadataID="urn:uuid:f81d4fae-7dec-11d0-a765-00a0c91e6bf6"
   	    majorVersion="1"
   	    minorVersion="4"
   	    validFrom="2003-12-17T09:30:47-05:00"
   	    validUntil="2003-12-17T09:30:47-05:00">
   	    <asciiPayload type="application/sdp">
   v=0
   o=mhandley 2890844526 2890842807 IN IP4 126.16.64.4
   s=SDP Seminar
   i=A Seminar on the session description protocol
   u=http://www.cs.ucl.ac.uk/staff/M.Handley/sdp.03.ps
   e=mjh@isi.edu (Mark Handley)
   c=IN IP4 224.2.17.12/127
   t=2873397496 2873404696
   a=recvonly
   m=audio 49170 RTP/AVP 0
   m=video 51372 RTP/AVP 31
   m=application 32416 udp wb
   a=orient:portrait
   	    </asciiPayload>
   	  </imgTransferEnvelope>

             Figure 2: Example of an IMG transfer envelope

















Luoma, et al.             Expires June 8, 2004                 [Page 19]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 December 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Luoma, et al.             Expires June 8, 2004                 [Page 20]

Internet-Draft                IMG Metadata                 December 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Luoma, et al.             Expires June 8, 2004                 [Page 21]


