HTTP                                                          Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
Internet-Draft                                                  Ex-Sun Employee
Intended status: Standards Track                                        Individual
Expires: Jan 26, 2019                                                 Jul 26, 2018
                                                                
                                                          

                 Need for an httpi intelligent service
                         draft-pradeepkumarxplorer-httpi-02

Abstract

    This document describes the need for an httpi user interface switch to
    be used for intelligent surfing of information.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on Jan 16,2019.

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Jan 26, 2019             [Page 1]
Internet-Draft    Need for an httpi intelligent service   Jul 26, 2018

Copyright Notice

Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents
   1. Introduction ............................................... 2
   2. Background ..................................................2
   3. General Information of the service ..........................3
   4. Authors Addresses ...........................................3
   5. Acknowledgements ............................................3

1. Introduction

    To implement an httpi:// service in browser

2. Background
     Right now URL's are hardcoded. I propose an httpi:// service
     that would allow dynamic links that can be updated by the httpi
     service in the text that you are viewing. The content you are viewing using 
     the httpi:// service in your browser can show links suggested by the WWW intelligence
     or Artificial intelligence that you can traverse or navigate.

	This can be also a Menu choice in the Browser to Enable Intelligent browsing.
     See the text http://www.pradeepkumarxplorer.com/YogaSequence.txt. It is something
    i typed in and does not have any links.if i type in httpi://www.pradeepkumarxplorer.com/YogaSequence.txt
    The WWW intelligence can chose for you and
    show navigatable links in all the lines of this text.This is different from browser 
    extensions that are numerous to Create links for your text helping you author HTML
    or extensions that allow you to Highlight and then allowing you to Re Search using
    the highlighted text. The idea is to have a network service httpi that takes in a
    text/xml and return you a text/xml with links.So a request to
    httpi://www.pradeepkumarxplorer.com/YogaSequence.txt
    would fetch that file which is then tunneled or piped into httpi service whose output
    is rendered into the browser. If its .php file, the output of the server side script goes to
    httpi service. The browser extensions are not easy to use for thin clients
    like android or other tablets, its not easy to highlight but easy to click on tablets,
    the browser extensions spawns more processes. The idea is to keep the client
    as thin as possible. This does not prevent a webserver from inserting its own links.
    This is different from you may also like links.This does not prevent any browser extensions
    to be used also. If the user selects Enable intelligent
    browsing in the browser, it would automatically insert the httpi prefix in the URL field.
    There are millions of users who would not even know what an URL is , and use google APP
    to search for the URL and link it. SO the usability of httpi is much more than browser
    extensions, reducing the number of links and someone can keep on improving the httpi
    service.You dont have to chose, the WWW intelligence choses for you.
    

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Jan 26, 2019             [Page 2]
Internet-Draft    Need for an httpi intelligent service   Jul 26, 2018
        
3. General Information of the service
        

      Having a parallel browser realm, that allows intelligent updates of
      navigatable links from WWW intelligent computing realm. Instead of using
      http:// you just need to type httpi:// in your URL and the texts you view
      would have in addition to hardcoded navigatable links also those suggested by
      the WWW brain. The URL's hardcoded in HTML would have the blue color and those
      suggested by the WWW Brain would have a different color.

      If i launch and type httpi://www.pradeepkumarxplorer.com/YogaSequence.txt , it would 
      be showing navigatable links that are not created intelligently. The httpi service could also
      allow profiling. A User profile of USA only can show links only from USA or from CHina can show
      links only from China.
    
        If i publish a site with no hardcoded URL URI's and if i view the site 
     it would still show navigatable links.The navigatible links would chnage 
     depending on whats available in the WWW.

	If work is already done on how to Create intelligent links in multiple browser
    extension software, it has to be consolidated and best of it has to be used in the httpi
    service.

4.Authors' Addresses

    Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
    EMail: pradeepan88@hotmail.com, pradeep@explodingmoon.org
    URI: http://www.pradeepkumarxplorer.com

5.Acknowledgement  

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Jan 26, 2019             [Page 3]
Internet-Draft    Need for an httpi intelligent service   Jul 26, 2018