Internet Draft                      Shanghai Hongchuang WEB Technology
Service Co., Ltd. Intended Status: Experimental Tian Guorong Expires: Apr.
2016 Curtis Young Oct. 15, 2015

HIEP: HTB Internet E-Wallet Protocol draft-tianguorong-hiep-04

This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the provisions
of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other groups
may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months and
may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any time. It
is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite
them other than as "work in progress".

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

This Internet-Draft will expire on Oct., 2015.

Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved. This document is subject to BCP 78 and the
IETF Trust's Legal Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully, as
they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract: This document describes an online-paying method that realizes
the paying addressing on the basis of HTTP protocol. It is for the purpose
to setup a normative and safe E-paying system standard, and specify the
definition of E-paying. And in this new version, we name this e-payment as
HART pay and explained how the HART pay works in the bank systems.

Table of Contents 1. Introduction 2. Conventions used in the Document 3.
HIEP Problem Statements 4. Business Process Description 5. Hart Domain
Name Considerations 6. Hart Account Balance Synchronization 7. Security
Considerations 8. IANA Considerations 9. Conclusions 10. References

1. Introduction Till now, there's no one paying addressing language to
realize the online paying or data set's interoperating that COULD be used
for definite or name of E-currency's widely used. Under the promoting by
W3C, the future generation WEB of the semantic web is defined as "the WEB
concept structure which COULD be handled directly by the machine". On the
background of this technology, this ID describes an E-currency paying
public infrastructure of the bank pre-positive system in the field of e-
paying. Explanation of Nouns: Hart main account: Hart account platform
within the account, refers to the domain name of Hart. Hart bank main
account (Collection): Hart main account in the bank account corresponding
to the open account which is a main account. Hart bank accounts (payment):
Hart main account in the bank under the corresponding bank account of sub-
account.

2. Conventions used in this document The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT",
"REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMENDED",
"MAY", AND "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described
in RFC-2119[RFC2119]. In this document, these words will appear with that
interpretation only when in ALL CAPS. Lower case uses of these words are
not to be interpreted as carrying RFC-2119 significance.

3. HIEP Problem Statements At present, differentiation of the payment
communication and system structure are formed by independent bank
organizations or 3rd party payment company's leading position, that they
are using different payment models to describe the objects, and formulate
each standard. Those standards just extend the life time of each existed
systems, instead ensure the data exchange or dataset's interoperation
between different paying systems. Obviously, it will restrict the
application field online paying, and it COULD not reach the ability and
technique of handling the paying activities of all kinds of bank cards.
The real-time of paying is finally a bottleneck problem of the E-business
development. Without solving this problem, furthermore, it will bring the
unsafe hidden trouble on the capital operation. For the time being, we can
only say in own scope utmost, as it only can realize the online paying
with safe within each own system. It cannot make the real-time online
paying, and can not reach the comprehensive integration of huge scale
(supranational, super-region, super-section). Currency's credit: The
currency is a credit symbol of paying, people trust it to make it as the
intermediation of substitution. It is accepted by the social due to its
characteristic advantage comparing the metal money on "Gold Standard
System" or "Silver Standard System". Obviously, the symbol in virtual
paying organizations transaction MUST use a unique identifier, which COULD
make into a definition when people using. This is the credit problem in
the paying procedure.

4.Business Process Description 4.1Hart domain name registration

Opening Hart bank account in online banking channels or counter. In the
bank account when activated by binding mobile phone number for identity
authentication. When opening of the bank sent to the Hart account platform
registration information.

4.2Hart account sign up process

Hart domain named specification

Distinguishing Bank Regional ownership Network ownership

4.3Personal Hart domain name registration: The user's personal domain name
registration Hart is mainly used for consumption and payment, the
application MUST have communication bank debit card or credit card, used
for authentication and binding domain, at the same time, as the default
payment clearing account. Supporting counter registered and electronic
channel registered in two ways.

4.4Personal counter registration: Individual clients need Hart domain name
main card handle Hart domain name registration at communication bank
outlets counter. Signing up tripartite paper agreement and the application
form(to provide the main card number, follow Hart domain name, related
documents and information, contact information, including mobile phone
Telephone, e-mail address) of Hart domain name, after that counter need to
check the main card number and identity, and then to handle business
registration. Counter system sends domain registration information to Hart
system banking front platform system and call the domain name registration
interface, authentication domain name uniqueness. If the transaction is
successful, print Hart domain name registration receipt, under individual
clients? custody after business chop, individual clients with this receipt
can handle to activate domain name at Hart official website.

4.5Personal electronic channel registration: Personal clients need to open
personal online banking or mobile banking, and with Hart domain name card
in my personal online banking or mobile banking self-service Hart domain
name registration, after signing up tripartite electronic agreement, first
to authentication on the first page, and then enter the main card
number?trading password and online banking associated password, and then
to enter Hart domain name application form page(to provide compliance Hart
domain name specification domain name relevant documents information,
mobile phone, telephone and email address.), the online banking system of
the main card number to check the password and related identity
verification after the registration of non-paper registration services.
Personal clients in the online banking system can apply for domain name to
send a real-time domain name detection to confirm the application
uniqueness domain name, after the page submitted, online banking system
automatically sends to Hart system bank front platform system and to call
registration of domain name interface, and verify the uniqueness domain
name. If the transaction is successful, to generate Hart domain name
electronic receipt, individual clients with this receipt can handle to
activate domain name at Hart official website.

4.6Bank enterprise Hart domain name registration: Enterprises register
Hart domain name is mainly used for an access application businesses, the
application MUST have communication bank settlement accounts (hereinafter
referred to as Hart domain name account) for enterprise authentication and
authorization binding domain, at the same time, as the default payment
clearing account to support counter registered and electronic channels.

4.7Business enterprises counter registration: Enterprise clients need Hart
domain name main account handle Hart domain name registration at
communication bank outlets counter. Signing up tripartite paper agreement
and the application form(to provide the main card number, follow Hart
domain name, related documents and information, contact information,
including mobile phone Telephone, e-mail address) of Hart domain name ,
after that counter need to check the main card number and identity, and
then to handle business registration. Counter system sends domain
registration information to Hart system banking front platform system and
call the domain name registration interface, authentication domain name
uniqueness. If the transaction is successful, print Hart domain name
registration receipt, under enterprise clients? custody after business
chop, enterprise clients with this receipt can handle to activate domain
name at Hart official website.

Businesses of electronic channels: Registration process is more complex,
suggest using counter channel.

4.8Inter-bank business domain name registration: Interbank enterprises
verify the Hart domain name when they registered at bank.

5Hart domain Considerations 5.1Registered domain name require within the
specified time to activate, if no activation within the given time, the
system will automatically void and release. Register domain name to set up
period of validity. 5.2Opening and binding Hart account. The relationship
between Hart main account and Hart bank account need to submit hart
account platform. Hart bank main account is clients? bank main account,
hart bank account is sub-account of clients? bank main account, it
associated with hart master account (Hart domain name) and established
binding relationship. 5.3Individual clients and enterprise clients
identity authentication Clients' identity information on Hart accounts
platform and bank need comparison and verification in the transaction
process. When interbank enterprises register at bank, it also verified the
validity of hart domain name on hart account system. 5.4Personal mobile
phone number binding and validation Tripartite arrangement MUST be
required to provide clients' mobile phone number?email and other key
information. Online banking channels MUST be required online banking
reserved cell phone number, and counter channels registration need opening
card reserved cell phone number, and need to verify consistency.
5.5Signing and circulation of the tripartite agreement Clients signed a
contract in the bank or online banking channels, and also signed a
contract with hart account platform when hart account platform activated.
After opening hart account in the bank, hart account has been opened but
no activation, clients need to activate on hart main application or
internet portal, by activating to notice platform and bank. 5.6Hart ID
activation and online identity authentication The activation process of
Hart ID and the identity authentication in the process of transaction all
through mobile verification code to identity authentication. In the
process of activation or transaction, the Hart account platform apply to
the bank SMS platform for mobile phone verification code sent to the
users? reserved phone number, the user submit verification code, and then
sent to the bank authentication system by the Hart account platform for
identity authentication. 5.7Renewal and cancellation of Hart ID Hart
account platform after the cancellation of Hart ID to notify the bank to
write off or freeze Hart bank account. 5.8Legal relations Hart account
platform operators need to sign an agreement with the bank. 5.9ID
resolution and preservation To support bank and inter-bank resolution, in
order to protect the personal information security, Hart ID information
only can interact in the bank and the Hart account platform. All Hart ID
and bank account binding relationship unified storage in Hart account
platform domain name resolution service module, information source is from
bank return information when clients activate Hart ID.













5.10ID resolution in the process of payment Process description: Third
party APP application send payment requests to the Hart account platform
(Pay and paid party are all called Hart ID). Hart account payment platform
let payment request information of Hart ID, passing through Hart ID
initiating analytical request to Hart ID resolution server. Hart account
resolution service bring succeed resolved of the Hart ID and corresponding
bank account information back to the Hart account payment platform. Hart
account platform let the APP application of the payment request according
to the analytical results by the bank transaction interface requirements
for re - package. The banking transaction system brings payment results
back to the Hart account platform. Hart account platform send payment
results back to third party application APP.

Application of contract process The signing process occurs at the first
time sign Hart account contract and the new APP application access. It is
interpreted as application activation protocol.

APP application vendors APP application vendors in the APP first access to
the Hart account payment platform or a new business on the line, need to
submit a business application to the bank, after a review of the legality
of the business, the bank decide whether to open the business, and signed
a tripartite arrangement.

Another: APP application merchants require in addition to businesses Hart
ID bank, every Hart account platform supported by bank signed the
collection agreement. We can accept inter-bank withholding funds.

Terminal user When Hart account ID user sign up at the first time, they
need to choose from agreement to open APP application protocol business.
Or when new payment business open also need online banking page to choose
open, Hart account ID user can use this business.

Hart account payment mode and the corresponding process According to the
merchant's situation, to distinguish between synchronous transactions (not
confirmed) or asynchronous transactions (confirmed) mode.

Synchronous mode: the payment transaction request and the transaction
result answer synchronization completed.

Asynchronous mode: after the payment of the transaction request, the bank
needs to launch a mobile phone verification action to the user, after the
user confirmed, the bank side sends to Hart account platform the
transaction results asynchronous response.

Payment request transaction message in the need to bring order
information: including business type, business name, and product name, the
number of transactions, the transaction amount and other information. Hart
merchants access and risk guarantee Merchant to submit the risk reserve to
the Hart account system bank account.

5.11Capital account Hart payment platform for all Hart ID to provide
accounting services, including the current balance of each Hart ID,
account status, transaction flow.

Every day at 1 am reconciliation of transactions with bank account system,
including the balance and transaction details. Reconciliation is for the
Banks SHALL prevail.


6.Hart account balance synchronization Daily synchronization Hart account
platform record account balance and the balance of bank account system.
When the balance does not match, check the transaction flow.
Reconciliation is for the Banks SHALL prevail, manual processing when
errors occur.

Transaction reconciliation Field nameData
typeStateTransNumTransAmtSumCheckFileName

Hart account funds query related processes To ease the pressure on the
banking system, as well as to enhance the user experience, with Hart
account information query relevant information sources are Hart account
platform. Details are: Hart account balance inquiries, Hart account
information inquiries (account status, etc.), Hart account transactions
details. At workday, the authenticities of the information synchronize
with the information at bank, and transaction reconciliation guarantee.


7. Security Considerations In order to realize the interconnection and
mutual certification, the HIEP mutual information approval is refer to
X.509V3 extension. It is merged into PKCS#12, the indicated HTB domain
name MUST be the first level domain name of a bank. Bind the user's public
key information with other identified information including the username
and email add., to complete the certification of users on the internet.

8.IANA Considerations The IANA will configure the HTB prot for HIEP.

9.Conclusions This document describes the pre-position E-currency paying
public infrastructure of bank in the field of the internet E-paying, that
realize the HIEP on the HTTP protocol according to the open standard of
W3C.

10.References: [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key Words for use in RFCs to
Indicate Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 [RFC2616] R.
Fielding, J. Gettys, J. Mogul, H. Frystyk, L. Masinter, P. Leach, T.
Berners-Lee, "Hypertext Transfer Protocol - HTTP/1.1", June 1999 [RFC1866]
T. Berners-Lee, D. Connolly, "Hypertext Markup Language - 2.0", November
1995



Author's Address: Tian Guorong Shanghai Hongchuang WEB Technology Service
Co., Ltd. Bldg 14, Xinyun Economic Zone, Lane 3199 Zhenbei Rd. Shanghai,
China Phone no.: 0086 135 8592 1617 Email: bill.tian@shcn.cc

Shen Jun Phone No.: 0086 133 0171 0551 Email: jun.shen@shcn.cc

Curtis Yang Phone No.: 0086 138 0178 0703 Email: curtis.yang@shcn.cc

