


ENUM -- Telephone Number Mapping                             M. Haberler
Working Group                                                        IPA
Internet-Draft                                                R. Stastny
Expires: April 24, 2006                                            Oefeg
                                                        October 21, 2005


          Combined User and Carrier ENUM in the e164.arpa tree
                     draft-haberler-carrier-enum-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 24, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   ENUM as defined now in RFC3761 [1] is not well suited for the purpose
   of interconnection by carriers, as can be seen by the use of various
   private tree arrangements based on ENUM mechanisms.  A combined end-
   user and carrier ENUM tree solution would leverage the ENUM
   infrastructure in e164.arpa, increase resolution rates, and decrease
   the cost per registered telephone number.  This document describes a
   minimally invasive scheme to provide both end-user and carrier data



Haberler & Stastny       Expires April 24, 2006                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM         October 2005


   in ENUM.

Table of Contents

   1.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3

   2.   The Carrier of Record  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3

   3.   Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4

   4.   Introducing a branch into the e164.arpa tree . . . . . . . .   4

   5.   Resolver behaviour options and the Carrier ENUM branch
        location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5

   6.   Recommended resolver behaviour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7

   7.   Zone file examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8

   8.   The Branch Location Record . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11

   9.   Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12

   10.  IANA considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13

   11.  Interoperability considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13

   12.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13

   13.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     13.1   Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     13.2   Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14

        Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14

        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . .  15















Haberler & Stastny       Expires April 24, 2006                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM         October 2005


1.  Introduction

   ENUM as defined in RFC3761 is based on the end-user opt-in principle.
   While this has great potential to foster new services and end-user
   choice in the long-term, the current requirements for IP-based
   interconnection of carriers and VoIP Service Providers require the
   provisioning of all allocated or served (hosted) numbers of a
   participating carrier of record.  Also, an interconnection scenario
   through Carrier ENUM typically implies underlying closed user
   arrangements where URIs are used in authenticated context, an
   assumption which cannot reasonably be imposed on User ENUM entries.
   While in principle solutions like compulsory opt-in through terms and
   conditions for end users are conceivable, there are substantial
   downsides to such an approach.  ENUM for end-user provisioning
   remains an ill-suited solution for the PoI (point-of-interconnect)
   information discovery problem.

   Both from an OPEX (Operational Expenditure) perspective as well as
   overall resolution rates achievable through a given approach, a
   combined ENUM tree both for end-users and carrier of record ENUM
   stands to be superior over a forest of disparate private trees now as
   well as long-term.  Also, as a common infrastructure easily supports
   both usage scenarios, a combined approach will support the end-user
   ENUM vision by driving down the average cost per number.  Lastly, any
   later convergence between ENUM for end-users and carriers of record
   will be significantly easier and cheaper, thus benefiting users as
   well as carriers.  For the rest of the document the terms User ENUM
   and Carrier ENUM will be used to distinguish between the two
   approaches.

2.  The Carrier of Record

   In User ENUM, the entity or person having the right-to-use in a
   number has the sole discretion about the content of the associated
   domain and thus the zone content.

   Within a Carrier ENUM namespace, we use the term "carrier of record"
   for the entity having that discretion.  This right typically lies
   with a service provider authorized to issue E.164 numbers for the
   provisioning of PSTN service under the authority of a National
   Regulatory Authority (NRA), but generally exhibits one or more of the
   following properties:

   o  it has been assigned one or more national number ranges by an NRA.
   o  it has been assigned a number range directly by the ITU, for
      instance a code under "International Networks" (+882) or
      "Universal Personal Telecommunications (UPT)" (+878).




Haberler & Stastny       Expires April 24, 2006                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM         October 2005


   o  it can be the recipient of a number porting operation.
   o  it provides a PSTN point-of-interconnect for the number.

   Carrier ENUM is understood to mean a form of ENUM where such
   entitites have exclusive discretion about zone content.

3.  Requirements

   A solution for combined User and Carrier ENUM within the e164.arpa
   tree should meet the following requirements:

   o  A single DNS lookup should suffice to resolve any given number in
      the public DNS in both scenarios.
   o  It should leave User ENUM resolution semantics and tree shape
      intact, i.e. requiring no wholesale changes to existing User ENUM
      resolvers or tree layout.
   o  Additional functionality should only be imposed on carrier ENUM
      resolvers.
   o  It should work with both closed and open numbering plans without
      resorting to wildcard records in the non-user controlled part of
      the DNS, both to avoid associated semantic problems as well as
      keeping the route to DNSSEC deployment open.
   o  It should not require the introduction of new constructs within
      existing standards, such as new types or changed semantics of
      NAPTR records.
   o  It should be possible to introduce the scheme in a timely manner,
      supporting current carrier needs.  Consequently, it is desirable
      to deploy the scheme without re-opening already settled questions
      of roles, responsibilities and international coordination, and in
      particular the country code delegation process.
   o  It should meet all reasonable privacy concerns about visibility of
      information an end user has no control over, for example discovery
      of unlisted numbers, or inadvertent disclosure of user identity.
   o  It should keep the option open for other types of closed-user-
      group type applications, which might not naturally fit into the -
      predominantly voice oriented - Carrier ENUM scenario.

   Note in particular that we assume all entries to properly resolve in
   the public DNS, both user and carrier.  Usage restrictions on Carrier
   ENUM records are to be handled at the URI level, and not by
   restriction on the visibility of entries in the public DNS.

4.  Introducing a branch into the e164.arpa tree

   The method most easily fulfilling the abovementioned requirements is
   to branch off the e164.arpa tree into a subdomain at a given point,
   and deploy a Carrier ENUM subtree underneath without touching User
   ENUM semantics at all.  For readability, we will use the 'carrier'



Haberler & Stastny       Expires April 24, 2006                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM         October 2005


   subdomain from now on, while in practice a single character subdomain
   like 'c' will suffice.

   For interoperability it is desirable to have that branch sit in a
   commonly agreed, or easily discoverable place.  Several options for
   this branch location exist, among them are:
   o  above the country code delegation level, e.g.
      '4.9.7.1.carrier.e164.arpa', alternatively:
   o  somewhere below the country code delegation level, e.g.
      '4.9.7.carrier.1.e164.arpa' or 'carrier.4.9.7.1.e164.arpa'.

   In the first case, heavy involvement of ITU-T, RIPE as well as the
   applicable NRAs (National Regulatory Authorities) is needed during
   the setup phase.  Also, reopening the discussion of the interim
   procedures already agreed is a tedious process, as is the adaptation
   of the current delegation mechanism.  However, no changes to resolver
   semantics are required as this approach amounts to just a different
   apex definition for the resolver.  Therefore the remainder of this
   paper addresses only the second scenario.  This approach, putting
   aside significant process and timing concerns, appears to be an
   easier to manage long-term approach to tree naming.

   In the second case issues could be resolved as a national matter, or
   as a regional opt-in within in a given Numbering Plan Area such as
   the North American NPA.  However, a convention is needed how, given a
   fully qualified E.164 [2] number, a resolver can determine the
   location of the carrier subdomain.  However, ITU-T and IETF (IAB)
   involvement is only lightweight, e.g. to recommend the proper
   algorithm defined here to enable international interoperability.

   Beyond the setup phase, an NRA need not be involved operationally -
   it is sufficient to establish a convention linking the national
   definition of a carrier of record to the credentials for write access
   to the Carrier ENUM tree.

   We believe the choice among the above options should not be
   predetermined for maximum flexibility and left to national or
   regional environments to decide.  This suggests a method for Carrier
   ENUM resolution which can deal at runtime with whatever the decision
   for a country code, or a group of countries, happens to be.

5.  Resolver behaviour options and the Carrier ENUM branch location

   A Carrier ENUM resolver thus needs to determine the place applicable
   in a given number to search for the 'carrier' subdomain for
   international interoperability, regardless what the national or
   group-of-countries setup decision was.




Haberler & Stastny       Expires April 24, 2006                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM         October 2005


   We propose a mechanism to discover this boundary dynamically for any
   given shape as follows:
   o  the national or group-of-countries decision about subdomain
      location is documented in the e164.arpa tree proper by inserting a
      special DNS record into the country code zone.  This branch
      location record (Section 8) (BLR) carries an integer value which
      points to the level in the tree where the carrier subtree branches
      off.  Implementation options for the BLR are disussed below.
   o  a resolver looking for a Carrier ENUM domain needs to retrieve
      this BLR once during first resolution within a country code,
      caching the result in a local table for later reuse.
   o  while constructing the FQDN, the 'carrier' label is inserted at
      the position indicated by the BLR's integer value.

   For the abovementioned tree shape options (Section 4), the
   corresponding branch location record values in the 1.e164.arpa zone
   would be as follows:

   +---------------------------+-----------------+
   |         shape             | branch location |
   +---------------------------+-----------------+
   | 4.9.7.1.carrier.e164.arpa |        0        |
   | 4.9.7.carrier.1.e164.arpa |        1        |
   | carrier.4.9.7.1.e164.arpa |        4        |
   +---------------------------+-----------------+

                                 Figure 1

   The only remaining a-priori knowledge a Carrier ENUM resolver should
   have is the current list of country codes, or an equivalent method to
   determine where the country code in the number ends.

   To prime the algorithm, the the current scheme to determine country
   code length as follows could be employed:
   o  3 digits is the default length of a country code.
   o  country codes 1 and 7 are a single digit.
   o  the following country codes are two digits: 20, 27, 30-34, 36, 39,
      40, 41, 43-49, 51-58, 60-66, 81, 82, 84, 86, 90-95, 98.

   Given the fact that the ITU recently allocated only 3-digit country
   codes, there are no more spare 1- and 2-digit country codes and
   existing 1- and 2-digit country codes are extremely unlikely to be
   recovered, the above table consisting of the existing 1- and 2-digit
   country codes can be considered very stable.  The only problem may be
   a country split as happened recently e.g. to Yugoslavia.

   If a branch location record is not found that way (for instance, in
   the unlikely case the ITU allocates a country code not according to



Haberler & Stastny       Expires April 24, 2006                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM         October 2005


   these rules), it is still possible to determine the branch location
   record by "iterating down" the tree.  Such a fallback strategy would
   rely on the assumption that there is never a branch location record
   inserted above the country code zone, for which there would be no use
   in the first place.

   It seems unlikely that inspection of more than the first five digits
   will be required to locate the branch location record under any
   realistic numbering administrative partitioning.

6.  Recommended resolver behaviour

   A User ENUM resolver as per RFC3761 need not be aware of any Carrier
   ENUM conventions at all.  A combined User and Carrier ENUM resolver
   shall behave as follows:

   The input to the resolver routine shall be:
   1.  the called number in fully qualified E.164 (international)
       format,
   2.  a 'subtree' parameter indicating whether the search should
       proceed in the User ENUM tree, or in the subtree indicated by the
       parameter (example: 'carrier' to indicate Carrier ENUM
       resolution, or a null value for defaulting to User ENUM
       resolution),
   3.  optionally a table or algorithm to easily detect country codes
       (Section 5),
   4.  any other parameters used to drive the search, for instance an
       enumservice type.  These parameters are outside the scope of this
       draft.

   The resolver shall proceed as follows:
   1.  if the subtree parameter indicates a User ENUM search, proceed as
       per RFC3761.
   2.  If the subtree parameter indicates a Carrier ENUM query:
       1.  determine country code length.
       2.  consult cache table if a branch location for this country
           code was already retrieved since resolver boot time.
       3.  if not:
              retrieve the branch location record from the country code
              zone, and store the country code/branch location pair in
              the cache table.
              ("iterating down" - optional fallback for irregular
              country code) if the last step fails, iterate over the
              number up to five digits and try to retrieve the branch
              location record each time, again storing the country code/
              branch location pair in the cache table if successful.





Haberler & Stastny       Expires April 24, 2006                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM         October 2005


              if both attempts fail, return failure and indicate
              NXDOMAIN.
       4.  (valid branch location found): insert the carrier label
           accordingly while creating the inverted dotted domain name.
       5.  search the DNS for any NAPTR records for the given number.

   It is assumed that already discovered branch location values are
   stored in a cache table of country code/branch location pairs.

7.  Zone file examples

   Example 1 - carrier subtree branches of right under the country code
   +43 level, zone files for country code zone and carrier subtree zone.
   The BLR happens to be at the same level as the carrier subtree.
   Since they use the same name, the BLR needs to be below the zone cut
   in the carrier.3.4.e164.arpa zone.  Note there is no change in the
   e164.arpa zone in this case, the carrier subtree can be introduced by
   nationally without further external interaction.

































Haberler & Stastny       Expires April 24, 2006                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM         October 2005


   ; +43 country code zone

   $ORIGIN 3.4.e164.arpa.

   @                  NS      ns1.enum.at.

   @                  NS      ns2.enum.at.

   ; carrier subtree starts here

   carrier            IN      NS      ns1-ce.enum.at.

   carrier            IN      NS      ns2-ce.enum.at.

   ; BLR is at the same label, thus in the subdomain.



   ; top of +43 Carrier subtree zone

   $ORIGIN carrier.3.4.e164.arpa.

   @                  NS      ns1-ce.enum.at.

   @                  NS      ns2-ce.enum.at.

   ; Branch location record - value 2
   ; meaning carrier subtree starts in CC zone:

   @                  BLR     2

   ; Carrier ENUM NAPTR example for +43(1)23456

   6.5.4.3.2.1 NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+sip" "!^(.*)$!sip:\\1@telco.at!" .


                                 Figure 2

   Example 2 - country code +7 opted for carrier subtree under
   7.carrier.e164.arpa, which is documented by the BLR  with value 0 in
   the 7.e164.arpa zone.  This implies consent with ITU and RIPE.










Haberler & Stastny       Expires April 24, 2006                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM         October 2005


   $ORIGIN 7.e164.arpa.

   @                  NS      ns1.enum.ru.

   @                  NS      ns2.enum.ru.

   ;

   ; Branch location record - value 0, meaning carrier tree
   ; starts in carrier.e164.arpa:

   c                  IN      BLR     0



   ; top of Carrier subtree zone

   $ORIGIN 7.carrier.e164.arpa.

   @                  NS      ns1-ce.enum.ru.

   @                  NS      ns2-ce.enum.ru.



   ; Carrier ENUM NAPTR example for +7(90)12345

   5.4.3.2.1.0.9 NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+sip" "!^(.*)$!sip:\\1@foo.ru!" .


                                 Figure 3

   Example 3 - country code +1 opted for carrier subtree under +1 (NPA),
   i.e. 4 digits into the number.  This would imply one zone per NPA.
   We show an example for the 794 NPA.  This scenario, again, can be
   introduced without ITU and RIPE involvement.















Haberler & Stastny       Expires April 24, 2006                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM         October 2005


   $ORIGIN 1.e164.arpa.

   @                  NS      ns1.cc1enum.ca.

   @                  NS      ns2.cc1enum.ca.

   ;

   ; Branch location record - value 4

   carrier            BLR     4

   ; delegation for 794 NPA - User ENUM

   4.9.7              IN      NS ns1-ue.cc1enum.org.

   4.9.7              IN      NS ns2-ue.cc1enum.org.

   ; delegation for 794 NPA - Carrier ENUM

   carrier.4.9.7      IN      NS ns1-ce.cc1enum.org.

   carrier.4.9.7      IN      NS ns2-ce.cc1enum.org.



   ; Carrier subtree for +1 794 NPA

   $ORIGIN carrier.4.9.7.1.e164.arpa

   @                  NS      ns1-ce.cc1enum.org.

   @                  NS      ns2-ce.cc1enum.org.



   ; Carrier ENUM NAPTR example for +1(794) 123 4567

   7.6.5.4.3.2.1 NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+sip" "!^(.*)$!sip:\\1@foo.com!" .


                                 Figure 4


8.  The Branch Location Record

   The BLR is located below the country code level and conveys the name
   and location of a specific subtree.  It has the same name as the



Haberler & Stastny       Expires April 24, 2006                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM         October 2005


   subtree branch label (thus both 'carrier' in the Carrier ENUM
   resolution context) and returns an integer value, indicating the
   position in the number where the subtree branch label is inserted
   while constructing the FQDN.

   We envisage several implementation options, such as:
   o  a new DNS Resource Record (as used in the zone file examples
      above)
   o  a NAPTR record with a new service definition for that purpose.
   o  for trial purposes, a TXT record carrying the branch location as
      an integer value in the string argument.

   While technically equivalent, we believe the NAPTR option to be the
   most flexible.  We solicit suggestions for the final choice.

   Note that this scheme is extensible: if, for example, it would be
   considered useful to create trees for other resolution contexts than
   carrier ENUM, that could be done by introducing another label.  One
   such example could be the 'carrier default registration' (number
   range allocation information) recently suggested by the UK ENUM
   group.

9.  Security considerations

   Privacy issues have been raised regarding unwarranted disclosure of
   user information by publishing Carrier ENUM information in the public
   DNS, for instance the use for harvesting of numbers in service, or
   unlisted numbers.

   Given that number range allocation is public information, we believe
   the easiest way to cope with such concerns is to fully unroll
   allocated number ranges in the Carrier ENUM subtree, wherever such
   privacy concerns exist.  Whether a number is served or not would be
   exposed by the carrier of record when an attempt is made to contact
   the corresponding URI.  We assume this to be an authenticated
   operation, which would not leak information to unauthorized parties.

   Entering all numbers in an allocated number range, whether serviced
   or not, or listed or unlisted, will prevent mining attempts for such
   number attributes.

   The result would be that the information in the public DNS would
   mirror number range allocation information, but not more.  Carrier
   ENUM will not tell you more than you can get by just dialing numbers.

   The URI pointing to the destination network of the Carrier of Record
   should also not disclose any privacy information about the identity
   of end-user, it is therefore recommended to use in the user-part of



Haberler & Stastny       Expires April 24, 2006                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM         October 2005


   the SIP URI either anonymized UserIDs or the E.164 number itself,
   such as sip:441632960084@example.telco.com .

   The definition of a new RR type or a new enumservice does not
   introduce security problems into the DNS.  Usage of the Branch
   Location record conveys only static setup information under a country
   code subtree of e164.arpa.  The intended use of DNSSEC within ENUM
   will prove authenticity of the conveyed value.

10.  IANA considerations

   The following parameters need to be registered with IANA:

   1.  The name of the Carrier ENUM subdomain, for example 'carrier' (or
       'c' for brevity).  In the future other labels could be registered
       for different purposes.
   2.  According to RFC 3761, the IETF requested IANA to delegate the
       E164.ARPA domain following instructions provided by the IAB.
       Names within this zone are to be delegated to parties according
       to the ITU-T Recommendation E.164.  If the second option outlined
       in this proposal is accepted, there will be no changes requested
       of IANA with respect to the E164.ARPA domain.  However, if the
       first option outlined in this document is accepted, this would
       require IETF to request IANA to create a new sub-domain
       CARRIER.E164.ARPA.
   3.  for the branch location record, an RR type or NAPTR service
       defintion.

11.  Interoperability considerations

   A resolver needs to indicate which information is requested - User or
   Carrier ENUM, or both.  A user-ENUM-only resolver need not be aware
   of the carrier subtree and no changes with respect to RFC3761
   semantics are required.  A resolver desiring to retrieve Carrier ENUM
   or both types of records needs to be aware of the conventions laid
   out in this draft.

12.  Acknowledgements

   We gratefully acknowledge suggestions and improvements by Jason
   Livingood and Tom Creighton of Comcast, Penn Pfautz of ATT, of
   Lawrence Conroy of Roke Manor Research, and Alexander Mayrhofer and
   Otmar Lendl of enum.at.

13.  References






Haberler & Stastny       Expires April 24, 2006                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM         October 2005


13.1  Normative References

   [1]  Faltstrom, P. and M. Mealling, "The E.164 to Uniform Resource
        Identifiers (URI) Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS)
        Application (ENUM)", RFC 3761, April 2004.

13.2  Informative References

   [2]  ITU-T, "The International Public Telecommunication Number Plan",
        Recommendation E.164, May 1997.


Authors' Addresses

   Michael Haberler
   Internet Foundation Austria
   Waehringerstrasse 3/19
   Wien  A-1090
   Austria

   Phone: +43 664 4213465
   Email: mah@eunet.at
   URI:   http://www.nic.at/ipa/


   Richard Stastny
   Oefeg
   Postbox 147
   Vienna  A-1030
   Austria

   Phone: +43 664 420 4100
   Email: richard.stastny@oefeg.at
   URI:   http://www.oefeg.at

















Haberler & Stastny       Expires April 24, 2006                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       Combined User and Carrier ENUM         October 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Haberler & Stastny       Expires April 24, 2006                [Page 15]

