


Internet Engineering Task Force                                R. Barnes
Internet-Draft                                               M. Lepinski
Intended status: Informational                          BBN Technologies
Expires: April 24, 2008                                 October 22, 2007


            Fraud mitigation for IP-based emergency calling
                       draft-barnes-ecrit-auth-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 24, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   The use of Internet technologies for emergency calling creates
   opportunities for fraud, relative to traditional circuit-switched
   emergency calling.  This document describes the context for IP-based
   emergency calling, and the types of fraud which are possible within
   the system.  A mitigation strategy for fraud against voice service
   providers is described; techniques for detecting or preventing other
   types of fraud will be incorporated in this document as they are
   available.



Barnes & Lepinski        Expires April 24, 2008                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         draft-barnes-ecrit-auth-01           October 2007


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Participants in IP-based emergency call establishment  . . . .  4
   4.  Fraud risk in IP-based emergency calling . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.1.  Callers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.2.  VSPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.3.  LSPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.4.  PSAPs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.5.  Requirements of the LoST Infrastructure  . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Mitigating Fraud against VSPs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.1.  Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.2.  Risk at different stages of emergency calling  . . . . . . 11
     5.3.  A verification mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 16




























Barnes & Lepinski        Expires April 24, 2008                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         draft-barnes-ecrit-auth-01           October 2007


1.  Introduction

   Entities that participate in emergency calling (e.g., callers, voice
   networks, or emergency authorities) expose themselves to abuse by
   fraudulent parties.  For example, when voice networks provide special
   service such as priority or preemption to emergency calls, fraudulent
   callers could mark non-emergency calls as emergency calls in order to
   receive special treatment.  In the traditional, circuit-switched
   emergency calling system, the types of fraud that are technically
   feasible are very limited because the system is very rigid.  The
   transition to a next-generation IP-based emergency calling system has
   the potential to broaden the spectrum of possible attacks.  In order
   to prevent this, it is necessary to identify the specific fraud risks
   to which entities in IP-based emergency calling are exposed, and to
   enhance to the emergency calling system to address these risks.  The
   first step in this process, an analysis of the structure of the
   emergency calling system from the perspective of fraud risk, is the
   subject of this document.

   This document discusses the fraud risks introduced by the transition
   from the current circuit-switched emergency calling architecture to
   next-generation, packet-switched emergency calling.  After
   introducing some necessary terminology, we describe the different
   roles that entities play in the emergency calling process, and the
   types of fraud to which the entities playing those roles are exposed.
   As an example of one type of fraud mitigation, we describe a system
   for voice networks to verify that call signaling that appears to be
   for an emergency call is actually for an emergency call.


2.  Terminology

   Caller - The entity that initiates an emergency call.  For purposes
   of this document, this term includes both the calling party (e.g., a
   person in distress or a vehicle that has been involved in a
   collision) and any hardware or software used to initiate the call.

   Voice Service Provider (VSP) - An entity that provides services that
   enable IP-based telephony.  In the SIP context, a VSP might operate a
   set of proxies; in the 3GPP/IMS context, a VSP is an IMS network
   operator.

   Internet Service Provider (ISP) - An entity that provides
   connectivity to the Internet to its subscribers.

   Access Network - An ISP to which a network endpoint is physically
   attached.  An access network will often also act as an LSP.




Barnes & Lepinski        Expires April 24, 2008                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         draft-barnes-ecrit-auth-01           October 2007


   Location Service Provider (LSP) - An entity that provides information
   about the location of Internet endpoints.  In many cases, the LSP
   used to geolocate an endpoint will be the access network to which it
   is connected.

   Public Safety Answering Point (PSAP) - An entity that receives
   emergency calls.  Some PSAPs receive all calls from callers within a
   specified geographic area; others are dedicated to calls related to
   specific emergency services.

   Emergency Services Routing Proxy (ESRP) - A signaling entity that
   routes calls within the emergency services network.  In particular,
   an ESRP is a part of the emergency services infrastructure, and not
   operated by a VSP.


3.  Participants in IP-based emergency call establishment

   At a high level, there are four steps in emergency call
   establishment:

   1.  VSP or caller recognizes that a call is an emergency call and
       tags it with a service URN

   2.  VSP or caller obtains location information from LSP, queries the
       LoST infrastructure to obtain the PSAP URI, and sends the call to
       this PSAP URI

   3.  Call is routed through normal signaling channels (possibly via
       multiple VSPs) to the PSAP

   4.  PSAP receives call and exchanges multimedia with caller

   At the application layer (ignoring physical and network access
   providers), there are thus four types of entities that participate in
   this process: Callers, VSPs, LSPs, and PSAPs.  (The LoST
   infrastructure is a background player, to be discussed below) The
   process of emergency call establishment in the SIP context is
   described in detail in [I.D-ietf-ecrit-framework] and
   [I.D-ietf-ecrit-phonebcp].  The remainder of this section follows the
   general structure described in those documents, but is not
   necessarily specific to SIP calling.

   Callers and VSPs are responsible for recognizing calls as emergency
   calls and routing calls to the appropriate PSAPs.  Once a caller or
   VSP recognizes that a call is an emergency call, it embeds in the
   call signaling a service URN to indicate the type of emergency
   service being requested.  There are two steps in the routing of a



Barnes & Lepinski        Expires April 24, 2008                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         draft-barnes-ecrit-auth-01           October 2007


   call: First, the URN for the desired service is combined with
   information on the location of the caller in a query to the LoST
   infrastructure, which provides contact information for the
   appropriate PSAP for that service and location.  Second, the call is
   directed to the PSAP via the normal routing mechanisms for the
   signaling protocol.  In some cases, VSPs will be required to provide
   special services to signaling and/or media packets related to
   emergency calls.  LSPs provide the location information that is used
   as an input to LoST in the call routing process.  Frequently, the LSP
   used for emergency calling will be the access network to which the
   calling endpoint is physically connected, since this network
   naturally has a physical relationship to the endpoint which can be
   used to determine the endpoint's location.  In other situations, the
   LSP's role may be played by a positioning function internal to a VSP
   network, or by an independent location server on which the endpoint's
   location has been previously stored.  It is generally understood that
   location information will be provided without restriction to
   appropriate entities for emergency call routing purposes, even when
   the LSP might otherwise restrict access to that information (e.g.,
   for business or privacy purposes).

   PSAPs are the recipients of emergency calls.  They are responsible
   for answering emergency calls and using information provided via
   signaling or media to determine how best to respond to an emergency.
   Location information is a critical component of this decision.  In
   many cases, the endpoint's location will be carried in the call
   signaling messages that initiate the emergency call, but the PSAP may
   also obtain location through other mechanisms.  For example, the
   signaling may contain a reference to an LSP that is able to provide
   up-to-date information on the location of a mobile endpoint.  PSAPs
   must also discriminate between calls that are genuine emergencies and
   calls that are not (while all calls are usually answered, callers who
   call without an emergency may be subject to subsequent investigation
   or prosecution).


4.  Fraud risk in IP-based emergency calling

   Each type of entity described in Section 3 above puts valuable
   resources at risk by participating in the emergency call-
   establishment process.  VSPs may give priority to emergency calls
   transiting their network, or allocate bandwidth for them.  LSPs need
   to provide location, which they may be unwilling to give out (due to
   business or privacy reasons) in a non-emergency setting.  PSAPs need
   to optimize their limited resources for responding to emergency
   calls.  And, most importantly, emergency callers entrust their safety
   to the proper functioning of the emergency calling infrastructure.
   This section describes in more detail the requirements that each



Barnes & Lepinski        Expires April 24, 2008                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         draft-barnes-ecrit-auth-01           October 2007


   party has of the others, and discusses how these requirements can be
   violated by fraudulent actors.  This section also briefly discusses
   how these threats may be addressed, but proposes no complete
   solutions.  The LoST infrastructure is also a central, trusted
   component of the emergency calling system; we describe below certain
   assurances that emergency calling entities require of the LoST
   infrastructure.

4.1.  Callers

   Emergency callers generally have more to lose from a failed emergency
   call than other entities that participate in emergency call
   establishment, since they are by definition in distress.  A caller's
   primary requirement is to be able to communicate with the appropriate
   PSAP for their emergency, and to receive any necessary emergency
   services.  In order to receive the requested emergency services as
   quickly as possible, the caller must be directed to the PSAP that is
   responsible for the requested service in the caller's current
   location.  This requires that the entity that does LoST routing
   (whether the caller or a VSP) have access to accurate, timely
   location, and that LoST routing be done correctly.  Once the
   appropriate PSAP has been identified and contacted, there must be
   sufficient communications resources available for the caller and the
   PSAP to exchange any further necessary media or signaling traffic.
   The fraud risks faced by callers are thus:

   1.  LSPs that provide LoST routing entities with inaccurate location
       information, or no location information at all

   2.  VSPs that mis-route emergency calls

   3.  VSPs (or ISPs) that restrict the communications resources
       available for call traffic

   Fortunately, these risks are all relatively improbable.  Users often
   have business relationships with their LSPs, VSPs, and ISPs that
   oblige these service providers to provide reliable service.
   Additionally, these service providers are often subject to legal and
   regulatory requirements that they faithfully execute their roles in
   emergency calling.

4.2.  VSPs

   By handling emergency calls, VSPs impose additional load on their
   infrastructure, and by providing priority to emergency call signaling
   or media traffic (or allocating bandwidth for it), they risk
   degrading the quality of service experienced by other users.  In
   order to protect their infrastructure, VSPs require assurance that



Barnes & Lepinski        Expires April 24, 2008                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         draft-barnes-ecrit-auth-01           October 2007


   calls receiving special treatment as emergency calls are in fact
   emergency calls.  That is, they require a reliable means for
   determining which calls are emergency calls.

   The primary fraud risk for VSPs is that callers will be able to
   obtain special treatment for non-emergency calls that is usually only
   provided to emergency calls, i.e., that non-emergency calls will be
   able to masquerade as emergency calls in order to get special
   treatment.  VSPs thus require reliable mechanisms for verifying that
   a call is an emergency call.  These mechanisms must be reliable in
   the sense that a call so verified will necessarily be delivered by
   the signaling system to a PSAP.  An example of such a mechanism is
   described in Section 5 below.

4.3.  LSPs

   Location providers have the right to control access to the location
   information they hold.  They may restrict access to location in order
   to protect users' privacy, or they may do it in order to enable a
   pay-for-location business model.  On the other hand, location
   providers in many jurisdictions have a legal or regulatory
   requirement to provide location information for the purpose of
   routing emergency calls or for directing emergency responders.  The
   primary fraud that concerns an LSP is thus that an entity (a caller
   or VSP) that would not otherwise have access to location information
   will be able to obtain it by claiming to need it for emergency
   purposes.  This problem is exacerbated by the fact that LSPs are
   generally unable to authenticate the entities (e.g.  VSPs) that might
   request location information for LoST routing.  This is because while
   LSPs tend to be physically local entities, serving a specific
   geographical area, VSPs can handle a call originated anywhere on the
   Internet.  Thus it is not sufficient for an LSP to have relationships
   with VSPs in its local area, as the callers served by an LSP may use
   a VSP based in another country, or even on another continent.

4.4.  PSAPs

   PSAPs have limited resources to devote to answering emergency calls -
   in particular, they have a limited number of human call-takers.  Many
   emergencies require emergency responders to be dispatched, often at
   significant cost.  PSAPs need to optimize their limited resources,
   and ensure to the greatest extent possible that emergency responses
   are timely and appropriate to the emergency.

   The two most significant fraud risks to PSAPs are false emergency
   calls and false location information.  A false emergency call is a
   call placed to a PSAP by a caller who is not in distress.  In the
   current system, these are often prank calls or inadvertently placed



Barnes & Lepinski        Expires April 24, 2008                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         draft-barnes-ecrit-auth-01           October 2007


   calls.  In the Internet context, there is a much larger risk that
   PSAPs will receive a high volume of such false calls, as the process
   of making a false call can be more easily automated.  A high volume
   of false calls can exhaust the limited resources of the PSAP, causing
   legitimate calls not to be answered, therefore false calls can be
   used as a denial of service attack against the PSAP and legitimate
   emergency callers.

   Likewise, false location information is location information that
   points to something other than the location of an ongoing emergency.
   If a PSAP dispatches first responders based on false location, then
   these responders may not be available to respond to actual
   emergencies.  While false calls can by definition only be launched by
   fraudulent callers, false location information can be provided by
   either callers or LSPs (possibly in collusion with each other).

   The cost of not responding to a legitamate emergency call is
   obviously quite high, and so PSAPs generally respond to all emergency
   calls.  Thus, a mechanism for discriminating false calls from
   legitimate calls is not useful (unless it can be clearly proven not
   to identify legitimate calls as false ones).  Mechanisms that provide
   reliable information for forensic analysis are preferable, for
   instance mechanisms that reliably identifying callers for subsequent
   investigation or prosecution.

   On the other hand, it is essential to determine whether location
   information has been falsified before emergency responders are
   dispatched.  This is a more tractable problem: Since PSAPs and LSPs
   are both inherently local entities, with well-defined geographical
   coverage areas, PSAPs will likely be able to establish trust
   relationships with LSPs that serve the same geographical area as the
   PSAP.  These trust relationships can be used together with Internet
   security technologies to prove that location objects originated from
   a trusted LSP.

4.5.  Requirements of the LoST Infrastructure

   The proper functioning of the emergency calling system depends on the
   LoST infrastructure having three critical properties:

   1.  Accuracy.  Information returned by LoST queries is trusted by all
       parties to be an accurate reflection of current PSAP assignments.

   2.  Completeness.  A URI belongs to an emergency services entity if,
       and only if, it is returned in a LoST response from an
       authoritative LoST server.





Barnes & Lepinski        Expires April 24, 2008                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         draft-barnes-ecrit-auth-01           October 2007


   3.  Uniformity.  If two different entities both submit the same query
       (within a reasonable period of time), then both queries will
       return the same results.

   The LoST mapping architecture as specified in
   [I.D-ietf-ecrit-mapping-arch] mostly satisfies these requirements.
   However, there may be limited cases in which it does not, primarily
   due to territorial disputes or incomplete deployment.  The latter can
   be expected to improve as the LoST infrastructure is more completely
   deployed; the former is likely to be long-term issue.

   The accuracy assumption is necessary for the emergency calling system
   to function at all: If the LoST infrastructure is not trusted then
   there are much more serious problems than user fraud.  (In
   particular, an attacker could redirect all emergency calls in an area
   to an attacker controlled fake PSAP.)  The completeness and
   uniformity assumptions mean that the LoST infrastructure can be used
   to authenticate PSAP URIs.  In the absence of an authentication
   infrastructure for PSAPs, verifying that a URI is returned by a LoST
   query is a convenient mechanism that provides reasonable assurance
   that a given URI is a PSAP URI.  The completeness and uniformity
   assumptions may not be valid in the early stages of the deployment of
   the LoST infrastructure.  In particular, a VSP may receive a
   different answer to a LoST query than the end device (or another LoST
   routing entity) because either (A) the LoST forest-guide system is
   incomplete and the VSP's LoST resolver is unable to identify the
   authoritative tree for a given location; or (B) the location is in a
   contested region, there are two trees that claim to be authoritative
   for this region, and the VSP and the device disagree as to which tree
   has a legitimate claim to represent the region.

   Fortunately, once the mapping infrastructure is fully deployed (as
   described in [I.D-ietf-ecrit-mapping-arch]) it should be very rare
   for a VSP to fail to locate the authoritative tree for a given
   location.  In the meantime, one possible strategy to mitigate this
   problem is for the device to include in the signaling the <source>
   element from the LoST response.  In such a case, if the VSP fails to
   locate an authoritative tree for a given location, it can extract the
   authoritative LoST server from the <source> element in the signaling
   traffic and query that server to verify that URI belongs to an
   emergency services entity.  Even when the LoST infrastructure is
   fully deployed, there will likely always be territorial disputes that
   result in two distinct trees claiming to be authoritative for a given
   region.  However, in most such cases, it is likely that a user will
   select a VSP that agrees with him as to who legitimately controls a
   given region.  In situations where a user disagrees with his VSP as
   to which tree is authoritative for a given region, then the VSP will
   likely not give special consideration to calls destined for a PSAP it



Barnes & Lepinski        Expires April 24, 2008                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         draft-barnes-ecrit-auth-01           October 2007


   deems illegitimate (even if the user deems the PSAP to be
   legitimate).  There can be no technical solution that resolves such a
   dispute.  (For example, it is unlikely that a Israeli VSP will give
   special treatment to a call destined for a Palestinian PSAP in a
   contested territory, no matter what protocol specifications we might
   produce.)


5.  Mitigating Fraud against VSPs

   One type of fraud that can reasonably be mitigated is fraud against
   VSPs, in which callers are able to obtain special services usually
   reserved for emergency calls by crafting non-emergency calls that
   look like emergency calls.  In this section, we describe a mechanism
   to mitigate this fraud.  Although we describe our solution here in
   terms of SIP signaling, the same technique could be adapted to other
   signaling protocols with appropriate semantics.

5.1.  Problem Statement

   In the case of the signaling network, fraud occurs when a call is
   placed to a non-emergency services entity, but signaling elements
   (e.g.  SIP Proxies) believe that that the call is an emergency call.
   In particular, consider a VSP that provides special preference to
   emergency calls (e.g. emergency calls are free of charge, or are
   given high priority access to signaling elements).  If a malicious
   user of such a VSP is able to cause calls to an arbitrary recipient
   to be treated as emergency calls, then the user could fraudulently
   gain access to VSP resources.  Clearly this is a situation the VSP
   wishes to avoid.

   Note that in this document, we are not concerned with non-emergency
   calls to emergency services entities.  Although such calls are also
   fraudulent, they (1) are very difficult to detect; and (2) have a
   very limited impact on VSP resource consumption, since they may only
   be placed to emergency services entities.

   This system verifies that a call is an emergency call in the sense
   that it is structured as an emergency call described in
   [I.D-ietf-ecrit-phonebcp], and it is directed to a PSAP URI.  The
   structural verification is performed simply be examining the contents
   of the SIP INVITE message.  Verifying that a given URI is a PSAP URI
   is done via a LoST query, so this mechanism depends heavily on the
   above-listed assumptions about the LoST infrastructure.  If LoST
   information can be manipulated by an attacker, then he can thwart
   this verification procedure by making any URI look like a PSAP URI.
   If there are PSAPs who are not listed in the LoST infrastructure,
   then this system will not be able to verify that their URIs are PSAP



Barnes & Lepinski        Expires April 24, 2008                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         draft-barnes-ecrit-auth-01           October 2007


   URIs, and will not regard calls to them as emergency calls.  And if
   different entities receive different answers to the same query, then
   there is a risk that the entity that the query that is used to verify
   the PSAP URI will return a different result than the one used to find
   the PSAP URI in the first place.

5.2.  Risk at different stages of emergency calling

   Recall that in the ECRIT framework for emergency calling, there are
   three distinct stages of an emergency call.  The three stages and
   their corresponding markings are listed below:

   1.  The call has not been recognized as an emergency call (and has
       therefore has also not been routed).

       The Request-URI of the call contains a Dial String URI.

   2.  The call has been recognized as an emergency call but has not
       been routed.

       The Request-URI of the call contains an appropriate emergency
       services URN.

   3.  The call has been recognized as an emergency call and has been
       routed via the LoST protocol.

       The Request-URI of the call contains an appropriate emergency
       services URN and the Route header contains the URI of PSAP.

   Note that in the context of fraud targeting the VSP, there is only
   risk of fraud when the VSP receives a call in the third of these
   stages.

   When a VSP receives a call in the first stage, it will attempt to
   recognize the dial string as a valid emergency dial string.  If the
   recognition is successful it will process the call as it would
   process a second-stage call and thus there is no opportunity for
   fraud.

   When a VSP receives a call in the second stage, the VSP will make a
   LoST query (which will return a valid PSAP URI) and the VSP will
   proceed to route the call to this URI.  Therefore, there is no
   opportunity for fraud.

   The possibility of fraud only exists when the VSP receives a call in
   the third stage.  In such a case, the URI in the route header may or
   may not be a valid PSAP URI returned by LoST query.  Therefore, to
   prevent fraud against the VSP it suffices to ensure that a VSP can



Barnes & Lepinski        Expires April 24, 2008                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         draft-barnes-ecrit-auth-01           October 2007


   verify that the URI in the route header of a third-stage call is a
   valid PSAP URI returned by a LoST query.  Note that this problem is
   tractable becuase in order for a VSP to receive a third-stage call,
   some upstream signaling entity must possess location information of
   sufficient precision for use with LoST, and this location can be used
   by the VSP (in conjunction with the LoST infrastructure) to verify
   the validity of the URI in the Route header.  A mechanism for
   performing such verification is described in the next section.

5.3.  A verification mechanism

   Here we propose a signaling mechanism for emergency calls that have
   been recognized and routed (see Section 5.2) that allows a VSP to
   verification that the URI in the Route header is a valid PSAP URI
   (returned by a LoST query).

   Note that we are not proposing that VSPs reject emergency calls that
   fail verification (or are not marked using this mechanism).  Instead
   the failure of verification or the absence of this mechanism may be
   used as an indication of possible fraud.  Further (forensic) analysis
   may be necessary to determine that fraud did indeed occur.
   Nonetheless, this mechanism should be useful to detect large scale
   fraud and take appropriate action.

   In describing our mechanism, we distinguish the following two cases:
   (1) the emergency call is routed by the calling device; and (2) the
   emergency call is routed by a SIP proxy.  These two cases differ
   slightly in the actions perfromed by the entity who does the call
   routing.  However, the verification procedure performed by the VSP is
   identical in both cases.

   When the emergency call is routed by the calling device, if the
   calling device has access to its location, then it MUST include its
   location (either by value or by reference) in a geolocation header
   [I.D-ietf-sip-location-conveyance] in the SIP INVITE used to initiate
   the emergency call.  This geolocation header must include the "used-
   for-routing" parameter.  If the calling device does not have access
   to its location, then it must include the PSAP service area boundary
   (returned by LoST) in the body of the SIP INVITE.  This boundary must
   be referenced by a SIP geolocation header and that header must
   contain the "used-for-routing" parameter.

   When the emergency call is routed by a SIP proxy, if the calling
   device's location is already present in the SIP INVITE, then the
   proxy must add the "used-for-routing" parameter to the appropriate
   geolocation header.  If the calling device's location is not present
   in the SIP INVITE, then the proxy must add a geolocation header
   containing either a reference to the device's location, or else a



Barnes & Lepinski        Expires April 24, 2008                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         draft-barnes-ecrit-auth-01           October 2007


   reference to the PSAP service area boundary (returned by LoST).  This
   geolocation header must include the "used-for-routing" parameter.
   This reference must be able to be dereferenced by any entity on the
   public internet.  If the SIP proxy possesses an appropriate,
   universally-dereferencable reference to the device's location or the
   PSAP service area boundary, it may use this reference in the
   geolocation header.  However, if the SIP proxy does not possess an
   appropriate reference, then it must create a new reference to either
   the location of the calling device or the service boundary of the
   PSAP.  Note that this requires the SIP proxy (or another machine in
   the domain of the SIP proxy) to maintain state for the lifetime of
   this newly created location reference (which should not be less than
   several minutes).  This introduces the possibility of a denial of
   service attack against the SIP proxy in which an entities served by
   the SIP proxy make a large number of emergency calls to exhaust the
   storage available for maintaining such reference bindings.
   Therefore, it is recommended that the SIP proxy creates references to
   PSAP service boundaries and not device locations, since these service
   bondary references can be reused whenever the SiP proxy routes
   multiple calls to the same PSAP.

   We now describe the actions taken to verify that a (previously
   recognized and routed) emergency call is being routed to a valid PSAP
   URI.  Upon receiving a SIP INVITE for such a call, the VSP does the
   following:

   o  Examine the Request-URI header to obtain a service URN.  If the
      Request-URI header does not contain a service URN then
      verification fails.  (Note that service URNs act as universal
      identifiers for emergency calls, and any call that has been
      recognized as an emergency call must be tagged with a service URN
      in the Request-URI header [I.D-ietf-ecrit-phonebcp].)

   o  Examine the SIP headers and attempt to find a geolocation header
      containing the "used-for-routing" parameter.  If such a
      geolocation header does not exist then verification fails.

   o  If the geolocation header contains a location reference, attempt
      to dereference the reference to obtain a location object.  If the
      deference fails then verification fails.  Otherwise, if the
      location is included by-value then obtain the location object from
      the body of the SIP message.

   o  If the location object is a point, then make a LoST query using
      that point and the service URN from the Request-URI header to
      obtain a PSAP URI.  If the location object is a service boundary,
      then make a LoST query using an arbitrary point within the
      boundary and the URN from the Request-URI header to obtain a PSAP



Barnes & Lepinski        Expires April 24, 2008                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         draft-barnes-ecrit-auth-01           October 2007


      URI.

   o  Compare the PSAP URI obtained from the LoST query to the URI in
      the Route header.  If the two URIs do not match, then verification
      fails.  If the two URIs do match, then verification succeeds.


6.  Acknowledgements

   This template was derived from an initial version written by Pekka
   Savola and contributed by him to the xml2rfc project..


7.  Security Considerations

   This document outlines a mechanism for the mitigation fraud against
   VSPs with respect to IP-based emergency calls.  The trust model and
   the security concerns related to the mechanism are presented in the
   appropriate sections.


8.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [I.D-ietf-ecrit-framework]
              Rosen, B., Schulzrinne, H., Polk, J., and A. Newton,
              "Framework for Emergency Calling using Internet
              Multimedia", September 2007.

   [I.D-ietf-ecrit-phonebcp]
              Rosen, B. and J. Polk, "Best Current Practice for
              Communications Services in support of Emergency Calling",
              September 2007.

   [I.D-ietf-sip-location-conveyance]
              Polk, J. and B. Rosen, "Location Conveyance for the
              Session Initiation Protocol", July 2007.

9.2.  Informative References

   [I.D-ietf-ecrit-mapping-arch]
              Schulzrinne, H., "Location-to-URI Mapping Architecture and



Barnes & Lepinski        Expires April 24, 2008                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft         draft-barnes-ecrit-auth-01           October 2007


              Framework", September 2007.


Authors' Addresses

   Richard Barnes
   BBN Technologies
   9861 Broken Land Pkwy, Suite 400
   Columbia, MD  21046
   USA

   Phone: +1 410 290 6169
   Email: rbarnes@bbn.com


   Matt Lepinski
   BBN Technologies
   10 Moulton St
   Cambridge, MA  02138
   USA

   Phone: +1 617 873 5939
   Email: mlepinski@bbn.com




























Barnes & Lepinski        Expires April 24, 2008                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft         draft-barnes-ecrit-auth-01           October 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Barnes & Lepinski        Expires April 24, 2008                [Page 16]


