


Network Working Group                                          R. Morgan
Internet-Draft                                       Univ. of Washington
Expires: November 11, 2002                                   K. Hazelton
                                              Univ. of Wisconsin-Madison
                                                            May 13, 2002


                        A URN Namespace for MACE
                  draft-hazelton-mace-urn-namespace-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 11, 2002.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document describes a proposed URN (Uniform Resource Name)
   namespace that would be managed by the Internet2 Middleware
   Architecture Committee for Education (MACE) for naming persistent
   resources defined by MACE, its working groups and other designated
   subordinates.








Morgan & Hazelton       Expires November 11, 2002               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          A URN Namespace for MACE                May 2002


1. Introduction

   The Internet2 Middleware Architecture Committee for Education (MACE)
   produces many kinds of documents: specifications, working drafts,
   object classes, schemas, stylesheets, etc.  It also defines directory
   attributes and controlled vocabularies for the values of some of
   those attributes.

   MACE wishes to provide global, distributed, persistent, location-
   independent names for these resources.  The Uniform Resource Name
   (URN) variant of URIs meets these requirements.

   The proposed URN namespace specification is for a formal namespace.






































Morgan & Hazelton       Expires November 11, 2002               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          A URN Namespace for MACE                May 2002


2. Specification Template

   Namespace ID:

         "mace" requested.

   Registration Information:

         Registration Version Number 1

         Registration Date: 2002-xx-yy

   Registrant of the namespace:

         Middleware Architecture Committee for Education (MACE)

         ATTN: Lisa Hogeboom

         Internet2

         3025 Boardwalk  Suite 200

         Ann Arbor, MI 48108

         Phone: +1 734 913 4250



         Contact: Keith Hazelton

         Affiliation: Univ.  of Wisconsin-Madison

         1210 W.  Dayton St.

         Madison, WI  53706

         Phone: +1 608 262 0771

         hazelton@doit.wisc.edu

   Syntactic structure:

         The Namespace Specific Strings (NSS) of all URNs assigned by
         MACE will conform to the following syntactic rule: All MACE URN
         NSSs must consist of a left-to-right series of tokens delimited
         by colons.  If the tokens themselves include colons, those
         colons must be escaped as the hexadecimal value for a colon in
         ASCII, "%3A." The left-to-right sequence of colon-delimited



Morgan & Hazelton       Expires November 11, 2002               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          A URN Namespace for MACE                May 2002


         tokens corresponds to descending nodes in a tree.  One or more
         of the initial nodes correspond to naming authorities.  Below
         the naming authority node(s) there may be zero, one or more
         levels of hierarchical nodes.  The rightmost string is a leaf
         node under the naming authority.

         See the section on Identifier Assignment below for an
         explanation of the semantics behind this syntax.

   Relevant ancillary documentation:

         None.

   Identifier uniqueness:

         It is the responsibility of MACE directors to guarantee
         uniqueness of the names of immediately subordinate naming
         authorities.  Each lower-level naming authority in turn
         inherits the responsibility of guaranteeing uniqueness of names
         in their branch of the naming tree.

   Identifier persistence:

         MACE directors bear ultimate responsibility for maintaining the
         usability of MACE URNs over time.  This responsibility may be
         delegated to subordinate naming authorities per the discussion
         in the section below on identifier assignment.  That section
         provides a mechanism for the delegation to be revoked in case a
         subordinate naming authority ceases to function.

   Identifier assignment:

         MACE directors will create an initial series of  immediately
         subordinate naming authorities, and will define a process for
         adding to that list of authorities.  Each top-level working
         group of MACE will be invited to stand up a naming authority
         and to suggest one or more candidate names for that authority.
         The MACE-Shibboleth group, for example, might propose creating
         a naming authority under "urn:mace:shib," "urn:mace:shibboleth"
         or some other name.

         Institutions and communities affiliated with MACE may request,
         through their designated MACE liaison, that they be granted
         MACE-subordinate naming authority status.  They may propose
         candidate names for that authority.  One way for such entities
         to guarantee uniqueness of their proposed name is to base it on
         a DNS name.  That is, if Georgetown University wished to be
         designated a subordinate naming authority under MACE, the



Morgan & Hazelton       Expires November 11, 2002               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          A URN Namespace for MACE                May 2002


         institutional MACE liaison could propose to MACE directors that
         they be delegated control over names beginning with
         "urn:mace:georgetown.edu."  Institutions seeking affiliation
         with MACE should send email to mace-submit@internet2.edu,
         nominating an institutional liaison and providing contact
         information for that person.

         On at least an annual basis, MACE directors MUST contact the
         liaisons or directors of each immediately subordinate naming
         authority.  If there is no response, or if the respondent
         indicates that they wish to relinquish naming authority, the
         authority over that branch of the tree reverts to MACE.  This
         process MUST be enforced recursively by each naming authority
         on its subordinates.  This process guarantees that
         responsibility for each branch of the tree will lapse for less
         than one year at worst before being reclaimed by a superior
         authority.

         Lexical equivalence of two MACE namespace specific strings
         (NSSs) is defined below as an exact, case-sensitive string
         match.  MACE will assign names of immediately subordinate
         naming authorities in lower case only.  This forestalls the
         registration of two MACE-subordinate naming authorities whose
         names differ only in case.

   Identifier resolution:

         MACE directors MUST maintain an index of all MACE and MACE
         workgroup assigned URNs on its web site, http://
         middleware.internet2.edu/MACE.  That index will map URNs to
         resource identifiers, usually URLs.  MACE-affiliated naming
         authorities MUST specify how to resolve the URNs they assign if
         they are resolvable.

   Lexical equivalence:

         Lexical equivalence of two MACE namespace specific strings
         (NSSs) is defined as an exact, case-sensitive string match.

   Conformance with URN syntax:

         No special considerations.

   Validation mechanism:

         As specified in the "Identifier resolution" section above, MACE
         directors will maintain an index of all MACE and MACE workgroup
         assigned URNs on its web site, http://middleware.internet2.edu/



Morgan & Hazelton       Expires November 11, 2002               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          A URN Namespace for MACE                May 2002


         MACE.  Presence in that index implies that a given URN is
         valid.  MACE-affiliated naming authorities MUST specify how to
         validate the URNs they assign.

   Scope:

         Global.












































Morgan & Hazelton       Expires November 11, 2002               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          A URN Namespace for MACE                May 2002


3. Security Considerations

   There are no additional security considerations beyond those normally
   associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general.















































Morgan & Hazelton       Expires November 11, 2002               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          A URN Namespace for MACE                May 2002


4. Namespace Considerations

   Registration of an NID specific to MACE is reasonable given the
   following considerations:

   1.  MACE would like to assign URNs to some very fine-grained objects
   (such as specific controlled vocabulary values of an attribute in
   MACE-defined LDAP object classes).  This does not seem to be the
   primary intended use of the XMLORG namespace (rfc3120), let alone the
   more tightly controlled OASIS namespace (rfc3121).

   2.  MACE seeks naming autonomy.  We understand that the XMLORG
   registrants left the door open to subordinate naming authorities,
   "OASIS may assign portions of its [XMLORG] namespace for assignment
   by other parties" (rfc3120), but there is no specified process for
   such assignment.  That would in any case mean having a fixed XMLORG-
   assigned prefix on every single object to which we assign a URN,
   making for longer strings.  We have a number of active work groups
   that may well generate a growing number of subordinate naming
   authorities.  Moreover, MACE is not a member of OASIS, so becoming a
   subordinate naming authority under the OASIS URN space is currently
   not a current option.

   3.  MACE will want to assign URNs to non-XML objects as well.  That
   is another reason that XMLORG may not be an appropriate higher-level
   naming authority for MACE.

   Some MACE-developed schema and namespaces may be good candidates for
   inclusion in the XMLORG registry.  The fact that such an object might
   already have a MACE-assigned URN shouldn't be a hindrance.  Work in
   progress to update RFC2611 includes an explicit statement that two or
   more URNs may point to the same resource (see draft-ietf-urn-
   rfc2611bis-04).  A resource with a MACE-assigned namespace-specific-
   string would, of course, be given an XMLORG namespace-specific-string
   at the time it enters the XMLORG registry.
















Morgan & Hazelton       Expires November 11, 2002               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          A URN Namespace for MACE                May 2002


5. Community Considerations

   MACE working groups and other MACE-affiliated groups would benefit
   from the MACE URN proposal by having an easy, efficient way to assign
   globally unique, persistent identifiers to resources that they
   create.  The nature of MACE work is that it is carried out to serve
   the needs of one or more communities of interest.  A namespace
   managed so as to facilitate the creation, registration and resolution
   of unique, persistent identifiers would be of great value for MACE,
   its affiliates and the higher education community generally.









































Morgan & Hazelton       Expires November 11, 2002               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          A URN Namespace for MACE                May 2002


6. IANA Considerations

   This document is intended as a formal request to IANA for the
   registration of a "MACE" NID within the IANA registry of URN NIDs.















































Morgan & Hazelton       Expires November 11, 2002              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          A URN Namespace for MACE                May 2002


References

   [1]  Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997.

   [2]  Daigle, L., van Gulik, D., Iannella, R. and P. Faltstrom, "URN
        Namespace Definition Mechanisms", BCP 33, RFC 2611, June 1999.


Authors' Addresses

   RL "Bob" Morgan
   4545 15th Ave. NE
   Seattle, WA  98105
   U.S.A.

   EMail: rlmorgan@washington.edu


   Keith D. Hazelton
   University of Wisconsin-Madison
   1210 W. Dayton St.
   Madison, WI  53706
   U.S.A.

   EMail: hazelton@doit.wisc.edu


























Morgan & Hazelton       Expires November 11, 2002              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          A URN Namespace for MACE                May 2002


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Morgan & Hazelton       Expires November 11, 2002              [Page 12]


