Internet Draft                                            Expire: Sept. 1994

                      An IPng Requirements White Paper
                 <draft-ghiselli-ipng-whitepaper-req-00.txt>

Status of this Memo
                                             
This document was submitted to the IETF IPng area in response to
RFC 1550  Publication of this document does not imply acceptance 
by the IPng area of any ideas expressed within.  Comments should
be submitted to the big-internet@munnari.oz.au mailing list.

Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
and its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
working documents as Internet Drafts.

Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
months.  Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
other documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to use Internet
Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as a
``working draft'' or ``work in progress.''

Please check the 1id-abstracts.txt listing contained in the
internet-drafts Shadow Directories on nic.ddn.mil, nnsc.nsf.net,
nic.nordu.net, ftp.nisc.sri.com, or munnari.oz.au to learn the
current status of any Internet Draft.

                                                                
                                                      A. Ghiselli
                                                      D. Salomoni
                                                      C. Vistoli
                                                      INFN/CNAF
                                                      Italy
                                                      January-1994

Abstract:

This white paper is sent by INFN network team, the Italian National 
Institute for nuclear phisics, whose network, named INFNet, is a 
nationwide network founded to provide the access to existing national and
international HEP laboratory and to facilitate communications between the 
researchers.
With this  paper we would like to emphasize the key points that we would 
to consider if charged with  IPng plan. We do not really expect to add  
original items to the selection, but we think that it could be useful to 
submit the opinions and ideas that come from our network experience.

1. General Requirements

The problems  that are to be solved in IP internet are mainly three:
1. address exaustion
2. flat address space
3. routing efficiency, flexibility and capacity.
The aim of IPng study should be  to define a plan that solves  all these 
problems as a whole and not each of them separetely.
The general requirements that we underline  for this transition are:
- transparency to the final user: user applications should not be 
  influenced.

- flexibility:  Simplify the  suitability  to new communication 
  technology and to topology changes due to new services provided or to 
  different users needs.

2. Application and Transport Level

Starting from the top of the OSI model, we think that the users 
applications should not be influenced by the migration plan.
It means that the  TCP (the transport layer) must  maintain  the same 
interfaces and services to the upper layers.
Anyway, it is also necessary to foresee the use of a different transport
services. The  possibility to use different transport should be offered 
to the applications. Therefore a transport selector field is needed. 

3. Network layer: service and address

We assume that the network layer must continue to  provide the same 
datagram service as IP does.  
CLNS could be a solution and a reliable starting point for the IPng. 
The main advantage is that this solution  has  been profitable
tested and it is  already available on many systems.
It is not, of course, deployed  as widely as IPv4 is, since it is 
a newer technology, but it is  widely configured and and there is
already operational experience.
The corresponding address, the NSAP, is 20 bytes long. 
It is long enough to scale the future data network environment.
Its  hierarchical format can be organized in a really flexible way,  
satisfying hierarchical routing and  policy based routing needs and 
simplifying the distributed administration and  management.
A lot of work has been already done in the majority of the countries in 
order to define NSAP formats satisfying both the requirements of 
administrative delegation  and routing performances.

4. Routing protocols

We don't consider the decision about the routing protocol to be adopted 
for the IPng to be fundamental.
Even if this choice is very important to obtain good performances, the
routing protocols can be changed or improved at any time, because there 
is no influence into the End Systems configuration. 
Relationships between NSAP aggregation, hierarchical topology and 
hierarchical routing algorithm must be taken into account in IPng plan.
These issues could improve administation and topological flexibility of 
the IPng and solve the flat problem of the IPv4.
The IPng routing protocols should include policy-based features.
The IPv4 network  topology is very complex and it will continue to
enlarge during the transition. It would be very difficult or impossible 
to manage it without the "policy" tools.
The multicast capability as well as any other new features that fit 
in a datagram network should be supported.
Regarding the Source Routing feature, since  we  think that it deeply 
modifies  the aim and the "philosophy" of a connectionless network and 
it  also  introduces an heavy complication in the end nodes and routers 
software, we don't consider it a major issue.


5. Layer 2 or communication infrastructure media support.

This is an open field, rapidly changing, then it  must be left open to 
any evolution. What it should be recommended is to be compatible with 
the above network layer. 

6. Transition and Deployment

We faced  the problem of the transition of the DECNET global network
to DECNET/OSI over CLNS. This activity is now proceding to the last step
and based on this experience we would underline some points that we found 
important during the transition deployment.
The transitions must be planned and developed in a distribiuted way.
This means that every organization should have the possibility  to  plan 
and start their network migration without  loosing connectivity with 
the existing  global internet.
Of course, the compatibility with the IPv4 world must be mantained, this 
mean that a new generation system must interwork with both the IPv4 and 
IPng nodes, using the same applications.
However it is important to define a deadline for the backward 
compatibility in order to avoid huge software maintenance in 
the user systems and a "multi-topology" management.
We think that a dual stack approach could simplify very much the 
transition, whereas a translation mechanism would need a widely and 
deep coordination in order to mantain the global connectivity during 
the transition period.
The dual stack is simpler and could be easily developed, but it
is important to push in order to have pure IPng with global 
connectovity as soon as possible; this could happen when there are  
no more "IPv4 only"  hosts.
Indeed, the drawback of the dual stack configuration is that you  
continue to suffer for the IPv4 address space exaustion and that you 
must continue  to support the IPv4 routing protocols and 
infrasctructure.
We don't think that the tunnel  solution to interconnect the IPv4 isle 
could give good performances to the users. 
Then, it is important to mantain  the  IPv4 connectivity  and the dual 
stack software  support in the End System software in a determinated 
timeframe, or the transition will never end. 


