



Network Working Group                                           S. Hanna
Internet-Draft                                          Juniper Networks
Expires: June 24, 2006                                       T. Hardjono
                                                          Signacert Inc.
                                                             S. Thomson
                                                           Cisco Systems
                                                       December 21, 2005


          Network Endpoint Assessment (NEA) Problem Statement
                 draft-thomson-nea-problem-statement-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 24, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   Network endpoint assessment (NEA) is a system that enables the
   network to learn the posture (state) of an endpoint device, and
   optionally use that information to influence a network admission
   decision.  Posture information may include information about the OS
   and security applications running on the endpoint.  This document



Hanna, et al.             Expires June 24, 2006                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            NEA Problem Statement            December 2005


   describes the problem network endpoint assessment is intending to
   address, and identifies interfaces that are candidates for
   standardization.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Goals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Deployment Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.1.  Wired LAN access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.2.  Wireless LAN Access  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.3.  Remote access VPN  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.4.  Gateway Access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Components and Interfaces  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     6.1.  Relationship to EAP and AAA Architecture . . . . . . . . .  8
     6.2.  Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       6.2.1.  NEA Agent  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       6.2.2.  Network enforcer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       6.2.3.  NEA server . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.3.  Interfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       6.3.1.  Posture Attribute interface (IF-PA)  . . . . . . . . . 11
       6.3.2.  Posture Broker Interface (IF-PB) . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       6.3.3.  Posture Transport Interface (IF-PT)  . . . . . . . . . 11
       6.3.4.  Network Access Enforcement Interface (IF-NAE)  . . . . 11
       6.3.5.  Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.4.  System Flow  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  Scope of Standardization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     9.1.  Secure channel between the NEA Agent Broker and Server
           Broker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     9.2.  Authorization for Plug-in/Broker interaction . . . . . . . 13
     9.3.  Self-Integrity of the NEA Agent and NEA Server . . . . . . 14
     9.4.  Protection of parameters exchanged across Interfaces . . . 14
     9.5.  Identity authentication of communicating end-points  . . . 14
   10. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   11. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 17



Hanna, et al.             Expires June 24, 2006                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            NEA Problem Statement            December 2005


1.  Introduction

   Network endpoint assessment (NEA) is a system that enables the
   network to learn the posture (state) of an endpoint device, and
   optionally use that information to influence a network admission
   decision.  Endpoint posture may include information about the
   operating system as well as information about security applications
   running on the endpoint such as anti-virus software, personal
   firewalls and host intrusion protection systems.

   An organization may use posture information for several purposes
   including monitoring and enforcing compliance of endpoints to the
   organization's security policy, and supplementing and updating
   information in asset tracking databases.

   The document describes the problem network endpoint assessment is
   intending to address, defines terminology and concepts, and
   identifies interfaces that are candidates for standardization.

   Note that this document is not intended to define a new architecture
   or framework for network endpoint assessment.  There are already
   several existing architectures for this purpose.  The network
   endpoint assessment effort aims only to identify common interfaces
   that are used in these architectures, and define standard protocols
   that can be used by the existing architectures to reduce duplication
   and achieve interoperability.


2.  Terminology

   Endpoint: An endpoint is a host connected to the network.  This broad
   definition includes (but is not limited to) desktop or laptop
   computers, servers, mobile phones, printers.

   Posture: Posture refers to the state of an endpoint as it pertains to
   an organization's security policy.  Endpoint state may include
   knowledge about the types of hardware and software installed and
   their configurations, e.g.  OS name and version, application patch
   levels, and anti-virus signature file version.

   NEA agent: The NEA agent is a software component on the endpoint that
   requests access to the network.  The NEA agent comprises three
   logical components: NEA agent plug-in, NEA agent broker and Network
   access requestor.

   Network enforcer: The Network enforcer is a network device that
   controls endpoint access to the upstream network.  It implements
   authorization decisions from the Network access authority.



Hanna, et al.             Expires June 24, 2006                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            NEA Problem Statement            December 2005


   NEA server: The NEA server is a server that assesses the posture of
   an endpoint device and provides network authorization decisions.  The
   NEA server comprises three logical components: NEA posture server,
   NEA server broker and Network Access Authority.

   NEA agent plug-in: A NEA agent plug-in is the component of the NEA
   agent that is responsible for collecting and maintaining posture
   information about the endpoint device.  There may be multiple NEA
   agent plug-ins on an endpoint device each targeted at a particular
   security application from a particular vendor.

   NEA agent broker: A NEA agent broker is the component of the NEA
   agent that aggregates posture information from multiple NEA agent
   plug-ins.

   Network access requestor: The Network access requestor is the
   component of the NEA agent responsible for requesting access to the
   network.

   Network access authority: The Network access authority is the
   component of the NEA server that authorizes endpoints based on a
   number of criteria including the identity of an endpoint machine
   and/or user as well as the results of posture assessment

   NEA server broker: A NEA server broker is the component of the NEA
   server that aggregates posture information from multiple NEA posture
   servers.

   NEA posture server: A NEA posture server is the logical component of
   the NEA server that assesses posture information from a NEA agent
   plug-in and determines the result of the assessment.  There may be
   multiple NEA posture servers each targeted at a particular security
   application from a particular vendor.


3.  Problem Statement

   Viruses and worms are a top cause of financial loss due to disruption
   of business activities and loss of employee productivity.  Endpoints
   are vulnerable to such attacks and, once infected, may in turn infect
   others.  To protect against infection (and re-infection), corporate
   security policy often requires that hosts run an IT-specified OS
   configuration and have certain security applications enabled, e.g.
   anti-virus software, host intrusion protection systems, personal
   firewalls, and patch management software.

   However, ensuring compliance of all endpoints to corporate security
   policy is still time-consuming and difficult.  Not all endpoints are



Hanna, et al.             Expires June 24, 2006                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            NEA Problem Statement            December 2005


   managed by a corporation's IT organization, e.g. lab assets, guest
   machines.  Even for assets that are managed, they may not receive
   updates in a timely fashion because they are not permanently attached
   to the corporate network, e.g. laptops.  Also, for organizations that
   attempt to keep track of their assets, inventory databases tend to be
   incomplete and out-of-date.

   The purpose of network endpoint assessment technology is to allow the
   network to supplement the role that security applications already
   play in protecting endpoints.  First, the network is able to detect
   when an endpoint accesses the network, thus providing an opportunity
   to assess an endpoint both prior to granting network access as well
   as while the endpoint remains connected to the network.  Second, the
   network can be used to enforce compliance.  Endpoints that are not
   compliant with security policy and are considered a risk to the
   network may be given restricted access until remediated.

   Today, most network access technologies, e.g. 802.1x, PPP and IPSEC
   VPN, authenticate an endpoint prior to granting network access, and
   if authentication succeeds, allow an authorization decision to be
   made based on the identity of the endpoint.  Common interoperable
   standards should be defined for assessing the posture of an endpoint
   device in addition to performing authentication as part of network
   access control.


4.  Goals

   The goals of network assessment technology are to support the
   following:

   o  Support assessment of endpoints across a range of network access
      technologies, leveraging existing technology to the extent
      possible

   o  Support authorization decisions based on authentication of user or
      endpoint device, assessment of the state of the endpoint device,
      or both

   o  Support endpoint assessment at various locations in the network
      i.e. at a L2 hop or a L3 hop, both of which may be a single hop or
      multiple hops away from the endpoint.

   o  Support endpoint assessment at possibly multiple hops on a path
      e.g. at both a L2 and a L3 hop

   o  Support network isolation of non-compliant endpoints from
      compliant endpoints for remediation or other purposes



Hanna, et al.             Expires June 24, 2006                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            NEA Problem Statement            December 2005


   o  Support endpoint re-assessment when state of endpoints change, or
      rules in the NEA server change

   o  Enable integration of 3rd-party security applications so that one
      or more applications can assess the posture of an endpoint and the
      aggregate of all results can be used in network admission
      decisions.

   o  Support endpoints with a NEA agent and without an agent


5.  Deployment Scenarios

   Network assessment has been targeted primarily at enterprise
   deployment scenarios to date.The deployment scenarios include:

5.1.  Wired LAN access

   In this deployment scenario, network admission control would
   typically take place at the first L2 hop from the endpoint i.e. a
   switch port.  However, there are cases where the first L2 device may
   not support network endpoint assessment for some reason, and network
   endpoint assessment may happen behind the first hop, e.g. a switch
   behind a wireless access point.

   Wired LAN access deployment scenarios may need to support single or
   multiple hosts per switch port.  Deployment scenarios with multiple
   hosts per port include IP phones + PC, or multiple PCs connected
   behind a hub.

   802.1x is an example of a standards-based network access technology
   that supports access control based on authentication for a single
   host per port in first L2 hop deployment scenarios.

5.2.  Wireless LAN Access

   In this deployment scenario, network admission control would
   typically take place at the first L2 hop from the endpoint i.e. a
   wireless access point.  Wireless LAN access supports multiple hosts
   per wireless access point.

   802.11 is a standards-based network access technology that supports
   wireless access control based on authenticating the endpoint.

5.3.  Remote access VPN

   In this deployment scenario, network admission control is done at the
   VPN concentrator that acts as the gateway between remote users and



Hanna, et al.             Expires June 24, 2006                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            NEA Problem Statement            December 2005


   access to the enterprise network.

   IPSEC VPN and SSL VPN are example of network access technologies that
   support remote access VPN deployment scenarios.

5.4.  Gateway Access

   In this deployment scenario, network admission control is enforced at
   a L3 boundary in a distributed campus network.  The L3 boundary may
   be one or more L3 hops away from the endpoint.

   This deployment scenario may be used during the transition period
   while an organization gradually upgrades network equipment to support
   network endpoint assessment.  In some cases, the technology may not
   be available immediately for first-hop L2 or L3 deployments and a
   general-purpose gateway deployment e.g. at a router behind a VPN
   concentrator, may be a reasonable first step.

   This deployment scenario may also be used between network security
   domains e.g. at the border between a less trusted/managed branch
   office and main campus, at the border between main campus or a
   visitor site and access to the Internet, at the border between
   extranet and intranet, and on access to protected servers in a data
   center.

   It follows from this deployment scenario that there may be multiple
   network enforcers on any path that an endpoint may use in a network,
   thus resulting in it being authorized more than once.  It is also
   possible that different posture rules may be assessed at different
   network locations and a different authorization decision made.


6.  Components and Interfaces

   Figure 1 shows the components of the NEA system and identifies
   specific interfaces.















Hanna, et al.             Expires June 24, 2006                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            NEA Problem Statement            December 2005


   |-------------|                          |----------------|
   | NEA Plug-in |  <-------IF-PA------->   |   NEA Posture  |
   |             |                          |   Server       |
   |-------------|                          |----------------|


   |-------------|                          |----------------|
   | NEA Agent   |  <-------IF-PB------->   |   NEA Server   |
   |   Broker    |                          |     Broker     |
   |--------- ---|                          |----------------|


   |-------------|  <------IF-PT------->    |----------------|
   |             |                          |                |
   | Network     |    |--------|            |   Network      |
   | Access      |    |Network |            |   Access       |
   | Requestor   |    |Enforcer| <-IF-NAE-> |   Authority    |
   |-------------|    |--------|            |----------------|

      NEA AGENT                                  NEA SERVER
   Figure 1: NEA Components and Interfaces

6.1.  Relationship to EAP and AAA Architecture

   Network endpoint assessment technology can build on the EAP and AAA
   architectures, so that existing technologies can be used to the
   extent possible including EAP, Radius, 802.1x, PPP, IPSEC VPN.

6.2.  Components

6.2.1.  NEA Agent

   The NEA Agent resides on an endpoint device and comprises the
   following components:

   o  NEA Agent Plug-in

   o  NEA Agent Broker

   o  Network Access Requestor

6.2.1.1.  NEA Agent Plug-in

   The NEA agent plug-in is software that provide posture information
   about the endpoint device to the NEA agent broker.  There may be many
   plug-ins in an agent, one per vendor and application type.  Examples
   of plug-ins include a host plug-in that provides information about
   the OS and patch levels, anti-virus plug-in that provides information



Hanna, et al.             Expires June 24, 2006                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            NEA Problem Statement            December 2005


   about the anti-virus application, firewall plug-in that provides
   information about the configuration of the personal firewall.

   An agent plug-in is responsible for:

   o  Receiving and responding to requests for posture information on a
      per vendor and application type basis

   o  Receiving a notification of the result of the posture assessment
      and information any actions to perform e.g.  URL of a remediation
      server

   o  Indicating when the posture of the host has changed

6.2.1.2.  NEA Agent Broker

   The NEA agent broker aggregates posture information from multiple NEA
   agent plug-ins.  The NEA agent broker is responsible for:

   o  Maintaining a record of agent plug-ins

   o  Multiplexing and demultiplexing posture messages between the NEA
      server and the relevant plug-ins

   o  Determining from plug-ins when posture has changed and triggering
      re-assessment where supported by the underlying transport

   o  Providing user notifications

6.2.1.3.  Network access requestor

   The Network access requestor is responsible for communicating with
   the NEA server (likely via the enforcer) to transport the necessary
   information to gain access to the network and for subsequent re-
   assessment.

6.2.2.  Network enforcer

   The Network enforcer is a network device that controls access of
   endpoints to the upstream network.  The NEA enforcer implements
   authorization decisions from the Network access authority.

6.2.3.  NEA server

   The NEA server comprises the following logical components (which may
   or may not be co-located on a single server):





Hanna, et al.             Expires June 24, 2006                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            NEA Problem Statement            December 2005


   o  Network access authority

   o  NEA server broker

   o  NEA server plug-in

6.2.3.1.  Network access authority

   The Network access authority is responsible for authorizing endpoints
   based on a number of criteria including the identity of an endpoint
   and/or user as well as the results of posture assessment

6.2.3.2.  NEA server broker

   The NEA server broker aggregates posture information from potentially
   multiple server plug-ins.  Responsibilities of the NEA server broker
   include:

   o  Maintaining a record of server plug-ins

   o  Multiplexing and demultiplexing posture messages between the NEA
      agent and the relevant plug-ins

   o  Aggregating posture assessment results from all plug-ins into an
      overall system result

   o  Triggering posture reassessment where supported

6.2.3.3.  NEA posture server

   A NEA posture server is a server that is responsible for assessing
   information from the corresponding NEA agent plug-in and determining
   the result of the assessment.  There may be multiple posture servers
   each targeted at a particular security application from a particular
   vendor.

   A NEA posture server is responsible for the following:

   o  Requesting and receiving posture information from a particular NEA
      agent plug-in

   o  Assessing the posture of the NEA agent plug-in and providing a
      result to the NEA agent plug-in along with any information on
      remediation actions to be taken

   o  Indicating to the NEA server broker when posture reassessment may
      be needed




Hanna, et al.             Expires June 24, 2006                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            NEA Problem Statement            December 2005


6.3.  Interfaces

6.3.1.  Posture Attribute interface (IF-PA)

   The IF-PA is a protocol between the NEA agent plug-in and the NEA
   posture server.  The interface is used to pass information about the
   posture of a plug-in, the results of the assessment and information
   needed for remediation.

6.3.2.  Posture Broker Interface (IF-PB)

   The IF-PB is a protocol that carries aggregated posture information
   between all requested plug-ins on an endpoint and the corresponding
   posture servers.  This protocol also carries the overall system
   posture result from the NEA server broker to the agent broker.

6.3.3.  Posture Transport Interface (IF-PT)

   The IF-PT is the transport protocol between the Network access
   requestor and the Network access authority that carries the IF-PB
   protocol.  In network endpoint assessment systems that use EAP, this
   interface would be an EAP method running over typically a combination
   of underlying network transports, e.g.  EAP over 802.1x, EAP over
   Radius.

6.3.4.  Network Access Enforcement Interface (IF-NAE)

   The IF-NAE is the protocol between the Network enforcer and Network
   access authority used to carry network access decisions between the
   Network enforcer and the Network access authority.

6.3.5.  Other

   Interfaces also exist between the logical components that make up the
   NEA agent and the NEA server themselves.  For example, an interface
   exists between the plug-in and broker components on the agent, as
   well as between the broker and network access requestor components.
   Similarly, an interface exists between the posture server and broker
   components on the NEA server as well as the broker and network access
   authority components.

   The interfaces on the NEA agent are likely local APIs.  This may be
   true on the NEA server as well, but deployments where components are
   not co-located are also possible.  Since these interfaces do not fall
   clearly within the purview of the IETF, standardization efforts are
   initially focused on the interfaces explicitly identified above.
   Standardization of some of these other interfaces may be called for
   in the future.



Hanna, et al.             Expires June 24, 2006                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            NEA Problem Statement            December 2005


6.4.  System Flow

   TBD.


7.  Scope of Standardization

   Interfaces that are candidates for standardization in the IETF
   include the following :

   o  Posture attributes interface (IF-PA): This interface can be
      defined independently of the underlying transport interfaces,
      while keeping in mind performance and other constraints imposed by
      the underlying protocols.  Many of the posture attributes will be
      vendor-specific and need only be understood by the corresponding a
      plug-in and its associated posture server.  However. there are
      common attributes that would benefit from standardization.

   o  Posture broker interface (IF-PB): This interface is also largely
      independent of the underlying transport, although it should be
      defined in such a way that it can be used in posture transport
      interfaces that are likely to be used, such as EAP tunneling
      methods based on TLS e.g. by using the same TLV framing that is
      already used in these methods today.

   o  Posture transport interface (IF-PT): While different posture
      transport interfaces may be used to support network endpoint
      assessment, one likely choice of transport is EAP.  The benefits
      of EAP are that it can be used to meet a range of deployment
      scenarios since it is designed to be independent of the underlying
      network transport, and is extensible to supporting both
      authentication and posture assessment in making a network access
      decision.  Standardization of certain EAP methods for
      authentication is the proposed charter of the EMU WG.  The need to
      support posture assessment in addition to authentication may place
      additional requirements on the EAP methods that need to be
      standardized.  In particular, standardization of tunnel EAP
      methods is a high priority.  Also, there is no standard EAP
      transport to support gateway and other "multi-hop" deployment
      scenarios as defined in this document.  The PANA WG has proposed a
      specification of EAP over an IP transport, although not explicitly
      for this use case.  Non-standardized protocols have been designed
      and used for this purpose.

   o  Network access enforcement interface (IF-NAE): Existing standards
      exist including Radius and Diameter.  The Radext WG has the
      charter to standardize Radius extensions.  Its not clear that NEA
      would require any extensions that fall outside of the scope of the



Hanna, et al.             Expires June 24, 2006                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft            NEA Problem Statement            December 2005


      existing charter of that WG.

   As mentioned earlier, the remaining interfaces that have been
   identified will likely not be within the scope of standardization
   efforts, at least not initially.  This could be revised in future.


8.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.


9.  Security Considerations

   A NEA system includes a number of functional components and
   interfaces, and thus there are a number of security aspects
   pertaining to the system as a whole which need to be highlighted.
   Some of these are discussed in the following sections.

9.1.  Secure channel between the NEA Agent Broker and Server Broker

   The NEA Agent Broker needs to be able to communicate the posture
   information regarding the NEA Agent to the NEA Server Broker with
   communications integrity and confidentiality.  One possible avenue
   towards establishing this secure channel (at the peer layer of the
   NEA Agent Broker and Server Broker) is to establish it end-to-end
   between Network Access Requestor (NAR) and the Network Access
   Authority (NAA).  This end-to-end secure channel would prevent any
   intermediate entity, including the Network Enforcer from gaining
   access to the posture information.  The exact implementation of this
   secure channel is dependent on the domain of application and network
   configuration.

9.2.  Authorization for Plug-in/Broker interaction

   There is a functional separation between the NEA Agent Plug-in and
   the NEA Agent Broker (at the NEA Agent side) and also between NEA
   Posture Server and the NEA Server Broker (at the NEA Server side).
   It is important that a NEA Agent Broker be allowed to communicate
   with only the authorized NEA Agent Plug-ins.  Similarly, the NEA
   Server Broker should only communicate with authorized NEA Posture
   Server.  Recall that the NEA Agent Plug-in is software that provides
   posture information about the endpoint device to the NEA Agent
   Broker.  Note that there may be many plug-ins in an agent, one per
   vendor and application type.  Without protection, bogus NEA Agent



Hanna, et al.             Expires June 24, 2006                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft            NEA Problem Statement            December 2005


   Plug-in (NEA Posture Server) can open communications with the NEA
   Agent Broker (NEA Server Broker), thereby opening the possibility of
   a Denial-of-Service attack (at the very least) against the NEA Agent
   Broker and NEA Server Broker respectively.

9.3.  Self-Integrity of the NEA Agent and NEA Server

   The trustworthiness of the posture information being reported by the
   NEA Agent to the NEA Server is dependent on and is only as good as
   the self-integrity of the NEA Agent and NEA Server respectively.  If
   malicious code or other malware are present in the NEA Agent actively
   modifying posture information being communicated by the NEA Agent,
   the NEA Server may be basing its decision-making on inaccurate or
   bogus posture information.  Thus, it is important that both the NEA
   Agent and the NEA Server are protected against attacks that illegally
   modify the system configurations and system components of these
   entities.

9.4.  Protection of parameters exchanged across Interfaces

   An important aspect of the NEA sytem is the protection of parameters
   being communicated between the various interfaces defined in the
   architecture.  Examples of the parameters being exchanged include,
   but not limited to, state change notifications between the NEA Agent
   Broker and NEA Agent Plug-in, state change notifications between the
   NEA Server Broker and NEA Posture Server, the parameters and messages
   exchanged between two peer entities (on the NEA Agent and NEA Server
   respectively) across IF-PA and IF-PB, and in general parameters and
   messages exchanged across interfaces IF-PT, and IF-NAE.

9.5.  Identity authentication of communicating end-points

   In order for the NEA Server to accept access requests and posture
   information being reported to by the NEA Agent, the NEA Server may
   need to authenticate the NEA Agent in some manner.  Similarly, within
   some network environments there may be the requirement that the NEA
   Agent also authenticate the NEA Server with whom it is communicating.
   Although the process of evaluating an access request may combine
   together the notion of authentication and integrity state evaluation
   (through posture information), it is important from a security
   perspective and useful from a good engineering practices perspective
   to be able to separate end-point authentication (includling both
   machine and user authentication) from end-point posture assessment.


10.  Acknowledgements

   TBD



Hanna, et al.             Expires June 24, 2006                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft            NEA Problem Statement            December 2005


11.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.















































Hanna, et al.             Expires June 24, 2006                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft            NEA Problem Statement            December 2005


Authors' Addresses

   Steve Hanna
   Juniper Networks
   shanna@juniper.net

   Thomas Hardjono
   Signacert Inc.
   thardjono@signacert.com

   Susan Thomson
   Cisco Systems
   sethomso@cisco.com






































Hanna, et al.             Expires June 24, 2006                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft            NEA Problem Statement            December 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Hanna, et al.             Expires June 24, 2006                [Page 17]


