

behave Working Group                                     C. Perkins, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                             WiChorus Inc.
Intended status: Standards Track                       February 17, 2009
Expires: August 21, 2009


         Translating IPv4 to IPv6 based on source IPv4 address
                      draft-perkins-sourceipnat-00

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 21, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.








Perkins, Ed.             Expires August 21, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Source IP NAT for IPv6            February 2009


Abstract

   A method is proposed to enable communications between an IPv4-only
   node in today's Internet and an IPv6-only node, initiated by the
   IPv4-only node.  The communication depends on allocation of a flow
   record and address triggered by a DNS query received for the target
   v6-only node.  DNS query conventions can be agreed upon to provide a
   natural model for resolving IPv4 queries for IPv6-only nodes.  The
   NAT mechanism proposed demultiplexes multiple sessions through the
   same dynamically allocated IP address, using flow records matching
   the source address of incoming packets.  This is in contrast to the
   use of ports in NAT-PT boxes, which inhibits the support of incoming
   traffic towards a node behind the NAT-PT.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Outgoing flows, initated by an IPv6-only device. . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Appendix A.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Appendix B.  Using NAT for the DNS resolution  . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Appendix C.  Dual-stack deprecated . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
























Perkins, Ed.             Expires August 21, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Source IP NAT for IPv6            February 2009


1.  Introduction

   As long as it is more difficult to deploy IPv6 nodes than IPv4 nodes
   in today's Internet, adoption of IPv6 is going to be slow.  The use
   of NAT in today's Internet has created certain expectations and
   operational conveniences, but at the cost of some important features.
   In particular, communications are often not really bidirectional
   since the device whose IP address is to be translated typically has
   to initiate the communication.

   In order to encourage the adoption of IPv6, it is likely to be
   important to enable IPv6-only nodes to provide services to the
   existing IPv4-dominant Internet.  Otherwise, if services can be
   provided for today's Internet only by assigning IPv4 addresses to the
   service-providing nodes, there is decreased economic incentive for
   moving to IPv6.

   The approach may be compared to a specialized form of flow
   management, where flows are identified by source and destination IP
   addresses (usually also including additional information including
   ports).  The NAT box manages the flows, allocating and deallocating
   resources, and managing the traffic (albeit intrusively) according to
   the mutual needs of the source and destination networks.

   Using the techniques proposed in this specification, communication
   between IPv4 nodes and IPv6 nodes can be accomplished with minimal
   requirements on the nodes and infrastructure:

   o  no dual stack

   o  no restriction to port-based communications

   o  no tunneling

   o  no changes to IPv4 or IPv6 hosts

   Moreover, the approach is scalable because each IPv4 address used by
   for the incoming flows can be shared by many different IPv6-only
   devices.












Perkins, Ed.             Expires August 21, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Source IP NAT for IPv6            February 2009


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].














































Perkins, Ed.             Expires August 21, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Source IP NAT for IPv6            February 2009


3.  Overview

   Suppose that an operator wishes to support a large population of
   IPv6-only nodes.  Later, it will be explained why this is preferable
   compared to dual-stack approaches.  Also, suppose that the operator
   requires that the IPv6 nodes should have free access to the existing
   IPv4 Internet, and that customers in the existing Internet should
   also have free access to service-providing nodes in the IPv6-only
   domain, as well as to any of the other nodes in the domain for which
   such incoming communications would be valuable.  This might, for
   instance, greatly simplify real-time gaming and VoIP.

   Here is a proposed sequence of events.  Let v6dev.foo.net be the FQDN
   for a v6-only node in the operator's domain.  When a node in the IPv4
   Internet wishes to establish a communication with v6dev, it sends a
   IPv4 DNS query to the name server (denoted fooNS) for foo.net.
   Suppose that the fooNS is programmed to supply an IPv4 address for
   such IPv4 DNS queries, but there is no such IPv4 address record
   available.  Then, fooNS contacts the NAT box to get the required IPv4
   address; in this context, the NAT box has the function of address
   allocation.  Then fooNS creates a DNS reply with the appropriate A
   record.  Importantly, fooNS does NOT store this A record for v6dev.
   Every distinct DNS query for v6dev could conceivably get a distinct
   IPv4 address allocation.  The cache time for the A record is set to
   the minimum (either 0 or 1, depending on policy).

   When fooNS sends the request to the NAT box (call it fooNAT) for an
   address allocation, fooNAT allocates the address (call it v6dev-IPv4)
   and creates a flow record with the following information:

   o  v6dev-IPv4

   o  the time when v6dev-IPv4 was allocated

   o  the IPv6 address of v6dev

   o  which nameserver made the request

   It also sets the status of the address allocation as "pending", and
   sets a timeout (call it BIND_TIMEOUT) by which the allocation has to
   be "established".

   In due time, a packet will arrive at v6dev-IPv4, which is the address
   of a network interface of fooNAT.  Assuming this happens before the
   expiration of BIND_TIMEOUT, fooNAT "establishes" the allocation by
   associating the following additional information with v6dev-IPv4:





Perkins, Ed.             Expires August 21, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Source IP NAT for IPv6            February 2009


   o  the source address of the incoming packet (call it CNv4, for
      "correspondent node IPv4")

   o  the source port of the incoming packet

   o  the time of arrival

   o  the updated status of "established"

   o  a new timeout, "WAIT_TIME"

   Then, fooNAT does the address translation as detailed below and
   delivers the IPv6 result to v6dev.

   The translation is performed as follows: Suppose the incoming IPv4
   packet has:

   <source IP addr, dest IP addr> == <CNv4, v6dev-IPv4>,

   where v6dev-IPv4 is an address of fooNAT Then the outgoing IPv6
   packet gets:

   <source IP addr, dest IP addr> == <IPv4-mapped addr of CNv4, v6dev>

   The same rules apply for ICMP, GRE, and other protocols.  Ports
   remain unchanged.  If it is desired to use another IPv6 prefix to
   identify CNv4 to v6dev, the rule above can be easily modified as long
   as v6dev is configured appropriately.  Whichever prefix is used,
   v6dev will use it to send packets back through fooNAT, which then
   performs the reverse translation for delivery to CNv4 in the IPv4
   Internet.

   If, after the allocation is established, it happens that no packets
   flow between v6dev and CNv4, then v6dev-IPv4 is deallocated for the
   purpose of communications between v6dev and CNv4. v6dev-IPv4 may
   remain in use for other purposes. fooNAT waits for WAIT_TIME to
   receive or send a packet on the (v6dev, CNv4) flow before
   deallocating the flow.  Under the assumption that fooNS has not
   cached v6dev-IPv4 as the IPv4 address of v6dev.foo.net, there is no
   need to notify fooNS about the deallocation.  If, in the future, the
   no-cache assumption is relaxed, a notification of the deallocation
   would be needed.

   When the NAT box has allocated all of its available IPv4 addresses
   for active or pending communications, it begins to overload the
   available IPv4 addresses.  Each IPv4 address can be allocated for use
   of multiple distinct communications.  The same IPv4 address can be
   used for numerous different IPv6-only nodes, or even for multiple



Perkins, Ed.             Expires August 21, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Source IP NAT for IPv6            February 2009


   distinct flows to the same IPv6-only device.  Each such flow is
   identified by source and destination IPv4 address and port numbers,
   along with possibly other information to be specified.  Each new IPv4
   DNS query for one of the IPv6-only nodes served by fooNAT will
   trigger another allocation of one of fooNAT's IPv4 addresses.  It is
   not clear what the maximum degree of overload should be.

   When a new allocation (call it again v6dev-IPv4) has been made for
   one of fooNAT's IPv4 addresses, incoming packets have to be inspected
   to determine whether they contain a new IPv4 source address, not yet
   associated with any other flow using v6dev-IPv4.  If such a new
   source address is detected, the new allocation is "established", the
   new data is recorded, and the timeout is changed to WAIT_TIME.

   In a nutshell, the incoming sessions are demultiplexed into the IPv6-
   only domain based on incoming IPv4 source address, not based on
   incoming source port number.  Given the prevalence of NATs in today's
   Internet, the source port number takes on additional importance,
   because the same IPv4 address could actually be used by multiple
   source computers with their IP addresses hidden from the Internet.
   Because of this, the source port number should be used as an
   additional demultiplexing index.  In this way, multiple instances of
   the same source IPv4 address could be used at the same NATv4 address
   as long as port numbers were available and different for the
   different instances of that IPv4 source address.


























Perkins, Ed.             Expires August 21, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Source IP NAT for IPv6            February 2009


4.  Outgoing flows, initated by an IPv6-only device.

   These can be handled in any of the ways proposed, but perhaps the
   simple v6v4 NAT proposals are most appropriate here.  Problems with
   v4-mapped addresses and other difficulties associated with NATs are
   noted in RFC 4966, but it should also be pointed out that a majority
   of today's Internet citizens do not seem to be overly concerned with
   these limitations.  We should make it our first goal to make these
   typical users equally or more happy with IPv6, even if the NAT
   solution is inherently restrictive.  In fact, different outgoing NAT
   boxes can be used for the outgoing flows, as long as the incoming
   flow maintains enough traffic to avoid expiration of WAIT_TIME.







































Perkins, Ed.             Expires August 21, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Source IP NAT for IPv6            February 2009


5.  Acknowledgments

   Thanks to Vijay Devarapalli, who provided useful ideas to make
   important improvements in the proposal.















































Perkins, Ed.             Expires August 21, 2009                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           Source IP NAT for IPv6            February 2009


6.  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.















































Perkins, Ed.             Expires August 21, 2009               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           Source IP NAT for IPv6            February 2009


Appendix A.  Security Considerations

   This is where the Security Considerations will go.
















































Perkins, Ed.             Expires August 21, 2009               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           Source IP NAT for IPv6            February 2009


Appendix B.  Using NAT for the DNS resolution

   If the NAT box is used as the authoritative name server for a special
   subdomain of foo.net, say for example v6only_domaim.foo.net, then
   this design can be carried out without requiring changes to the
   existing DNS infrastructure.  It is a matter of discussion whether or
   not it would be desirable to recommend the isolation of such v6-only
   devices and their transient A records to such subdomains.











































Perkins, Ed.             Expires August 21, 2009               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           Source IP NAT for IPv6            February 2009


Appendix C.  Dual-stack deprecated

   There are three likely possibilities for a dual-stack implementation

   o  The IPv4 address is globally unique.  This is very undesirable to
      make as a requirement, since then we have accomplished nothing
      towards the goal of making available more network-layer addresses.

   o  The IPv4 address is a private address, and there is a NAT box at
      the border of the dual-stack domain.  In this case, we have NAT.
      Since IPv6-only hosts can work just fine with NATs, why require
      dual stack?

   o  The IPv4 address is a private address, and the dual-stack node is
      required to do tunnel processing on incoming v6-addressed packets
      that it receives.  This amounts to a substantial implementation
      burden and, when communications occurs over a wireless medium,
      even more overhead.

































Perkins, Ed.             Expires August 21, 2009               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           Source IP NAT for IPv6            February 2009


Author's Address

   Charles E. Perkins
   WiChorus Inc.
   3590 N. 1st Street, Suite 300
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Email: charliep@computer.org










































Perkins, Ed.             Expires August 21, 2009               [Page 14]



