






Network Working Group                                      Loa Andersson
Internet-Draft                                                      (ed)
Expires September 2003                                     February 2003

                     MPLS and GMPLS Change Process

               <draft-andersson-mpls-g-chng-proc-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of Section 10 of RFC 2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This memo describes the process through which individuals, working
   groups and external standards bodies can influence the development of
   MPLS and GMPLS standards.  With respect to standardization, this
   process means that (G)MPLS extensions and changes can be done through
   the IETF only, the body that created the (G)MPLS technology.  The
   IETF will not publish a (G)MPLS technology extension RFC outside of
   the processes described here.

Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119].




Andersson et al          Expires September 2003                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        MPLS and GMPLS Change Process        February 2003


Table of Contents


 1          Managing the (G)MPLS technology in the IETF  ...........   2
 1.1        Multiprotocol Label Switching Working Group  ...........   3
 1.2        Common Control & Measurement Plane Working Group  ......   3
 1.3        Other (G)MPLS technology working groups  ...............   4
 1.4        Terminology  ...........................................   4
 2          MPLS and GMPLS Change Process  .........................   5
 2.1        Overview  ..............................................   5
 2.2        Description  ...........................................   6
 2.2.1      Initiating changes or extensions to (G)MPLS protocols  .   6
 2.2.2      Problem statement review  ..............................   6
 2.2.3      Charter update  ........................................   6
 2.2.4      Problem statement evaluation  ..........................   7
 3          Extensibility and Architecture  ........................   8
 4          (G)MPLS protocols  .....................................   8
 5          Security Considerations  ...............................   9
 6          References  ............................................   9
 6.1        Normative  .............................................   9
 7          Authors' Addresses  ....................................  10
 8          Full Copyright Statement  ..............................  11




1. Managing the (G)MPLS technology in the IETF

   This memo describes the process through which individuals, working
   groups and external standards bodies can influence the development of
   MPLS and GMPLS standards.  With respect to standardization, this pro-
   cess means that (G)MPLS extensions and changes can be done through
   the IETF only, the body that created the (G)MPLS technology.  The
   IETF will not publish a (G)MPLS technology extension RFC outside of
   the processes described here.

   Currently, the MPLS Working Group specifies MPLS while the CCAMP
   Working Group specifies GMPLS. The SUB-IP Area contains both working
   groups.

   If the IETF were to re-organize the working groups developing the
   (G)MPLS technology into more than one area, the process described in
   this memo would still apply. It would, however, require the co-opera-
   tion of all IETF Area Directors who manage groups that participate in
   the specification of (G)MPLS protocols.






Andersson et al          Expires September 2003                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        MPLS and GMPLS Change Process        February 2003


1.1. Multiprotocol Label Switching Working Group

   The Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS)  working group is responsi-
   ble for standardizing a base technology for using label switching and
   for the implementation of label-switched paths over various link-
   level technologies. The WG charter includes procedures and protocols
   for the distribution of labels between routers, encapsulations and
   multicast considerations.

   When the (G)MPLS technology was broken out to be developed by multi-
   ple working groups, one of the assumptions was that the MPLS Working
   group should accept requirements from  other working groups. The MPLS
   Working group also accepts requirements from other sources, e.g.
   individuals or external standards bodies. Such requirements shall be
   sent to the working group in the form of Internet Drafts.

   Documents that must be handled by the MPLS working group include new
   MPLS methods and new MPLS encapsulation.



1.2. Common Control & Measurement Plane Working Group

   The IETF Common Control and Measurement Plane (CCAMP) Working Group
   coordinates the work within the IETF defining a common control plane
   and a separate common measurement plane for ISP and SP core tunneling
   technologies. This includes but is not limited to defining signaling
   protocols and measurement protocols such that they support multiple
   physical path and tunnel technologies using input from technology-
   specific working groups such as MPLS; protocol-independent metrics
   and parameters for describing links and paths that can be carried in
   protocols. The technology that the CCAMP Working group focuses on is
   sometimes call Generalized MPLS (GMPLS), indicating that CCAMP
   addresses a generalized technology, where labels are defined in such
   a way that they will be compatible with the technology they are
   transported over. In this respect GMPLS can be viewed as a superset
   of MPLS.

   When the (G)MPLS were broken out to be developed by multiple working
   groups one of the assumptions was that the CCAMP Working group should
   take input in the form of requirements from (G)MPLS requirement spec-
   ifying working groups. The CCAMP Working group is also open for
   requirements from other sources, e.g. individuals or external stan-
   dards bodies. Such requirements shall be sent to the working group in
   the form of Internet drafts.

   Documents that must be handled by the working group include new GMPLS
   methods and new GMPLS encapsulation.



Andersson et al          Expires September 2003                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        MPLS and GMPLS Change Process        February 2003


1.3. Other (G)MPLS technology working groups

   The IP over Optical and the Internet Traffic Engineering Working
   groups are mainly requirement generating working groups for the
   (G)MPLS technology area.  The Provider Provisioned Virtual Private
   Networks Working (ppvpn) group has been chartered to specify a lim-
   ited number of solutions for Provider Provisioned VPN's, but it is
   not assumed that this will include specifying new protocols.  The
   General Switch Management Protocol Working (gsmp) group is a protocol
   specifying working group.

   It is assumed that the change process for the MPLS and CCAMP Working
   groups, specified in this document, will be applicable or at least
   adaptable to other (G)MPLS technology working groups if such a need
   should arise.

   The set of (G)MPLS technology working groups, as indeed IETF working
   groups in general, changes over time. A list of the current set of
   working groups and areas will be found at
   http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/wg-dir.html


1.4. Terminology

   (G)MPLS working groups -
      in this document the (G)MPLS working groups is used to indicate
      the MPLS and the CCAMP working groups.

   (G)MPLS technology working groups -
      the (G)MPLS working groups plus the working groups focused on
      requirements on the (G)MPLS technology, see sections 1.1 to 1.3
      for a list of the (G)MPLS technology working groups as this memo
      is written.
   (G)MPLS protocols -
      in this document the (G)MPLS protocols is used to indicate the
      union of the protocols specified by the (G)MPLS working groups.

   requirement evaluating working group (rewg) -
      in the process described below, the Working Group charged with the
      task of evaluating a certain problem statement and a certain set
      of requirements is termed the rewg

   protocol specifying working group -
      in the process described below the working group chartered to
      specify certain changes and/or extensions to the (G)MPLS protocols
      are called - the protocol specifying working group.

   problem statement internet draft -



Andersson et al          Expires September 2003                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        MPLS and GMPLS Change Process        February 2003


      the draft that initiates the discussion on changing or extending
      the (G)MPLS protocols, this ID needs to include a detailed problem
      description and a set of requirements that the (G)MPLS protocols
      needs to meet to solve the problem

   solutions internet draft -
      a specification on how to change or extend the (G)MPLS protocols
      to meet the requirements in the problem statement ID


2. MPLS and GMPLS Change Process

2.1. Overview

   +-------+           +---------+              +---------+
   |  prob |discussion |review by|     ACK      |   IESG  | ACK
   | statem|---------->|wg chairs|------------->|   IAB   |-------+
   |   id  |on mailing |and ad's | request to   |decision |       |
   +-------+   list    +---------+ IESG/IAB to  +---------+       |
                            |      appoint rewg    |              |
                            | NAK  and charter     |NAK    rewg   |
                            |      req eval        |     chartered|
                            |                      |       to work|
                            V                      |       on prob|
                                                   |     statement|
                        |  dust | <----------------+              |
                     +->|  bin  | <--------------------+          |
                     |  +-------+                      |          |
                     |      ^                          |          |
                     |NAK   |     NAK                  |          |
                     |      +-----------------+        |          V
                     |                        |        | NAK  +-------+
                +--------+                +-------+    +------|  rewg |
                |  IESG  |        ACK     |   AD  |    ACK    |   req |
    +-----------|  IAB   |<-------------- |review |<----------|  eval |
    | wg        |decision|    request to  |       |           |       |
    |chartered  +--------+   IESG/IAB to  +-------+           +-------+
    |to work                  approve wg
    |solution               charter changes
    |          +---------+
    |          | IETF    |
    +--------->|  WG     |-----/ /----> RFC
               | process |
               +---------+
                    ^
                    |
                solutions
                   ID



Andersson et al          Expires September 2003                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        MPLS and GMPLS Change Process        February 2003


2.2. Description

2.2.1. Initiating changes or extensions to (G)MPLS protocols

   Anyone who intend to use one of the existing (G)MPLS protocols, but
   thinks that it  will not satisfy their needs must write an Internet-
   Draft (ID) explaining the problem they are trying to solve and why
   the existing (G)MPLS  protocols will not work.  This Internet-Draft -
   the problem statement ID - must include a detailed set of require-
   ments that (G)MPLS would need to meet to solve the particular prob-
   lem.  The ID must also describe in detail any security issues that
   arise from meeting the requirements. This ID shall be sent to IETF as
   an individual ID and after it is published the authors should send a
   note to the appropriate mailing list to start discussion on the prob-
   lems discussed in the ID. The mailing list to use should be the Area
   mailing list for the area that the working group that has specified
   the protocol being changed and that will likely be the requirement
   evaluation working group.


2.2.2. Problem statement review

   The MPLS and CCAMP working group chairs in conjunction with the Area
   Directors  will determine if the particular problems raised in the
   Internet-Draft should be evaluated by a working group. This decision
   will based on the mailing list discussion. If the decision is that a
   requirement evaluation is warranted a decision is taken on which
   working group should act as requirement evaluation working group
   (rewg).


2.2.3. Charter update

   If the chairs and the ADs both feel that the particular problems
   should be added to the MPLS or the CCAMP Working Group charter the
   ADs will propose specific charter modifications for the Working group
   to the IESG and IAB.  If the IESG and IAB approve of the charter
   changes the Working group can then update its charter and start the
   work to evaluate the requirements and the problems described in the
   Internet-Draft.

   In a separate Internet-Draft the authors (or anyone else) may
   describe a set of changes to the (G)MPLS protocols that would meet
   the requirements. This Internet-Draft would not be considered by the
   rewg as part of the requirement evaluation, but will be held until a
   working group has been chartered to work on a solution, i.e.  one of
   the possible outcomes of the process described in this document.




Andersson et al          Expires September 2003                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        MPLS and GMPLS Change Process        February 2003


2.2.4. Problem statement evaluation

   The rewg will evaluate the problem statement ID and based on the
   evaluation make a recommendation to the IESG/IAB. The recommendation
   may be:

   1  that no extensions to the (G)MPLS protocols are needed since the
      problem can be solved by the protocols as they exists.

   2  that no changes or extensions to the (G)MPLS protocols are justi-
      fied the problem is not a general enough one

   In cases 1 & 2 the IETF will not publish an RFC that attempts to get
   around the decision.

   3  that the problem is real and extensions to the (G)MPLS protocols
      are justified and recommend to the ADs that a work item be added
      to the charter of the appropriate working group - if the ADs agree
      then they will bring the proposal before the IESG and IAB.  If the
      IESG (with IAB advice) agrees that the task should be added to
      that particular charter then the rewg can work on it with the aim
      of developing a final set of requirements to be forwarded to the
      working group that will handle the specification of the protocol
      changes.

   The rewg will evaluate and refine the requirements, merging them with
   others if warranted.  The result of these deliberations will be a
   requirements RFC.  When the IESG approves publication of the require-
   ments RFC it will add it as new task to the protocol specifying Work-
   ing Group charter.

   The protocol specifying working group will then develop the modifica-
   tions or extensions to the (G)MPLS protocol needed to fulfill the
   requirements.

   If such a requirements document is added to a working group charter
   and if a proposed solution has been published as an ID, the protocol
   specifying Working Group may evaluate the proposed solution - but
   there is no requirement that the proposal be adopted.

   The (G)MPLS Working Groups are required to protect the architectural
   integrity of (G)MPLS protocols and must not add features that do not
   have general use beyond the specific case - they also must not add
   features just to make some function more efficient at the expense of
   simplicity or generality.

   4  that the problem is real and that they would be solved with exten-
      sions to the (G)MPLS protocols, but that this for some reason is



Andersson et al          Expires September 2003                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        MPLS and GMPLS Change Process        February 2003


      not best done within the IETF, but some other organization. The
      IETF might in such a case come to an agreement with this organiza-
      tion to specify the protocol extensions and that these will be
      described in a ID sent to the IETF for review and eventually be
      published as an RFC.


3. Extensibility and Architecture

   In an idealized technical design, the extensibility design would be
   self-contained, and it would be inherent that new extensions and new
   headers would naturally have an architectural coherence with the
   original protocol.

   However, this idealized vision has not been attained in the world of
   standards tracks protocols.  Implications for interoperability can be
   addressed by capabilities negotiation rules.  The effects of adding
   features that overlap or that deal with a point solution and are not
   general are much harder to control with rules.  Therefore the (G)MPLS
   technology calls for this architectural guardianship by its Working
   Groups.

   We encourage other protocol working groups with highly extensible
   protocols to review whether they need more coordination of extensions
   as in the (G)MPLS case.


4. (G)MPLS protocols

   The current set of (G)MPLS protocols are:

   RFC 3032 - MPLS Label Stack Encoding
   RFC 3034 - Use of Label Switching on Frame Relay Networks Specification
   RFC 3035 - MPLS using LDP and ATM VC Switching
   RFC 3036 - LDP Specification
   RFC 3038 - VCID Notification over ATM link for LDP
   RFC 3033 - The Assignment of the Information Field and Protocol
              Identifier in the Q.2941 Generic Identifier and Q.2957
              User-to-user Signaling for the Internet Protocol
   RFC 3063 - MPLS Loop Prevention Mechanism
   RFC 3107 - Carrying Label Information in BGP-4
   RFC 3209 - RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels
   RFC 3212 - Constraint-Based LSP Setup using LDP
   RFC 3214 - LSP Modification Using CR-LDP
   RFC 3279 - MPLS Support of Differentiated Services
   RFC 3429 - Assignment of the 'OAM Alert Label' for Multiprotocol Label
              Switching Architecture (MPLS) Operation and Maintenance (OAM)
              Functions



Andersson et al          Expires September 2003                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        MPLS and GMPLS Change Process        February 2003


   RFC 3443 - Time to Live (TTL) Processing in MPLS Networks
              (Updates RFC 3032)



   Note that in the future more (G)MPLS related protocols may become
   members of this set.  (G)MPLS protocol specifying working group docu-
   ments and documents produced by those groups under the review of IESG
   or in the RFC-Editor queue will be treated as if they were members of
   this set.


5. Security Considerations

   Complexity and indeterminate or hard to define protocol behavior,
   depending on which of many extensions operate, is a fine breeding
   ground for security flaws.

   All Internet-Drafts that present new requirements for the (G)MPLS
   protocols must include a discussion of the security requirements and
   implications inherent in the proposal.  All RFCs that modify or
   extend the (G)MPLS protocols must explore the security considerations
   of the modifications and extensions.


6. References

6.1. Normative

[RFC2026]

   Bradner, S. "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", RFC 2026,
   October 1996.

[RFC2119]

   Bradner, S. "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Lev-
   els", RFC 2119, March 1997.













Andersson et al          Expires September 2003                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        MPLS and GMPLS Change Process        February 2003


7. Authors' Addresses

   Loa Andersson
   email: loa@pi.se

   Ron Bonica
   WorldCom
   22001 Loudoun County Parkway
   Ashburn, VA 20191
   ronald.p.bonica@wcom.com

   Scott Bradner
   Harvard University
   29 Oxford St.
   Cambridge MA 02138
   Email: sob@harvard.edu
   Phone: +1-617-495-3864

   Kireeti Kompella
   Juniper Networks, Inc.
   1194 N. Mathilda Ave
   Sunnyvale, CA 94089
   Email: kireeti@juniper.net

   George Swallow
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   250 Apollo Drive
   Chelmsford, MA 01824
   Phone:  +1 978 497 8143
   Email:  swallow@cisco.com

   Bert Wijnen
   Lucent Technologies
   Schagen 33
   3461 GL Linschoten
   Netherlands
   Phone: +31 348 680 485
   EMail: bwijnen@lucent.com













Andersson et al          Expires September 2003                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        MPLS and GMPLS Change Process        February 2003


8. Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this doc-
   ument itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the
   copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of develop-
   ing Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights
   defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as
   required to translate it into languages other than English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MER-
   CHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

























Andersson et al          Expires September 2003                [Page 11]
