Network working group                                           H. Liu 
Internet Draft                                                   Q. Wu 
Category: Informational                            Huawei Technologies. 
Created: March 8, 2010                                       H. Asaeda 
Expires: September 2010                                Keio Universitys 
                                                            TM. Eubanks 
                                               Iformata Communications 
                                                                       
 
                                      
       Mobile and Wireless Tuning Requirements on IGMP/MLD Protocols 
                                      
                draft-liu-multimob-igmp-mld-mobility-req-03 


Status of this Memo 

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF 
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November 
   10, 2008. The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this 
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow 
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.  
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling 
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified 
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may 
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format 
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other 
   than English. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

 
 
 
Liu and etc.          Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility       March 2010 
    

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 15, 2009. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors. All rights reserved. 

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document. Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document. 

Abstract 

   This document presents the requirements for IGMP/MLD protocols to 
   allow the deployment of mobile multicast service.  It is intended to 
   provide useful guideline when adapting current IGMP/MLD protocols to 
   support terminal mobility. 

Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119]. 

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Introduction................................................. 3 
   2. Problem Statement ........................................... 3 
   3. The Behavior of IGMP and MLD Protocols....................... 5 
      3.1. IGMP Version 1.......................................... 5 
      3.2. IGMP Version 2.......................................... 5 
      3.3. IGMP Version 3.......................................... 6 
      3.4. Multicast Listener Discovery Protocols.................. 7 
      3.5. Lightweight IGMPv3/MLDv2................................ 7 
   4. Requirements for Wireless and Mobile Multicast............... 7 
      4.1. Functional Requirements for Mobile Multicast............ 7 
      4.2. Requirements on Tuning IGMP/MLD Protocol Parameters .... 8 
      4.3. Requirements for Handover............................... 9 
      4.4. Requirements for Wireless Link Types................... 10 
      4.5. Requirements for Explicit Tracking .................... 11 
   5. IGMP/MLD Tuning Requirements for Mobility and Wireless 
   Environment.................................................... 11 

 
 
Liu and Etc.          Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility       March 2010 
    

      5.1. Evaluation of Current Features of IGMP and MLD Protocols11 
      5.2. IGMP and MLD Protocol for Wireless or Mobile Network... 12 
   6. Security Considerations..................................... 14 
   7. References.................................................. 14 
      7.1. Normative References................................... 14 
      7.2. Informative Referencess ............................... 15 
   Authors' Addresses............................................. 16 
    
1. Introduction 

   IP multicast efficiently distributes data to a number of receiver 
   hosts in IP networks simultaneously thereby saving network and 
   server resources.  The receiver hosts use IGMP for IPv4 [2] and MLD 
   for IPv6 [3] to receive or to stop receiving data via multicast 
   (using join/leave or a subscribe/unsubscribe requests).  The 
   intermediate routers construct multicast tree between the source and 
   receiver hosts with multicast routing protocols. 

   IGMP and MLD protocols are originally designed to work on wired 
   broadcast shared links (e.g. Ethernet) by taking into account the 
   wired link characteristics.  When they are used on a wireless link, 
   it is necessary to consider how to make the protocols better fit the 
   properties of the wireless link.  In this document, the requirements 
   for IGMP and MLD protocols that enable mobile multicast services via 
   a wireless link are discussed.  The wireless link type could be but 
   should not be restricted to 3GPP, IEEE 802.11 and 802.16, which are 
   or may be popularly adopted in providers' network 

   IGMP or MLD protocol can work with any mobile protocols (e.g., MIPv6 
   [9], PMIPv6 [10], NEMO [11]) independently, if these protocols 
   support multicast.  However, context transfer or other procedures to 
   provide seamless handover depend on the mobile protocols.  Therefore, 
   this document does not assume mobile protocols that mobile hosts use, 
   and only protocol-independent considerations and requirements 
   regarding how mobile protocols should work with IGMP/MLD for 
   seamless handover are discussed. 

2. Problem Statement 

   A mobile host usually accesses to a network via a wireless link.  
   When a mobile host wants to join or leave an IP multicast session, 
   it sends IGMP/MLD messages for the request to its upstream equipment.  
   The upstream equipment may be a wireless access router (in case of 
   MIPv6), a mobile router (in case of NEMO), a gateway (in case of 
   PMIPv6), or a switch or router that supporting IGMP/MLD Proxy.  In 


 
 
Liu and Etc.          Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility       March 2010 
    

   the following part of this document, it is expressed as an "upstream 
   router" or "multicast router". 

   The upstream router should maintain the group membership states 
   indicating which multicast sessions mobile hosts have joined and 
   constructs the multicast tree towards the source with multicast 
   routing protocol procedures.  If upstream wireless routers or 
   switches are wireless and do not maintain this group membership 
   states, they will flood all multicast data received onto each 
   wireless link, which is not an efficient use of wireless bandwidth 
   resources.  Thus IGMP and MLD protocols are necessary to be 
   supported on the mobile and wireless hosts and their upstream 
   routers. 

   Apart from the above general wireless link characteristic, different 
   wireless technique exhibits different features.  For the purpose of 
   generality, this memo does not concentrate on a specific wireless 
   link layer protocol, but rather focus on the popular link model 
   being abstracted from currently in-used wireless techniques, such as 
   IEEE 802.11x, IEEE 802.16x, 3GPP,and etc. 

   According to the properties of a wireless link, bandwidth usage and 
   packet loss should be carefully considered.  It is also necessary to 
   take care of battery consumption of a mobile host.  These conditions 
   encourage the minimization of exchanged data packets and control 
   messages including IGMP/MLD protocol messages if possible. 

   On the other hand, IGMP and MLD are asymmetric and non-reliable 
   protocols; multicast routers need solicited membership reports by 
   periodical IGMP/MLD Queries, in order to be robust in front of host 
   or link failures and packet loss.  It is encouraged that host-and- 
   router communication is effectively coordinated to support limited 
   wireless or terminal resources. 

   When a host receiving multicast data moves from an access link to 
   another one, the host wants to continuously receive the multicast 
   data without any packet loss and session interruption, and the 
   network provider wants to minimize the amount of duplicated 
   multicast traffic.  This seemless handover is a necessary component 
   of mobile multicast communication, which introduces additional 
   requirements on IGMP/MLD protocols during handover.  Precisely, the 
   moving host's membership information should be transmitted to the 
   new access link as quickly as possible.  This procedure reduces the 
   host's join latency.  Or, if there is no member host on the access 
   link after the host moves, then the upstream router should leave 


 
 
Liu and Etc.          Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility       March 2010 
    

   from the multicast session quickly as well.  This contributes to 
   releasing the unnecessary resources. 

   All the above problems stated above together with others are to be 
   discussed in this memo.  In the following sections, we briefly 
   introduce the IGMP/MLD protocols, analyze the protocol behavior and 
   the requirements of wireless link characteristic and IP multicast 
   mobile service, and discuss the possibility of the enhancement of 
   the protocols if needed.  The illustration below will consider both 
   IPv4 and IPv6 networks. 

3. The Behavior of IGMP and MLD Protocols 

   A multicast receiving host uses IGMP protocols to join and leave a 
   multicast group on an IPv4 network, and uses MLD protocols on an 
   IPv6 network. 

3.1. IGMP Version 1 

   IGMP Version 1 [5] defines the basic operating model between a 
   multicast receiving host and its upstream router to determine group 
   membership.  The router periodically sends Host Membership Queries 
   to its attached network.  A host sends a Host Membership Report to 
   the router when it decides to join a group, or it responds to the 
   Queries passively.  The host does not send group leave message 
   explicitly, but rather silently leaves the group by ignoring a Host 
   Membership Query, which causes an undesirably long leave latency.   

   IGMPv1 is an obsolete protocol; hence it is not recommended for 
   mobile hosts to implement IGMPv1, whereas upstream routers may need 
   to support IGMPv1 to keep compatibility with non-upgraded mobile 
   hosts. 

3.2. IGMP Version 2 

   IGMP Version 2 [6] has the optimizations that an IGMPv2 host can 
   explicitly send a Leave Report when it decides to stop receiving 
   multicast data.  This enables faster leave from the multicast group.  
   When a multicast router receives a leave message, it will generate a 
   Group-Specific Query to verify whether there is other receiver for 
   the same group on its network.  IGMPv2 also supports the case when 
   multiple multicast routers are connected to the same shared network.  
   In this case, a single Querier is elected by ordering the IP 
   addresses to take on the duty of sending Query packets. 



 
 
Liu and Etc.          Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility       March 2010 
    

   Several timers are defined in IGMPv2 and their values are 
   configurable.  Query Interval is the interval between General 
   Queries sent by a router, which has influence on the total number of 
   IGMPv2 messages on a link.  Query Response Interval is the maximum 
   response time of a report after a host receives the General Query.  
   It will reduce the bursty traffic of the reports on a link.  Startup 
   Query Interval is the interval between the queries sent by the 
   Querier in startup.  Last Member Query Interval is the maximum 
   response time used by Group-Specific Queries in response to leave 
   from session.  This value can be tuned to modify the leave latency 
   of the network.  

   IGMPv2 also introduces timer related counters to make the protocol 
   function more robust.  For example, it defines Robustness Variable 
   to quantify the number of reports sent out to prevent packet loss.  
   Last Member Query count is used to set the number of Group-Specific 
   Queries sent before the router assumes there is no local member. 
   Startup Query Count is the number of Queries issued on startup.  
   These values can be tuned according to the expected packet loss on a 
   link. 

3.3. IGMP Version 3 

   IGMP Version 3 [2] introduces a big enhancement to the previous two 
   versions.  It defines INCLUDE and EXCLUDE filter modes on both the 
   host and router side.  With these filter modes, a host can specify 
   the desired or undesired source address(es) except for multicast 
   address(es) in IGMP report messages. 

   IGMPv3 router uses filter mode to process the group record properly. 
   The router also maintains a group-timer to indicate the filter mode 
   switch over and a source-timer to time each valid source.  A new 
   type of Source-and-Group-Specific Query is utilized to verify there 
   are no receivers desiring to receive traffic from listed sources for 
   a particular group, which has been requested to no longer be 
   forwarded. 

   Another modification is that IGMPv3 does not adopt the report 
   suppression mechanism.  Without suppression, the number of report 
   messages may increase greatly on a link.  IGMPv3 solves this problem 
   by merging reports or queries into a combined packet. 

   An advantage of eliminating report suppression is that it provides 
   the possibility for the router to keep track of host membership 
   status on a link.  This Explicit Tracking [2] consumes memory on the 


 
 
Liu and Etc.          Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility       March 2010 
    

   router, but provides feasibility to manage end users on a per-user 
   basis and implements fast leave function. 

3.4. Multicast Listener Discovery Protocols 

   MLDv1 and MLDv2 are respectively derived from IGMPv2 and IGMPv3 to 
   be applied for IPv6 networks.  The important difference between MLD 
   and IGMP is that MLD is a sub-protocol of ICMPv6 and its message 
   types are a subset of ICMPv6 messages.  For MLDv1, parts of the 
   message types are renamed to distinguish from those of IGMPv2. 

3.5. Lightweight IGMPv3/MLDv2 

   IGMPv3 and MLDv2 enable the support of Source-Specific Multicast 
   (SSM) communication [8] by indicating desired sources in the INCLUDE 
   Group Record.  Its usage of excluding undesired sources by an 
   EXCLUDE filter mode operation has little practical prototype use and 
   no desired use case.  Moreover, when a host requests to join or 
   leave session whose operation changes INCLUDE filter mode to EXCLUDE 
   filter mode or vise versa, both the host and the upstream router 
   will suffer from complex state transition and scalability problems. 

   In [4], simplified version protocols of IGMPv3/MLDv2 are defined to 
   keep the INCLUDE source-filtering characteristics to support SSM 
   communication and remove the EXCLUDE filter mode operation.  With 
   the reduced number of report types and and without the filter-mode 
   related processing,the host-side kernel implementation and 
   especially the router's operation are greatly simplified, and less 
   states need to be stored by lightweight router compared to their 
   full IGMPv3/MLDv2 counterpart.  These improvements are especially 
   desirable for multicast mobility, as wireless devices typically have 
   limited storage and CPU processing capabilities. 

4. Requirements for Wireless and Mobile Multicast 

4.1. Functional Requirements for Mobile Multicast 

   Any-Source Multicast (ASM) is a traditional multicast communication 
   model in which receivers requests all data from a multicast address, 
   which is denoted with (*,G).  A host joining a (*,G) session will 
   receive data from all the sources sending to the specified multicast 
   address.  On the other hand, in the SSM communication, a host 
   specifies both source and multicast addresses and receives the 
   traffic from the specified source(s).  The subscribed source-
   specific multicast session is denoted by an (S,G) and called a 
   channel. 

 
 
Liu and Etc.          Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility       March 2010 
    

   All the versions of IGMP/MLD support the ASM communication.  It is 
   not recommended to use IGMPv1 in mobile communications since it does 
   not have a robust mechanism to retransmit report messages, does not 
   provide fast leave, and does not support SSM, as described in 
   Section 2.  IGMPv2 and MLDv1 are possible to be used in mobile 
   communications, but they do not support SSM subscription. 

   To enable the SSM communication, a mobile host must use IGMPv3/MLDv2 
   or LW-IGMPv3/LW-MLDv2.  As described in [4], there is no functional 
   difference to subscribe (S,G) channels between the full versions of 
   IGMPv3/MLDv2 and the lightweight version protocols.  The lightweight 
   version protocols have the advantage of simpler processing. 

   IGMP/MLD protocols (except IGMPv1) protocols themselves implement 
   some fast join and fast leave functions.  When a host joins a 
   multicast session, it sends unsolicited join report to its upstream 
   router immediately.  The Startup Query Interval has been set to 1/4 
   of the General Query value to enable the faster join at startup.  
   When the host ceases from listening a session, it sends a request to 
   leave the session immediately.  The Group-Specific or Source-and-
   Group-Specific Queries are triggered when an IGMP/MLD router knows 
   that the reception for a group or a source-specific group has been 
   terminated.  This helps the router acquire the multicast membership 
   information as fast as possible when all the members as a whole 
   leave a group.  The time to complete leaving from a session is 
   referred to as leave latency.  Lower leave latency (i.e. fast leave) 
   has the advantage of quickly releasing the network resources. 

4.2. Requirements on Tuning IGMP/MLD Protocol Parameters 

   Within each protocol's scope, the number of transmitted packets on a 
   wireless link could be further decreased by tuning timer values.  
   For example, Query Interval can be set to a larger value to reduce 
   the packet quantity.  The Query Response interval could be widened 
   to avoid the burst of messages. 

   On the other hand, to cover the possibility of a State-Change Report 
   being missed by one or more multicast routers, a host transmits the 
   same State-Change Report [Robustness Variable] times in all [2][3].  
   However, this manner does not only guarantee that the State-Change 
   Report is reached to the routers, but also increases the number or 
   amount of State-Change Report messages on a wireless link.  It is 
   required to tune these values with the good balance of protocol 
   robustness and the amount of traffic. 



 
 
Liu and Etc.          Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility       March 2010 
    

   As well, various IGMP/MLD timers should be configurable.  If non-
   default settings are used, they MUST be consistent among all routers 
   on a single network. 

4.3. Requirements for Handover 

   [12] categorized the diversified mobile IP schemes by their group 
   subscription manner principally as home subscription and remote 
   subscription.  These two different subscription has important 
   influences on the handover behaviour.  Since different mobile and 
   handover protocols may need different parameters and different 
   optimizations, this document describes the possible scenarios with 
   examples in MIPv6 [9] but only discussed the possible requirements 
   related to the group-subscription related behavior. 

   In home subscription (also referred to tunneled method), the 
   IGMP/MLD message should be encapsulated and tunneled to the home 
   network.  The multicast router (e.g., Home Agent) on home network 
   will be responsible for joining and pruning a multicast tree.  When 
   a mobile host moves to a new foreign network, it does not need to 
   re-join the multicast group. 

   In the remote subscription approach (also referred to optimal 
   multicast routing), a mobile host joins the group via a local 
   multicast router on the foreign network.  The router intercepts the 
   host's report message and joins or prunes the multicast tree on the 
   foreign network.  After handover to another foreign network, the 
   host needs to resend new reports to new access routers and the 
   latters will construct the new multicast tree on the new network.  
   If the old multicast branches have been torn down before the new 
   branches being constructed, the host will suffer from packets loss 
   during the handover. 

   To prevent packet loss, a make-before-break mechanism SHOULD be 
   provided.  It requires a mobile host to join the group on the new 
   network as soon as possible once it decides to switch to the new 
   network.  The host keeps the reception of the "old" multicast data 
   until the traffic from new branches arrives.  Then the host begins 
   issuing leave reports to the previous attached multicast router. 

   The possibility of packet loss can be reduced by predicting the 
   movement of a mobile node during handover.  The handover can be 
   initiated either by the mobile host or by the network.  In the 
   mobile-initiated handover, the host acquires the handover 
   information quickly and can send early reports.  In the network-


 
 
Liu and Etc.          Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility       March 2010 
    

   initiated handover, the network entity indicates the possible 
   handover situation and the mobile host does not invoke any process. 

   It may be possible that IGMP and MLD could be extended to carry the 
   handover indication from a previous router to a new router to 
   facilitate the fast join and fast leave.  Since IGMP/MLD protocol or 
   message extension may require additional operational costs or 
   interoperability problems, it must be carefully defined. 

   IGMP/MLD hosts and routers can adjust their timer and counter values 
   to make faster join/leave during handover, as described in Section 
   4.2.  The adjustment is carried out by the application according to 
   the actual wireless situations and policies of the management. 

4.4. Requirements for Wireless Link Types 

   Wireless access technique could be categorized to three different 
   types - shared, point-to-point (PTP), and point-to-multipoint (PTMP) 
   links.  The shared link (e.g.IEEE802.11) resembles Ethernet that the 
   end-users share the same wireless media.  IGMP/MLD should be 
   generally applicable because they are originally designed for the 
   shared Ethernet. 

   For PTP link (e.g.3G GSM, IEEE802.16), different links are separated 
   physically or logically from each other.  The standard use of IGMP 
   and MLD requires the multicast router to maintain a separate 
   interface state for each link.  It will be inefficient if the number 
   of the receiver becomes large.  Considering there is only one 
   receiving host on each link, the operation of IGMP/MLD relating to 
   multiple receivers per interface should be taken out.  For example, 
   Host Suppression and Delaying Response are unnecessary.  Instead the 
   mobile could respond the reports immediately, which helps 
   implementing faster join and leave capability.  Besides, when a host 
   requests its leave from the group, the successive Group-Specific 
   Query or Group-and-Source-Specific Query to inquire other possible 
   receivers is not needed.  Finally, the periodic General Query which 
   is sent separately to each mobile host, is unnecessary to be sent to 
   all the links but rather only to the hosts which have made the group 
   join and have reception state on the router.  This is desirable for 
   the battery saving for the mobile terminal not involved in the 
   multicast reception will not be frequently awakened when in the 
   sleeping mode.  

   Wireless PTMP links (e.g.3GPP MBMS, and IEEE 802.16) is point-to-
   multipoint (or shared) in down link direction, but point-to-point in 
   up link direction.  The IGMP/MLD protocols should present both 

 
 
Liu and Etc.          Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility       March 2010 
    

   shared media and point-to-point media features.  Host Suppression 
   and Delaying Response should not be adopted.  Group-Specific Query 
   and Group-and-Source-Specific Query triggered by group leave are 
   also unnecessary.  And General Query should be multicast to the 
   shared down link, which is the same as the shared link model but 
   different from the PTP link. 

4.5. Requirements for Explicit Tracking 

   Since the full and lightweight IGMPv3 and MLDv2 protocols disable a 
   report suppression mechanism (described in Section 3.3), multicast 
   routers working with these protocols can choose to implement 
   explicit tracking of mobile hosts [2].  The explicit tracking 
   enables the router to learn the reception state of each receiver, 
   but at the meantime consumes substantial memory resources on the 
   router. 

   The advantage of explicit tracking is that it provides better 
   manageability of mobile receivers.  It is unnecessary to issue 
   Group-Specific queries and Source-Specific Queries to stop receiving 
   on subnets whose router keeps track of group and source receivers. 

5. IGMP/MLD Tuning Requirements for Mobility and Wireless Environment 

5.1. Evaluation of Current Features of IGMP and MLD Protocols 

   To evaluate whether IGMP and MLD protocols are applicable to 
   wireless communication, their key features should be analyzed 
   regarding their functionality, reliability and efficiency. 

   IGMP/MLD join and leave are sent unsolicitedly when a host intends 
   to join or leave a group.  They are closest to user's experience and 
   must be guaranteed.  Current IGMP and MLD provide the reliability 
   for these packets by retransmission for [Robustness Variable] times.  
   Retransmission provides reliability to some degree but if in most 
   cases the first packet is a success, the other retransmissions are a 
   waste of resources.  In other cases if all the retransmission fail 
   the host has no indication of the situation.  Besides, it is 
   troublesome to determine the value of [Robustness Variable], for the 
   wireless link condition may alter from time to time and a host may 
   change its connection from one access network to another.  Thus it 
   is required that the transmission reliability for IGMP/MLD join and 
   leave should be enhanced to improve the user experience. 

   IGMPv2 and MLDv1 only support ASM communication mode, but does not 
   support SSM subscription and explicit tracking, which limits their 

 
 
Liu and Etc.          Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility       March 2010 
    

   widespread deployment in future multicast network.  IGMPv3 and MLDv2 
   (and also LW-IGMP/LW-MLD) support all the features of ASM and SSM 
   communication, and of explicit tracking.  They are much better the 
   candidates for wireless and mobile networks than their previous 
   versions.  The disadvantage of (LW-) IGMPv3 and MLDv2 is that 
   because host suppression is not available, the report count in 
   response to query is not a small number, if there are many active 
   receivers on the network.  Even though the protocols enable a host 
   to utilize combined report to reduce the packet number, further 
   optimization is still required to efficiency the bandwidth usage.  

   As the summary, IGMP and MLD for wireless or mobile network should 
   have the following ideal characteristics: 

   o ASM and SSM mode support  

   o Explicit tracking[2] 

   o Enhanced robustness. 

   O Minimized packet transmission and packet burst 

5.2. IGMP and MLD Protocol for Wireless or Mobile Network 

   (LW-) IGMPv3/MLDv2 are suggested to be used as the basis for 
   optimization for wireless and mobile networks, because they are more 
   applicable to current multicast scenarios, as illustrated in section 
   5.1.  Apart from the parameter tuning (in section 4.2), there are 
   several other measures which are suggested to be used when make this 
   adaption. 

5.2.1 Robustness Enhancement for unsolicited report 

   For the reasons given in section 5.1, acknowledge-retransmission is 
   suggested to be used for a unsolicited (LW-) IGMPv3/MLDv2 Report 
   [ACK-draft], whose mechanism is commonly deployed in today's 
   protocol design.  Its basic protocol behavior is direct and simple.  
   A host after sending a join report starts a retransmission timer and 
   waits for the acknowledgement (ACK) from the router.  If the ACK is 
   not received when the timer expires, another report is retransmitted.  
   A parameter should also be used to limit the maximum retransmission 
   times for the report. 

5.2.2 Efficiency Considerations for Passive Report 



 
 
Liu and Etc.          Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility       March 2010 
    

   Passive reports in response to Queries are not acknowledged for not 
   introducing too many report packets on the network, and they are not 
   acknowledged also because the Query-Response to-and-fro implies an 
   acknowledgement to some degree. 

   Further, if the number of the receivers on a network is large, it is 
   suggested that Queries are sent only once, rather than for 
   [Robustness Variable] times.  This is because each turn of Query 
   will trigger all active members' response, which is not an efficient 
   usage of bandwidth resources.  

   The passive report manner could also be optimized for PTP and PTMP 
   link types.  Because these two types of links are not shared (or 
   exclusive) for the end users, the Delayed Response which prevent 
   report collision on a link is not necessary.  Without Delayed 
   Response, the report could be responded to the router immediately, 
   and it is much easier to implement robust enhancement for passive 
   Report and for a Query, as shown in section 5.2.3 and 5.2.5. 

5.2.3 Robustness Considerations for Passive Report 

   If in some cases a host's response report is lost due to bad 
   transmission condition, there is still some remedy that can tackle 
   this issue. 

   For example, a router after sending a Query collects successfully 
   all the members' report responses except for other one or two which 
   are kept in its database.  This may be because the non-response ones 
   silently leave the network without any notification, or because 
   their reports are lost for unreliable transmission.  The router in 
   this case could unicast respectively to each non-respondent receiver 
   to check whether they are still alive for the multicast service 
   reception.  Unicast Query is different from normal group queries for 
   its destination address is set to the unicast address of a receiver 
   [13]. 

5.2.4 Efficiency Enhancement of Queries 

   [14] discusses several processing for reducing Queries when mobile 
   receiver is on the foreign network, e.g. attenuating the Queries on 
   the home network when the router on the remote network process the 
   receiver's report, and the stopping or resuming of Queries under 
   specific conditions.  Irrespective of the mobile receivers' position, 
   there are still some optimizations that might be usable for 
   minimization the packet transmission. 


 
 
Liu and Etc.          Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility       March 2010 
    

   First, if explicit tracking is used, the router is able to keep all 
   active members state for reception.  The Group Specific and Source-
   and-Group Specific Queries, which are sent to query other members 
   when a member leaves a group or a source-specific group, are 
   unnecessary because the router knows who are active on the link 
   through explicit tracking.  Thus it is suggested that when explicit 
   tracking is used, only periodical query is sent. 

   Further, to reduce the packet burst on link with large number of 
   receivers, the router can limited its scope of its periodical 
   Queries.  For example, if the receiver number is small, the 
   periodical General Queries for all multicast receivers is enough.  
   If the multicast receiver on a link is large, the router could 
   periodically send Group Queries to a group or send Source-Group 
   Specific Queries to a source-group.  In this case the router tunes 
   its behavior by sending these two Queries periodically instead of 
   triggering them when a member leaves. 

5.2.5 Robustness Enhancement of Queries 

   If the Query is tuned for wireless network by sending only once, as 
   shown in section 5.2.2, the reliability of the query behavior is 
   weaker than wired IGMPv3/MLDv2.  In fact, this situation could also 
   be improved by tuning a router's behavior.  A router which keeps 
   track of all its active receivers, if after sending a Query, fails 
   to get any response from any receiver, it can derive that its just-
   sent Query might have been lost before reaching other end of the 
   link.  The router could choose to compensate this situation by 
   sending another Query to query its members. 

6. Security Considerations 

   Apart from the security issue of IGMP/MLD, additional requirements 
   should be considered for the features of the wireless link.  They 
   will be described in the later version of this draft. 

7. References 

7.1. Normative References 

   [1] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to indicate requirement 
   levels", RFC 2119, March 1997. 

   [2] Cain, B., Deering, S., Kouvelas, I., Fenner, B., and A. 
   Thyagarajan, "Internet Group Management Protocol, Version 3", RFC 
   3376, October 2002. 

 
 
Liu and Etc.          Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility       March 2010 
    

   [3] Vida, R. and L. Costa, "Multicast Listener Discovery Version 
   2(MLDv2) for IPv6", RFC 3810, June 2004. 

   [4] Liu, H., Cao, W., and H. Asaeda, "Lightweight IGMPv3 and MLDv2 
   Protocols", RFC5790, September 2008. 

   [5] Deering, S., "Host Extensions for IP Multicasting", RFC 1112, 
   August 1989. 

   [6] Fenner, W., "Internet Group Management Protocol, Version 2", RFC 
   2236, November 1997. 

   [7] Deering, S., Fenner, W., and B. Haberman, "Multicast Listener 
   Discovery (MLD) for IPv6", RFC 2710, October 1999. 

   [8] Holbrook, H. and B. Cain, "Source-Specific Multicast for IP", 

   RFC 4607, August 2006. 

7.2. Informative Referencess 

   [9] Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in 
   IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004. 

   [10] Gundavelli, Ed., S., Leung, K., Devarapalli, V., Chowdhury, K., 
   and B. Patil, "Proxy Mobile IPv6", RFC 5213, August 2008. 

   [11] Devarapalli, V., Wakikawa, R., Petrescu, A., and P. Thubert, 
   "Network Mobility (NEMO) Basic Support Protocol", RFC 3963, January 
   2005. 

   [12] Romdhani, I., Kellil, M., and H. Lach, "IP Mobile Multicast: 
   Challenges and Solutions", IEEE Comm. Surveys 6(1), 2004. 

   [13] H. Asaeda, "IGMP and MLD Optimization for Mobile Hosts and 
   Routers", draft-asaeda-multimob-igmp-mld-optimization-01,work in 
   progress,2010. 

   [14] I. Romdhani, J. Munoz, H. Bettahar, and A. Bouabdallah, 
   "Adaptive Multicast Membership Management for Mobile Multicast 
   Receivers", IEEE, 2006. 






 
 
Liu and Etc.          Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 15] 

Internet-Draft IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility       March 2010 
    

Authors' Addresses 

   Hui Liu 
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd. 
   Huawei Bld., No.3 Xinxi Rd. 
   Shang-Di Information Industry Base 
   Hai-Dian Distinct, Beijing  100085 
   China 
    
   EMail: Liuhui47967@huawei.com 
    
    
   Qin Wu 
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd. 
   Site B, Floor 12, Huihong Mansion, No.91 Baixia Rd. 
   Nanjing, Jiangsu  21001 
   China 
    
   Phone: +86-25-84565892 
    
   EMail: sunseawq@huawei.com 
    
    
   Hitoshi Asaeda 
   Keio University 
   Graduate School of Media and Governance 
   5322 Endo 
   Fujisawa, Kanagawa  252-8520 
   Japan 
    
   EMail: asaeda@wide.ad.jp 
   URI:   http://www.sfc.wide.ad.jp/~asaeda/ 
    
    
   T.M. Eubanks 
   Iformata Communications 
   130 W. Second Street 
   Dayton, Ohio  45402 
   USA 
    
   Phone: +1 703 501 4376 
   EMail: marshall.eubanks@iformata.com 
   URI:   http://www.iformata.com/ 




 
 
Liu and Etc.          Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 16] 

