Network Working Group                         Chern Nam Yap
Internet Draft                                Seamoby Forum
<draft-cnyap-rbm-00.txt>                                   
                                                   Nov 2001

                    Realm Based Mobility

Status of This Memo

     This document is an Internet-Draft and is NOT offered
     in accordance with Section 10 of RFC2026, and the
     author does not provide the IETF with any rights other
     than to publish as an Internet-Draft
     
     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet
     Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its
     working groups. Note that other groups may also
     distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.
     
     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum
     of six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsolete
     by other documents at any time. It is inappropriate to
     use Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite
     them other than "work in progress."
     
     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/lid-abstracts.txt
     
     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be
     accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html
     
Abstract

     Realm Based Mobility described ways and method to
achieve local realm mobility in contrast to flat private
circuit switch model.

























Chern Nam Yap        Expires May 2002                 Page i
Internet Draft          Realm Based                 Nov 2001
                         Mobility


                          Contents

Status of This Memo
i

Abstract
i

 1. Introduction
1

 2. Terminology
1

 3. Overview of Realm Based Mobility
2

 4. Latest Address Convergence Mechanism
3

 5. Security Consideration
3

 6. Intellectual Property Right
3

Authors' Addresses
3






































Chern Nam Yap        Expires May 2002                Page ii
Internet Draft          Realm Based                 Nov 2001
                         Mobility

  1.   Introduction

  Network Address Translation allows a private network so
as to host a large number of hosts. Normally this only
exists in an enterprise or an Institution. Due to the fact
ease of today technology, even home user will soon also
experience such type of benefits. When a large network
exist, it is inevitable that further sub-networking will
exist. These documents describe how to allow mobility to
exist in such environment.

  2.   Terminology

2.1 General Term

IP
Internet Protocol.

RBM
Realm Based Mobility

IIP
Itinerant Internet Protocol.

Node
A device that implements IP.

Router
A node that forwards IP packets not explicitly address to
itself.

Host
Any node that is not a router.

Packet
An IP header plus payload.

2.2 Realm Based Mobility Terms

Mobile node
A node whose movement between subnets has minimum effect on
its applications.

Correspondent node
A peer node that the mobile node is communicating with. It
can be mobile or stationary.

MPR (Mobile Proxy Register)
An anchoring points for the mobile node at the HOME link
that aids the mobile node to diverse its address. It also
forwards packets to the mobile node when there is necessity
to do so.

Binding
The association of the Home/Visit address with the co-
located address for any mobile node, along with the
remaining lifetime of that association.

2.3 Specification Language
The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENEDED", "MAY", and
"OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in RFC 2119.
Chern Nam Yap        Expires May 2002                 Page 1
Internet Draft          Realm Based                 Nov 2001
                         Mobility

  3.   Overview of Realm Based Mobility

  In Realm Based Mobility, due to the ability to control
every single node in the organisation, this makes life much
easier to put mobile awareness. Due to the way IP is being
designed, RBM puts the mobile awareness in the realm top-
level gateway (Mobile Proxy Register) and the node that is
moving.

  Due to the fact that every node belongs to the
organisation, all mobile nodes in this case have already a
pre-determined hard coded security association with top-
level gateway.

  In addition to that, the MPR must link to the DHCP
service that provides all mobile nodes their dynamic
address, as it moves from subnet to subnet.

  Based on mobile node latest address convergence
mechanism, any mobile aware node would be able to
communicate with one another without directly in an optimal
way. In some case, some node that does not have latest
address convergence mechanism would still able to
communicate with a mobile node using the MPR latest address
convergence mechanism. This also applies to any node that is
not within the realm.
  
  DNS within this network will always return 1 fixed IP
address that is in the same subnet as the MPR. MPR proxy
this addresses with its MAC address. A mobile aware node
will send a binding request to the MPR for the latest mobile
address. The top-level gateway will reply binding updates.
Latest address convergence address is nothing but change the
packet destination IP address. Whenever a mobile node moves
from a subnet to another subnet, the MPR will send binding
updates to the mobile aware correspondent node.
  
  If there were a need to support non-mobile aware node in
the network, then each mobile node would need 2 IP address.
One static, one dynamically assigned. <<<< Note: Half of the
realm address will goes to this static address. There is
ways to overcome this problem that is to use Class E IP
address. >>>>
  
   DNS within this network then always have to return the
mobile node fixed IP address. The non-mobile aware node
would just send the packet to the MPR. The MPR then use
proxy mechanism to route the packet accordingly.
  
  The mobile node based on the router advertisement to
determine it's latest position when it moves from a subnet
to another. It is suggested to speed up the rate for the
router advertisement for any radio networks that does not
support link layer hint (for example wireless LAN). When
there the radio network supports link layer hint (for
example PPP or other circuit sensitive) the mobile will
based on that information and request a new DHCP address
accordingly.
  
  Cross realm mobility extension will not be mentioned in
this document, but RBM mobile MUST support cross realm
mobility with the help of IIP as RBM is a part of IIP
architecture. RBM Signalling, Conceptual Data Structures and
Binding Management will also be the same as IIP. On the
other hand it can operate as a standalone system.
  
  
Chern Nam Yap        Expires May 2002                 Page 2
Internet Draft          Realm Based                 Nov 2001
                         Mobility
  
  
  The requirements for RBM mobile aware nodes are the same
as IIP. As for MPR, the requirement is quite similar to BHR.
The difference is: instead of tunnelling, latest address
convergence mechanism is done when non-mobile node is
required to deal with.

  4.   Latest Address Convergence Mechanism

  Due to the fact that every mobile node obtains its latest
address though MPR. MPR always knows mobile node latest
address. The address convergence lies in two fold. The
correspondent node like in IIP always uses the latest mobile
node address to construct packets. MPR on the other hand
recreate the packet with the latest mobile node local
address.
Note that the source address of the packet is kept, but the
checksum is recalculated. To do quick implementation,
NAT/NATP methods currently used.

  5.   Security Consideration
  
  This model is used when all the Network Interfaces used
registered with MPR DHCP service. Further more with address
translator kept the source address and the checksum modified
by the MPR to ensure no middleman attack.
  
  6.   Intellectual Property Right

  The Internet Draft is currently under serious
consideration for patent.
  
Comments about this document SHOULD be discussed on the
   seamoby@egroups.com mailing list or

Authors' Addresses

   Questions about this document can also be directed to the
authors:

     Chern Nam Yap
     Seamoby Forum

     Web: http://www.seamoby.org
     E-mail: cny@ieee.org

















Chern Nam Yap        Expires May 2002                 Page 3

