Internet Working Group                          Syed Misbahuddin(editor)
INTERNET DRAFT                         King Fahd University of Petroleum                   
                                              and Minerals, Saudi Arabia
Category: Informational                                   Tariq Ibn Aziz                               
                                       King Fahd University of Petroleum
                                              and Minerals, Saudi Arabia
                                                     Nizar Al-Holou, PhD   
                                        The University of Detroit Mercy,
                                                        Detroit, MI, USA
                                                           June 2003
                                                     Expires in 6 months                                             
Development of an Algorithm to Reduce Internet Data Traffic Congestion
                 draft-misbahuddin-data-reduc-02.txt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Status of this Memo

                 

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   This document specifies an Algorithm to Reduce Internet Data
   Trafgfic congession for Internet Community, and requests discussion
   and suggestions for improvements.

   A version of this draft document is intended for submission to the
   RFC editor as a Proposed Standard for the Internet Community.
   Discussion and suggestions for improvement are requested. This
   document will expire six months after publication.  Distribution of
   this draft is unlimited.  Copyright Notice
	 Copyright (C) The Internet Society 2002.  All Rights
	 Reserved.

				
Syed Misbahuddin et al.          Informational                  [Page 1]





INTERNET DRAFT                                               June 2003

Abstract

	In recent era of Information Technology the data traffic over the
        Internet is increasing uncontrollably. This proliferation of data
        traffic is due to general shift towards  e-business and  other 
        application  of Information Technology. The businesses relying on
        Internet  lose billions of dollars each year due to slow or failed 
        web  services.   Therefore,  in  Internet research, the most
        conspicuous issue is to develop methodologies to reduce net
        traffic over the Internet. In this paper, an algorithm is proposed
        to reduce net data traffic, which works at Internet layer in TCP/IP
        reference model.  The algorithm monitors data repetitions in IP
        datagram and prepares a compression code in response of this
        repetition. If no IP datagrams are repeated, no compression code
        is sent. Therefore, the algorithm does not put any overhead on
        the system. Furthermore, as the proposed algorithm works at IP
        datagrams only, therefore, it remains transparent from all
        client-server applications.   




Table of Contents

   1. Introduction .................................................. 
   2. Review of IP Datagram.......................................... 
   3. Data Reduction Algorithm Motivation ........................... 
      3.1 Assumptions ............................................... 
      3.2 The Algorithm ............................................. 
   4. Conclusion .................................................... 
   6. Acknowledgments ...............................................
   Normative References .............................................
   Informative References ........................................... 
   Authors' Addresses ............................................... 
   Full Copyright Statement .........................................















Syed Misbahuddin et al.          Informational                  [Page 2]






INTERNET DRAFT                                               June 2003




1. Introduction

        The WWW traffic is growing exponentially day-by-day with significant
        shift towards e-commerce and increasing Internet usages in the society.
        However, the exorbitant net data traffic over the Internet leads to
        slow responses to the net users and consequently the e-commerce web sites
        lose about $4.3 billion per annum [1].  The quality of web service and
        proper web response time is influenced by two factors: the web serverÆs
        slow response and net congestion over the Internet. The web serverÆs
        slow response is obviously connected with number of client hits. The
        serverÆs response may be improved improving web serversÆ performance [2].
        Net congestion over the Internet may be controlled by two methods:
        web-caching and data compression [1].  In web caching, the history of
        web objects is maintained at some caching servers. When a client requests
        a web object, a specific cache server generates the requested object
        instead of obtaining the object from original web server. The web caching
        mechanism helps reduce the net data traffic.  However, web caching is
        still a challenging area because all web objects are not cacheable [3].
        Data compression algorithms are applied on the information content of the
        web object.


        There are some related works addressing the issue of net congestion.
        However, their focus has been limited to IP/UDP/RTP and TCP header
        compression for Low-Speed Serial Links data communication such as
        dial-up access [7, 8]. To use this characteristic, the sender and
        receiver keep their own states of header information along the
        session. The sender sends only the difference information in next
        packet transmission. In the present Internet paradigm, the net
        traffic is growing uncontrollably, which leads significant net
        congestion. Therefore, the issue of net congestion mandates the
        investigation of data compression algorithms for general Internet
        domain. Furthermore, it is observed that the TCP/IP datagrams
        contain a significant data portion, which repeats the data content
        in several situations. This data repetition also necessitates
        scavenging data compression techniques for IP datagramÆs data field.
        Syed Misbahuddin et al have presented a data reduction algorithm,
        which works for message communication based data communication
        networks [6]. In this algorithm, the processors connected to a data
        network, maintain the history of transmitted and received messages.
        The transmitter side processor prepares a compression code if some
        data bytes in the message are repeated and send the non-repeated data
        bytes to the network.  The receiving end prepares the complete message
        with the help of the message history and the received non-repeated
        data bytes.  The objective of this paper to extend the data reduction
        algorithm proposed in [6] to IP datagrams. In this algorithm, the
        data repetition in the data field of IP datagram has been focused.. 

Syed Misbahuddin et al.          Informational                  [Page 3]





INTERNET DRAFT                                               December 2002

	Multimedia media data traffic is sent over UDP at constant rate equal to
        the darin rate of reciver. The conestion algorithms work at network
        layers on TCP. However, TCP based congestion algorithms bring
        performance degradation for Multimedia media data traffic [7]. 
        Therefore, multimedia media data traffic requires a new approach for
        congestion control.  The data reduction algorithms presented in this
        draft work at IP layer on IP data grams at both client and serever ends.
        Therfore, this approach can be equally applied to both TCP and UDP
        datagrams.  Therefore, it will not bring performance degradation problem
        for multimedia media traffic. The proposed data reduction algorithm will
        be conducive to control data congestion over the routers as it works
        before IP datahgram are packateized at the sending end and after
        reassembled at the recieving end. Section 2 reviews IP datagram and
        section 3 discusses the motivation and the  proposed data reduction
        algorithm. Finally, the conclusion is presented in section 4. 


2. Review of IP Datagram

        In connectionless Internet services, the web objects are broken into
        individual data packets, which are sent over the Internet
        independently. These data packets carry information about the intended
        recipients.  At the receiving end of Internet model, the receiver
        software combines the received packets and reconstructs the originally
        transmitted web object. Figure 1 shows the general model of IP datagram.

        +------------------------+
        |Header|	Data Area|
        +------------------------+

        Figure 1: Format of an IP datagram

        An IP datagram travels independently over the net. The IP datagram
        contain variable length of data field.  The size of data field
        depends upon the application  sending the data over the net. In
        current version of IP version 4.0, a datagram size varies from
        single octet to 64k octets including the header.  The header portion
        contains routing and other informational details about the
        datagram [4].

3. Data Reduction Algorithm Motivation

        It may be commonly observed that in a client-server interaction, a
        client hits a web server multiple times.    This kind of situation
        is especially observed in web-based emails services,   on-line
        shopping  and  in  some e-commerce.   During   multiple client-server
        interactions, most of the web object content may remain intact for
        long time. The web server uses several session variables to maintain
        the currency of an already  shipped  web  object to  a particular
        client.  These session variables are originated by the web clients
        and sent to the web server.  Furthermore, some commercial web servers

Syed Misbahuddin et al.          Informational                  [Page 4]





INTERNET DRAFT                                               June 2003

        maintain the history of the interactions from web clients.  For
        example, a server maintains of history of advertisement pushed
        to a particular client [5]. Based upon these observations of repeated
        content of web objects and the availability of the client information
        at the server side, a Data Reduction (DR) algorithm has been
        investigated in this paper.  The DR algorithm is based upon following
        assumptions.


3.1 Assumptions
        1. The Internetworking model is connectionless, which uses IP
           datagram for information exchange. All IP datagrams follow IP
           version 4.0.
        2. One bit in ôType of serviceö field of IP version 4.0Æs header is
           used to denote the data reduction process. This bit will be
           defined as Data Reduction Bit (DRB).
        3. The algorithm is implemented at Internet layer in the TCP/IP
           model at both client and server side.
        4. Both client and server maintain limited of histories of IP
           datagrams of web objects.
        5. Each IP datagram is assigned the identification number according
           to the content of web page.
        6. The data field length in IP datagram is at least 8 bytes long. 

3.2 The Algorithm

        The algorithm divides data field of IP datagram into fixed eight
        groups. The width of each group varies from 1 byte to N/8 bytes for
        8 bytes to N bytes long data field in IP datagram respectively. 
        According to the algorithm, the web server keeps a copy of the
        recently transmitted IP datagram in a buffer called T_BUFF. Each
        entry in T_BUFF consists of two fields: ID field and data field. The
        ID field holds the information to identify a particular IP datagram.
        The data field keeps a copy of the data field of the transmitted
        datagram. When a client requests the same web object, the data
        reduction algorithm,   intercepts the generated IP datagram to check
        its presence in T_BUFF.  If T_BUFF contains the copy of the IP
        datagram, the data reduction algorithm will verify if the  data
        field of the IP datagram is changed.   If some data bytes groups
        have not been changed, then the DR algorithm will set DRB in the IP
        header to ô1ö to reflect the repetition of data bytes.  The
        algorithm will then prepare an eight bit compression code (CC) to
        indicate the repeated data bytes group in the  IP datagramsÆ data
        field. In the compression code,a bit with a value of "1" indicates
        that a corresponding data byte group has been repeated. A bit with
        a value "0" indicates a data byte group is not repeated. The
        non-repeated data byte group(s) will follow the compression code
        in the data field of IP datagram. The indices of repeated and
        non-repeated data byte groups is determined by bit numbers of
        compression code with values "1" or "0" respectively. The IP
        datagram with compression code is shown in Figure 2 and data
        reduction algorithm is summarized in Figure 3.

Syed Misbahuddin et al.          Informational                  [Page 5]





INTERNET DRAFT                                               June 2003

        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | IP header with DRB=1 |CC | Data field |
        +--------------------------------------------------+

        Figure 2: IP Datagram with compression


        Repeat
         For each IP packet generated
        Repeat
        If the generated  IP packet pk is very first IP packet THEN
          1.   T_BUF(k)= pk
          2.   Send IP packet out
        Else
        If pk is found in T_BUF and data bytes are repeated THEN
          1.   Prepare compression code
          2.   Set DRB to ô1.ö
          3.   Send CC and non-repeated bytes.
          4.   Update T_BUF
        End
        End


        Figure 3: Data reduction algorithm executed at the Web server side


        The decompression algorithmö running at the client side recovers the
        actual transmitted IP datagram from the received IP datagram.   The
        algorithm checks the data reduction bit in the received IP datagram.
        If this bit is "1", then the process will assume that some data byte
        groups in the received datagram have been repeated and the copies of
        the repeated data bytes groups are already  present in R_BUFF at the
        client side.  In this case, the client will interpret the very first
        byte of the received datagramÆs data field as an eight bit compression
        code. The compression code will describe the indices of the repeated
        and non-repeated data byte groups.  The data decompression algorithm
        will collect non-repeated data bytes from the received IP datagram and
        repeated data bytes groups from R_BUFF buffer at the client side. The
        reconstructed IP datagram will be sent to the appropriate layer to
        reconstruct the received web page. The data decompression process can
        be summarized in flow chart shown in Figure 4.

        To illustrate the IP datagram reconstruction process at the client
        side, we assume that the IP datagramÆs data field is 8 bytes long.
        According to DR algorithm, the data field is divided into eight
        groups and the size of each data byte group is one byte long.  Assuming
        groups 0, 1, 2 and 3 are repeated in the data field of IP datagram,




Syed Misbahuddin et al.          Informational                  [Page 6]






INTERNET DRAFT                                              June 2003


        the CCÆs bits 0, 1, and 3 will be set to ô1."  To indicate the positions
        of non-repeated data bytes, the bits 4 to 7 of the CC will be set to "0." 
        The CC to reflect this situation is shown in Figure 5. The IP datagram
        received at the client side along with compression code and non-repeated
        data bytes is shown in Figure 6.

        Repeat
        For each IP datagram received 
        Repeat
        If the received IP datagram  pk is very first IP datagram  THEN
        3.  R_BUF(k)= pk
        4.  Utilize IP datagram    pk
        Else
        If pk  is present  in R_BUF and DRB is ô1ö  THEN
        5.  Interpret CC
        6.  Collect repeated bytes from R_BUF
        7.  Collect non-repeated bytes from received message
        8.  R_BUF= pk
        9. Utilize IP datagram  pk
        End
        End

        Figure 4: IP datagram reconstruction process at the client side.

        +----------------------------------------------------------------+
        |Bit0  | Bit1   | Bit2  | Bit3    | Bit4  | Bit5   | Bit6 | Bit7 |
        +----------------------------------------------------------------+
        |1     | 1      | 1     | 1       | 0     |   0    |   0  |  0   |
        +----------------------------------------------------------------+

        Figure 5: Compression code showing repeated and non-repeated
                  data byte groupÆs indices

        +----------------------------------------------------------------------+
        | IP datagram Header with DRB=1 |  CC  |     Non-repeated data bytes   |
        +----------------------------------------------------------------------+

        Figure 6: The IP datagram received at the client side


        In this scenario the data decompression algorithm running at the web
        client side, retrieves bytes 0, 1, 2 and 3 from R_BUFF and bytes 4, 5,
        6 and 7 from the received IP datagram. In this example, total 5 data
        byte groups are transmitted instead of 8 data byte group (CC + 4
        non-repeated data byte group). In other words, due to DR algorithm,
        the IP datagram arrived at the client side in relatively short period
        of time. Therefore, by applying the proposed data reduction algorithm,



Syed Misbahuddin et al.          Informational                  [Page 7]





INTERNET DRAFT                                              June 2003

        more IP datagrams can be transferred from web server to a web client
        in given amount of time. The number of transmitted data bytes decreases
        as the number of repeated data bytes increases. Consequently, if all
        data bytes are repeated then only one byte of compression code will be
        sufficient to represent all data bytes.  If no data bytes are repeated,
        the compression code is not needed and IP datagram transmission remains
        normal.


5. Conclusion

        The Internet traffic is growing due to increasing trends of its
        application in all facets of life. Opening new web sites, online
        shopping, online news, online buying and selling of stocks, online
        banking, Internet emails and Internet telephony are some examples
        of major contributing factors for increased net traffic and net
        congestion. It may be easily observed that in most client-server
        interactions, most of web page contents remain unchanged. This
        observation of repeated web object can be exploited to devise a
        data reduction algorithm.  In this paper, a data reduction
        algorithm has been proposed, which utilizes the content repetition
        of web objects. The proposed algorithm generates a compression code
        if some data bytes in the IP datagram are repeated. The web client
        can reconstruct the original IP datagrams with the help of compression
        code and received non-repeated data bytes. The performance of the
        proposed data reduction algorithm has been evaluated in terms of
        queue length at router and IP datagram delay. The numerical results
        generated from the simulation model indicate that the proposed data
        reduction algorithm helps reduce the data congestion at Internet and
        improves web transactions. The proposed data reduction algorithm can
        be incorporated with IP header compression indicated in the
        literature [7, 8]. This approach may give better performance results.



Informative References

        [1]     Mazen Zari, Hossein Saiedian and Muhammad Naeem, ôUnderstanding
                and reducing web delays,ö IEEE computer, December 2001,
                pp. 30-37.
        [4]     Ed Taylor, ôThe Network Architecture Design Handbook,ö
                McGraw-Hill, 1998.
        [5]     Douglas E. Comer, ôComputer Networks and Internetö, Prentice
                Hall, 1997.
        [7]     V. Jacobson, "TCP/IP Compression for Low-speed Serial Links,ö
                RFC 1144.
        [8]     S. Casner and V. Jaconson, ôCompressing IP/UDP/RTP Headers for
                Low-Speed Serial Links,ö July 1998, draft-ietf-avt-crtp-05.txt                           



Syed Misbahuddin et al.          Informational                  [Page 8]





INTERNET DRAFT                                               June 2003

Normative References

[2]     J. Bangs and J. Mogoul, ôScaleable Kernel Performance for Internet
        Servers under  Realistic Loads,ö Proc. Usenix 1998 Technical Conf.,
        Usenix, Berkeley, California, pp. 1-12.
[3]     J. Almeida, V. Almeida, and D. Yates, ôMeasuring the Behavior of a World
        Wide Web Servers,ö Proc. 7t IFIP conf. High Performance Networking
        (IFIP), Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, Mass., 1997, pp. 57-72.
[6]     Syed Misbahuddin, Syed M. Mahmud and Nizar Al-Holou ôDevelopment and
        performance analysis of a data reduction algorithm for automotive
        multiplexingö IEEE transactions of Vehicular technology, Vol. 50, No. 1,
        January 2001.
[7]     Vasekin Rokocevic "Congestion control Algorithms for Multimedia
        Application in the wireless Internet",
        www.staff.city.ac.uk/~veselin/publications/Acta.pdf.


Authors' Addresses

   Syed Misbahuddin, Dr. Eng.
   Assistant Professor
   Department of Computer Sceince and Software Engineering
   Hail Community College, KFUPM
   PO Box 2440, Hail, Saudi Arabia
   Email: smisbah@kfupm.edu.sa


   Nizar Al-Holou, PhD
   Chairman
   Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
   The University of Detroit Mercy,
   4001 West Mc Nichols,
   Detroit, MI 48221, USA,
   Email: alholoun@udmercy.edu


   Tariq Ibn Aziz
   Lecturer
   Department of Computer Sceince and Software Engineering
   Hail Community College, KFUPM
   PO Box 2440, Hail, Saudi Arabia
   Email: taziz@kfupm.edu.sa









Syed Misbahuddin et al.          Informational                  [Page 9]





INTERNET DRAFT                                               June 2003






Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.




















Syed Misbahuddin et al.          Informational                  [Page 10]


