
  INTERNET DRAFT
  Expiration Date:  September 2002	
    
    						Chetan Kumar S	
    						Wipro Technologies
    						Sunil Kumar
    						Wipro Technologies

    						March 2002



			Signalling LSPID's in OSPF TE 	
    
    
    	   		draft-chetan-lspid-ospf-00.txt


  Status of this Memo

    This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
    all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
    other groups may also distribute working documents as
    Internet-Drafts.

    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
    documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
    Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
    "work in progress."

    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

  Abstract

    This draft introduces new a sub TLV to OSPF TE extensions to signal
    the LSPID (Label Switch Path ID) of an LSP (Label Switch Path). 
    This information can be used by any mechanism (normally constraint
    based path calculation (CSPF) procedures) to calculate paths that 
    may contain LSPID's as one its Explict Route Objects.
    								






chetan,sunil		Expires	September 2002			[Page 1]


 Internet Draft    	draft-chetan-lspid-ospf-00.txt	       March 2002




 1. Conventions Used in this Document

    CRLDP	: Constraint-Based LDP 
    CSPF	: Constraint Shortest Path First
    LDP		: Label Distribution Protocol
    E-LSPs	: Explicitly routed LSPs
    ERO		: Explicit Route Object
    ERTLV	: Explicit Route TLV

                                                                           
 2. Introduction

     This document introduces an additional traffic engineering 
     attribute describing LSPID (Label Switch Path ID) [CRLDP] to TE
     parameters documented in [OSPF-TE]. LSPID could be used by the CSPF
     path computation mechanism to generate Explicit Route Objects that 
     may include LSPID as one of the objects.

     LSPID of an LSP tunnel is described as one of the Sub-TLVs in the 
     Link TLV for the tunnel.

     Note: The LSPs can be advertised into IGP by other ways as 
     described in [UNNUM] [LSP-HIER].
    
 3. Overview

    CR-LDP provides a mechanism to setup LSPs based on constraint 
    routing. Explicit Label Switch Paths (E-LSP) which are constrained
    by a set of Explicit Route Objects (ERO) are essential requirements
    of traffic engineering. CRLDP specifies four different EROs for 
    signalling, viz. IPv4 prefix, IPv6 prefix, Autonomous system number
    and LSPID.

    LSPID is a unique identifier of a CR-LSP within an MPLS network.
    When an ERO that contains LSPID ERTLV is carried in the CRLDP label
    request the path selected would be tunneled(/spliced) through this 
    CRLSP.

    A TE path can normally be calculated using a high level software
    objects like CSPF, which may reside on a single node, which has the
    complete information about nodes and tunnels in the network. 
    Automated procedures to calculate a constrained based path help in
    reducing a lot of administrative overhead. Moreover, 
    administratively selected paths may be inconsistent or illogical due
    to operator error and the selected paths may not be optimal. 

    Some of the advantages of automating the CSPF calculations are as 
    follows.  



chetan,sunil		Expires	September 2002			[Page 2]

Internet Draft         draft-chetan-lspid-ospf-00.txt         March 2002



    a) A new LSP request can be triggered automatically on failure of 
    an existing LSP. 

    b) A single node can perform CSPF calculation and provide optimized
    paths in the whole network.

    c) Easy inter-operations with various vendor implementations that
    signal the path attributes.

    However none of the existing IGP protocols, with their extensions
    there of, carry the information about the LSPID therby forcing 
    operator interventions for setting up paths that pass through LSP
    tunnels.  Administrator will have to know apriori, the LSPIDs in the
    MPLS network domain and update the same in the ERO's calculated by 
    the CSPF. In this draft we add LSPID sub TLV to the OSPF TE 
    extensions to signal the LSPID TLV into the IGP. This provides CSPF
    object or any other mechanism with the complete information to 
    construct the EROs.
    
3. LSPID Sub-TLV

     The Link TLV describes a single link.
    	
     The following sub-TLVs are currently defined in [OSPF-TE]:

     1 - Link type (1 octet)
     2 - Link ID (4 octets)
     3 - Local interface IP address (4 octets)
     4 - Remote interface IP address (4 octets)
     5 - Traffic engineering metric (4 octets)
     6 - Maximum bandwidth (4 octets)
     7 - Maximum reservable bandwidth (4 octets)
     8 - Unreserved bandwidth (32 octets)
     9 - Resource class/color (4 octets)


     	 32768-32772 - Reserved for Cisco-specific extensions

     This document introduces LSPID sub-TLV. LSPID Sub-TLV specifies 
     LSPID of the tunnel being advertised in the LINK TLV.
     
     Type field for LSPID sub-TLV is TBD (refer section 7).
     This sub-TLV is of length 6 octets.
     The value of this TLV is as defined in the CRLDP specifications 
     which is composed of LSP tunnel ingress LSR Router ID (or any of 
     its own IPv4 addresses), Refer to [CRLDP] for more information.






chetan,sunil		Expires	September 2002			[Page 3]
^L
Internet Draft         draft-chetan-lspid-ospf-00.txt         March 2002



 6. Security Considerations

    This document raises no new security issues for OSPF. The security
    mechanisms already proposed for OSPF may be used.                   

 7. IANA Considerations

    The type value for the LSPID is to be obtained from IANA.

 8. Acknowledgments
    
    Authors would like to thank RaviShankar, Nagabhusna and Venkat for
    discussion on the idea.

 9. References

    [CRLDP] Jamoussi, et al., "Constraint-Based LSP Setup using LDP" 
    RFC 3212, January 2002. 

    [LSP-HIER] Kireeti Kompella, Yakov Rekhter, "LSP Hierarchy with
    Generalized MPLS TE" (work in progress).

    [OSPF-TE] Dave Katz, Derek Yeung, Kireeti Kompella, "Traffic
    Engineering Extensions to OSPF", (work in progress)

    [UNNUM] Kireeti Kompella, Yakov Rekhter, Alan Kullberg "Signalling
    Unnumbered Links in CR-LDP", (work in progress).


10. Author's Address

    Chetan Kumar S
    Wipro Technologies
    Hosur Road, Bomanahalli
    Bangalore-5600
    India
    Phone : 91-80-5732296
    Fax   : 91-11-5732296
    Email : chetan.kumar@wipro.com		

    Sunil Kumar 
    Wipro Technologies
    Hosur Road, Bomanahalli
    Bangalore-5600
    India
    Phone : 91-80-5732296
    Fax   : 91-11-5732296
    Email : sunil.kum@wipro.com

chetan,sunil		Expires	September 2002			[Page 4]




 Internet Draft         draft-chetan-lspid-ospf-00.txt         March 2002

10. Full Copyright Statement

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date).  All Rights Reserved.

    This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
    others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
    or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
    and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
    kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
    are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
    document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
    the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
    Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
    developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
    copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
    followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
    English.

    The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
    revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

















								
								
								
								
								
								
								
								
								
								
								
								
								

								
chetan,sunil		Expires	September 2002			[Page 5]



