


Network Working Group                                        C. Everhart
Internet-Draft                                   Network Appliance, Inc.
Intended status: Standards Track                              W. Adamson
Expires: May 15, 2008                       CITI, University of Michigan
                                                                J. Zhang
                                                  University of Michigan
                                                       November 12, 2007


  Using DNS SRV to Specify a Global File Name Space with NFS version 4
           draft-everhart-nfsv4-namespace-via-dns-srv-02.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 15, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   The NFS version 4 protocol provides a natural way for a collection of
   NFS file servers to collaborate in providing an organization-wide
   file name space.  The DNS SRV RR allows a simple and appropriate way
   for an organization to publish the root of its name space, even to
   clients that might not be intimately associated with such an



Everhart, et al.          Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Global Name Space with DNS SRV     November 2007


   organization.  DNS SRV can be used to join these organization-wide
   file name spaces together to allow construction of a global, uniform
   NFS version 4 file name space.  This document refreshes the draft.


Table of Contents

   1.  Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Proposed Use of SRV Resource Record in DNS . . . . . . . . . .  3
     3.1.  Deployment of the Resource Record  . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Integration with Use of NFS Version 4  . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.1.  Globally-useful names: conventional mount point  . . . . .  5
     4.2.  Mount options  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.3.  File system integration issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Where is this integration carried out? . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Relationship to DNS NFS4ID RR  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 11




























Everhart, et al.          Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Global Name Space with DNS SRV     November 2007


1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2.  Background

   With the advent of fs_locations attributes in the NFS Version 4
   protocol [RFC3530], NFS servers can cooperate to build a file name
   space that crosses server boundaries, as detailed in the description
   of referrals in [NB0510].  With NFS Version 4 referrals, a file
   server may indicate to its client that the file system name tree
   beneath a given name in the server is not present on itself, but is
   represented by a filesystem in some other set of servers.  The
   mechanism is general, allowing servers to describe any filesystem as
   being reachable by requests to any of a set of servers.  Thus,
   starting with a single NFS Version 4 server, using these referrals,
   an NFS Version 4 client might be able to see a large name space
   associated with a collection of interrelated NFS Version 4 file
   servers.  An organization could use this capability to construct a
   uniform file name space for itself.

   An organization might wish to publish the starting point for this
   name space to its clients.  In many cases, the organization will want
   to publish this starting point to a broader set of possible clients.
   At the same time, it is useful to require clients to know only the
   smallest amount of information in order to locate the appropriate
   name space.  Simultaneously, that required information should be
   constant through the life of an organization if the clients are not
   to require reconfiguration as administrative events change, for
   instance, a server's name or address.


3.  Proposed Use of SRV Resource Record in DNS

   Providing an organization's published file system name space is a
   service, and it is appropriate to use the DNS [RFC1035] to locate it.
   As with the AFSDB resource record type [RFC1183], the client need
   only utter the (relatively) constant domain name for an organization
   in order to locate its file system name space service.  Once a client
   uses the DNS to locate one or more servers for the root of the
   organization's name space, it can use the standard NFS Version 4
   mechanisms to navigate the remainder of the NFS servers for that
   organization.  The use of this proposed mechanism results in a useful
   cross-organizational name space, just as in AFS [AFS] and DCE/DFS
   [DFS] before it.  A client need know only the name of the



Everhart, et al.          Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Global Name Space with DNS SRV     November 2007


   organization in order to locate the file system name space published
   by that organization.

   We propose the use of the DNS SRV resource record type [RFC2782] to
   fulfill this function.  The format of the DNS SRV record is as
   follows:

      _Service._Proto.Name TTL Class SRV Priority Weight Port Target

   In our case, we use a Service name of "nfs4" and a conventional
   Protocol of "_tcp".  The Target fields give the domain names of the
   NFS Version 4 servers that export root filesystems.  An NFS Version 4
   client SHOULD interpret any of the exported pseudo-root filesystems
   as the filesystem published by the organization with the given domain
   name.

   Suppose a client wished to locate the root of the file system
   published by organization example.net.  The DNS servers for the
   domain could publish records like

      _nfs4._tcp IN SRV 0 0 2049 nfs1tr.example.net
      _nfs4._tcp IN SRV 1 0 2049 nfs2ex.example.net

   The result domain names nfs1tr.example.net and nfs2ex.example.net
   indicate NFS Version 4 file servers that export the root of the
   published name space for the example.net domain.  In accordance with
   RFC 2782, these records are to be interpreted using the Priority and
   Weight field values, selecting an appropriate file server with which
   to begin a network conversation.  Subsequent accesses are carried out
   in accordance with ordinary NFS Version 4 protocol.

3.1.  Deployment of the Resource Record

   As with any DNS resource, any server installation needs to concern
   itself with the likely loads and effects of the presence of the
   resource record.  The answers to requests for RRs might differ
   depending on what the server can tell about the client.  For example,
   some RRs might be returned only to those clients inside some network
   perimeter (to provide an intranet service) and requests from other
   clients might be denied.  As the RR directs the clients to ask for
   service from a given set of servers, the administrator should ensure
   that the identified servers can handle the expected load.
   Fortunately, the definition of the DNS SRV resource record offers a
   mechanism to distribute the load to multiple servers within a
   priority ordering.






Everhart, et al.          Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Global Name Space with DNS SRV     November 2007


4.  Integration with Use of NFS Version 4

   There are at least two remaining questions: whether this DNS SRV
   record evaluation is done in the NFS server or client, and also how
   the domain names of the organizations are passed to client or server.
   A third question is how this might produce a uniform global file name
   space, and what prefix should be used for such file names.

   This specification anticipates that these SRV records will most
   commonly be used to define the second directory level in an inter-
   organizational file name space.  This directory will be populated
   with domain names pointing to the file systems published for use
   under those domain names.  Thus, the root directory for the file
   system published by example.net will effectively be mounted
   underneath the example.net name in a second-level directory.

   In general, a domain name will appear to a client as a directory name
   pointing to the root directory of the file system published by the
   organization responsible for that domain name.

4.1.  Globally-useful names: conventional mount point

   For the inter-organizational name space to be a global name space, it
   is useful for its mount point in local systems to be uniform as well.
   The name /nfs4/ SHOULD be used so that names on one machine will be
   directly usable on any machine.  Thus, the example.net published file
   system would be accessible as

           /nfs4/example.net/

   on any client.  Using this convention, "/nfs4/" is a mount for a
   special file system that is populated with the results of SRV record
   lookups.

4.2.  Mount options

   SRV records are necessarily less complete than the information in the
   existing NFS Version 4 attributes fs_locations and the proposed
   fs_locations_info.  For the rootpath field of fs_location, we assume
   that the empty string is adequate.  Thus, the servers listed as
   targets for the SRV resource records should export the root of the
   organization's published file system as the pseudo-root in its
   exported namespace.

   As for the other attributes in fs_locations_info, the recommended
   approach is for a client to make its first possible contact with any
   of the referred-to servers, obtain the fs_locations_info structure
   from that server, and use the information from that obtained



Everhart, et al.          Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Global Name Space with DNS SRV     November 2007


   structure as the basis for its judgment of whether it would be better
   to use a different server representative from the set of servers for
   that filesystem.

   We recommend, though, that the process of mounting an organization's
   name space should permit the use of what is likely to impose the
   lowest cost on the server.  Thus, we recommend that the client not
   insist on using a writable copy of the filesystem if read-only copies
   exist, or a zero-age copy rather than a copy that may be a little
   older.  We presume that the organization's file name space can be
   navigated to provide access to higher-cost properties such as
   writability or currency as necessary, but that the default use when
   navigating to the base information for an organization ought to be as
   low-overhead as possible.

   One extension of this rule that we might choose to inherit from AFS,
   though, is to give a special meaning to the domain name of an
   organization preceded by a period (".").  It might be reasonable to
   have names mounting the filesystem for a period-prefixed domain name
   (e.g., ".example.net") attempt to mount only a read-write instance of
   that organization's root filesystem, rather than permitting the use
   of read-only instances of that filesystem.  Thus,

           /nfs4/example.net/users

   might be a directory in a read-only instance of the root filesystem
   of the organization "example.net", while

           /nfs4/.example.net/users

   would be a writable form of that same directory.  A small benefit of
   following this convention is that names with the period prefix are
   treated as "hidden" in many operating systems, so that the visible
   name remains the lowest-overhead name.

4.3.  File system integration issues

   The result of the DNS search SHOULD appear as a (pseudo-)directory in
   the client name space, cached for a time no longer than the RR's TTL.
   A further refinement is advisable, and SHOULD be deployed: that only
   fully-qualified domain names appear as directories.  That is, in many
   environments, DNS names may be abbreviated from their fully-qualified
   form.  In such circumstances, multiple names might be given to file
   system code that all resolve to the same DNS SRV RRs.  The
   abbreviated form SHOULD be represented in the client's name space
   cache as a symbolic link, pointing to the fully-qualified name, case-
   canonicalized when appropriate.  This will allow pathnames obtained
   with, say, getcwd() to include the DNS name that is most likely to be



Everhart, et al.          Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Global Name Space with DNS SRV     November 2007


   usable outside the scope of any particular DNS abbreviation
   convention.


5.  Where is this integration carried out?

   Another consideration is what agent should be responsible for
   interpreting the SRV records.  It could be done just as well by the
   client or by the server, though we expect that most clients will
   include this function themselves.  Using something like Automounter
   [AMD] technology, the client would be responsible for interpreting
   names under a particular directory, discovering the appropriate
   filesystem to mount, and mounting it in the appropriate place in the
   client name space before returning control to the application doing a
   lookup.  Alternatively, one could imagine the existence of an NFS
   version 4 server that awaited similar domain-name lookups, then
   consulted the DNS SRV records to determine the servers for the
   indicated published file system, and then returned that information
   via NFS Version 4 attributes as a referral in the way outlined by
   Noveck and Burnett [NB0510].  In either case, the result of the DNS
   lookup should be cached (obeying TTL) so that the result could be
   returned more quickly the next time.

   We strongly suggest that this functionality be implemented by NFS
   clients.  While we recognize that it would be possible to configure
   clients so that they relied on a specially-configured server to do
   their SRV lookups for them, we feel that such a requirement would
   impose unusual dependencies and vulnerabilities for the deployers of
   such clients.


6.  Relationship to DNS NFS4ID RR

   This DNS use has no obvious relationship to the NFS4ID RR.  The
   NFS4ID RR is a mechanism to help clients and servers configure
   themselves with respect to the domain strings used in "who" strings
   in ACL entries and in owner and group names.  The authentication/
   authorization domain string of a server need have no direct
   relationship to the name of the organization that is publishing a
   file name space of which this server's filesystems form a part.  At
   the same time, it might be seen as straightforward or normal for such
   a server to refer to the ownership of most of its files using a
   domain string with an evident relationship to that NFS4ID-given
   domain name, but this document imposes no such requirement.







Everhart, et al.          Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Global Name Space with DNS SRV     November 2007


7.  Security Considerations

   Naive use of the DNS may effectively give clients published server
   referrals that are intrusive substitutes for the servers intended by
   domain administrators.

   It may be possible to build a trust chain by using DNSSEC [RFC4033]
   to implement this function on the client, or by implementing this
   function on an NFS Version 4 server that uses DNSSEC and maintaining
   a trust relationship with that server.  This trust chain also breaks
   if the SRV interpreter accepts responses from insecure DNS zones.
   Thus, it would likely be prudent also to use domain-based service
   principal names for the servers for the root filesystems as indicated
   as the targets of the SRV records.  The idea here is that one wants
   to authenticate {nfs, domainname, host.fqdn}, not simply {nfs,
   host.fqdn}, when the server is a domain's root file server obtained
   through an insecure DNS SRV RR lookup.  The domain administrator can
   thus ensure that only domain root NFSv4 servers have credentials for
   such domain-based service principal names.

   Domain-based service principal names are being proposed in the KITTEN
   WG [KITTEN] .


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC1034]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain Names - Concepts and Facilities",
              RFC 1034, November 1987.

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain Names - Implementation and
              Specification", RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", March 1997.

   [RFC2782]  Gulbrandsen, A., Vixie, P., and L. Esibov, "A DNS RR for
              specifying the location of services (DNS SRV)", RFC 2782,
              February 2000.

   [RFC3530]  Shepler, S., Callaghan, B., Robinson, D., Thurlow, R.,
              Beame, C., Eisler, M., and D. Noveck, "Network File System
              (NFS) version 4 Protocol", RFC 3530, April 2003.

   [RFC4033]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "DNS Security Introduction and Requirements",
              RFC 4033, March 2005.



Everhart, et al.          Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Global Name Space with DNS SRV     November 2007


8.2.  Informative References

   [AFS]      Howard, J., "An Overview of the Andrew File System"",
              Proc. USENIX Winter Tech. Conf. Dallas, February 1988.

   [AMD]      Pendry, J. and N. Williams, "Amd: The 4.4 BSD Automounter
              Reference Manual", March 1991,
              <http://docs.freebsd.org/info/amdref/amdref.pdf>.

   [DFS]      Kazar, M., Leverett, B., Anderson, O., Apostolides, V.,
              Bottos, B., Chutani, S., Everhart, C., Mason, W., Tu, S.,
              and E. Zayas, "DEcorum File System Architectural
              Overview", Proc. USENIX Summer Conf. Anaheim, Calif.,
              June 1990.

   [KITTEN]   IETF, "GSS-API Next Generation", October 2005,
              <http://ietf.org/html.charters/kitten-charter.html>.

   [NB0510]   Noveck, D. and R. Burnett, "Next Steps for NFSv4
              Migration/Replication", October 2005, <ftp://www.ietf.org/
              internet-drafts/draft-noveck-nfsv4-migrep-00.txt>.

   [RFC1183]  Everhart, C., Mamakos, L., Ullmann, R., and P.
              Mockapetris, "New DNS RR Definitions", RFC 1183,
              October 1990.


Authors' Addresses

   Craig Everhart
   Network Appliance, Inc.
   7301 Kit Creek Road
   P.O. Box 13917
   Research Triangle Park, NC  27709
   US

   Phone: +1 919 476 5320
   Email: everhart@netapp.com













Everhart, et al.          Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Global Name Space with DNS SRV     November 2007


   Andy Adamson
   CITI, University of Michigan
   CITI, 3rd Floor Argus
   535 W. William Street
   Ann Arbor, MI  48103
   US

   Phone: +1 734 764 9465
   Email: andros@umich.edu


   Jiaying Zhang
   University of Michigan
   535 W. William Street, Suite 3100
   Ann Arbor, MI  48103
   US

   Phone: +1 734 647 4216
   Email: jiajingz@umich.edu
































Everhart, et al.          Expires May 15, 2008                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Global Name Space with DNS SRV     November 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Everhart, et al.          Expires May 15, 2008                 [Page 11]


