


Network Working Group                                        J. Loughney
Internet-Draft                                                     Nokia
Expires: September 6, 2006                                    S. Dawkins
                                                               Futurewei
                                                           March 5, 2006


                    A Single-Stage Standards Process
               draft-loughney-newtrk-one-size-fits-all-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 6, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document proposes several changes of principle to the Internet
   standards process, specifically a reduction from three stages to a
   single stage in the standards track.  This does not effect the
   Informational, Experimental or BCP designations.






Loughney & Dawkins      Expires September 6, 2006               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                Single stage                    March 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Stage 1: IETF-Approved Standard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  No higher stages  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  No timing rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   5.  No 'down references' within IETF-Approved Standards . . . . . . 4
   6.  The STD designation, and updates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   7.  Interoperability Reports  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   8.  Transitional arrangements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   9.  Not excluded  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   10. Housekeeping  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   11. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   12. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   13. Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   14. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 9

































Loughney & Dawkins      Expires September 6, 2006               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                Single stage                    March 2006


1.  Introduction

   This document proposes several changes of principle to the Internet
   standards process defined in [1].

   The background for this proposal is the published analysis of
   problems in the IETF [2], various discussions in the IETF's "New IETF
   Standards Track Discussion" (newtrk) working group, various largely
   expired drafts, and the authors' personal experiences.  It has little
   claim to originality (see Acknowledgements).

   The problems tackled by this proposal are those of clumsiness in the
   three-stage standards process, and related clumsiness in the clarity
   and useability of IETF standards.  Additionally, this draft proposes
   'truth in advertising' with respect to how the IETF manages the
   standardization process in most cases.  Working Groups are generally
   chartered to develop standards and then close down once the their
   charter is fufilled.  Only a handfull of Working Groups contain any
   references to progressing documents Draft or Full Standard status.
   The IESG does not enforce section 6.2 of [1], which states that the
   IESG should review the status of any standard that has not reached
   Internet Standard status and has remained unchanged for 24 months.

   This draft is deliberately short on rationale and explanation - the
   interested reader should study the above references and discussions
   carefully.  Should readers require additional rationale, the authors
   may add text to future revisions.  Additionally, a small analysis of
   the current status of the RFC Index shows that there are 66 Full
   Standards, which includes 10 that are obsoleted, resulting in 56 Full
   Stanards. 91 Draft Standards which includes 37 that are obsoleted,
   resulting in 54 Draft Standards.  Finally, there are 838 proposed
   standards, which includes 227 that are obsoleted, resulting in 611
   Proposed Standards.  Ensuring that all the Proposed Standards
   progress up the Standards Track would seem to be a large task.

   During recent (March 2006) discussions, Eliot Lear did a quick review
   of how many RFC's have progressed along the standards track.

   By RFC, not by STD (obviously):
   Status      1999  2000  2001  2002  2003  2004  2005
   -------------------------------------------------------------
   PS          102   119   71    105   103   131   169
   DRAFT       6     6     2     4     7     7     3
   STD         3(*)  2     0     8*    3     0     1

   (*) 3 in 1999 were SMIv2 6 in 2002 were SNMP

   Eliot commented that these "are rough based on 10 minutes of



Loughney & Dawkins      Expires September 6, 2006               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                Single stage                    March 2006


   scripting."  These should give a quick idea of the current status of
   the Standards Track.


2.  Stage 1: IETF-Approved Standard

   This is exactly as described for "Proposed Standard" in [1].


3.  No higher stages

   The higher stages, "Draft Standard" and "Standard", are simply
   abolished.  These stages are achieved by so few specifications that
   there is no justification for keeping them, and there is nothing
   negative about "IETF-Approved Standard" as the final state.  Should
   revisions be required, the document can be resubmitted as an Internet
   Draft and be assigned a new RFC number upon document approval.  The
   authors note that this roughly corresponds to the current process in
   practice.


4.  No timing rules

   Since there is no higher stage, all text requiring periodic reviews
   will be removed from the replacement for [1].

   This draft is deliberately short on rationale and explanation - the
   interested reader should study the above references and discussions
   carefully.  Should readers require additional rationale, the authors
   may add text to future revisions.


5.  No 'down references' within IETF-Approved Standards

   Since all IETF-Approved Standards are at the same stage of maturity,
   there is no concept of specifications at a higher stage referencing
   specifications at a lower stage.  (It is not proposed to allow down
   references to Internet-Drafts.)


6.  The STD designation, and updates

   Presently, an STD designation and number is only given to a document
   (or document set) at the full Standard level.  This can cause extreme
   confusion when a full Standard is technically obsoleted by a Proposed
   Standard.  What is an implementer to do?  What documents should be
   normatively referenced by other organizations?




Loughney & Dawkins      Expires September 6, 2006               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                Single stage                    March 2006


   One option is to simply abolish the STD designation, which is little
   used anyway.

   The alternative is to assign the STD designation (and number) to a
   IETF-Approved Standard document, or set of IETF-Approved Standard
   documents which are related.  In any case, this function (assigning
   documents to specific STD designations) would be an IETF (WG or IESG)
   matter and not an RFC Editor action as today.


7.  Interoperability Reports

   Although only a minority of IETF standards-track specifications have
   achieved Draft Standard or Internet Standard status, interoperability
   reports have been provided for specifications that have achieved this
   status.  Knowing that a protocol specification is clear enough to
   allow interoperable implementations is valuable.  It is not our
   intention to ignore valuable information.

   The IETF community is encouraged to continue to perform
   interoperability testing, and to report results for this testing.  In
   fact, interoperability reports should be considered a sign that an
   Internet draft as reached a certain level of maturity, and should be
   considered during IETF Last call.  A better automated tool and place
   to report these results would be required in order to ensure that
   protocols undergo some level of interoperability testing.  At this
   time, interoperability reports are provided to the IESG and are
   available from http://www.ietf.org/IESG/implementation.html.  One
   alternative would be to include interoperability reports as part of
   an ISD [3], but the current practice meets this need.

   Again, the authors note that the IETF does not manage or certify
   interoperability testing of its standards.  The IETF relies on
   interoperability reports from the community.  This document in no way
   changes this, it simply decouples document status from
   interoperability reports.

   There is a proposal [4] to handle in a more formal manner interop
   reports.  This would provide a good basis to ensure a one-step
   standards process was effective.


8.  Transitional arrangements

   On the day these changes enter service, all existing standards-track
   RFCs would be automatically reclassified as IETF-Approved Standard
   RFCs.  Corresponding changes would be made to the RFC Index and
   various features of the RFC Editor site and any other RFC



Loughney & Dawkins      Expires September 6, 2006               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                Single stage                    March 2006


   repositories displaying the status of RFCs.

   If and only if the STD designation is retained, all existing STD
   designations will be applied as follows:
   1.  If the old Standard has not been obsoleted, it is now an IS with
       the same STD designation.
   2.  If the old Standard has been obsoleted, the STD designation goes
       to the document(s) that obsoleted it.
   3.  If the old Standard has been updated, the STD designation is
       added to the document(s) that updated it.
   4.  The IESG would designate a team or teams to rapidly classify all
       standards-track documents not assigned an STD designation by the
       above process into new STD designations.

   (If the STD designation is abolished, these steps would be
   unnecessary, but various cleanings up of the RFC Index and the RFC
   Editor web site would be needed to remove all references to STD.)


9.  Not excluded

   The above changes have been constructed in such a way that they do
   not exclude the notions of WG Snapshots (drafts declared to be in a
   stable state by the WG), Stable Snapshots (drafts declared to be in a
   stable state with IESG agreement) or Internet Standards Documentation
   (ISDs, external descriptors of a set of RFCs as a single
   standard)[3].


10.  Housekeeping

   Obviously, [1] will need considerable editing in addition to the
   above changes, for example to remove the intellectual property
   material which is already obsolete.  Also, [5], which defined the STD
   designation, should be obsoleted.  (Even if the STD designation is
   retained, it should be fully described in the replacement for [1].)

   An unrelated housekeeping item is to clarify that, occasionally, the
   IESG may decide to approve a document for immediate publication as
   Historic (rather than Informational), when it is desired to publish
   it for the record but it is already overtaken by events.


11.  Security Considerations

   This document does not directly affect the security of the Internet.





Loughney & Dawkins      Expires September 6, 2006               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                Single stage                    March 2006


12.  IANA Considerations

   This document requests no action by the IANA.


13.  Acknowledgements

   Although this document proposes a single stage standards track, it
   draws heavily from previous two-stage proposals by Spencer Dawkins,
   Charlie Perkins, Dave Crocker, Scott Bradner, and Brian Carpenter,
   and discussions of those proposals in the Newtrk working group.

   This document was produced using the xml2rfc tool[6].

14.  Informative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3",
        BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [2]  Davies, E., "IETF Problem Statement", RFC 3774, May 2004.

   [3]  Klensin, J. and J. Loughney, "Internet Standards Documentation
        (ISDs)", draft-ietf-newtrk-repurposing-isd-03 (work in
        progress), April 2005.

   [4]  Masinter, L., "Formalizing IETF Interoperability Reporting",
        draft-ietf-newtrk-interop-reports-00 (work in progress),
        October 2005.

   [5]  Postel, J., "Introduction to the STD Notes", RFC 1311,
        March 1992.

   [6]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
        June 1999.

















Loughney & Dawkins      Expires September 6, 2006               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                Single stage                    March 2006


Authors' Addresses

   John Loughney
   Nokia
   Itamerenkatu 11-13
   Helsinki,   00180
   Finland

   Phone: +358504836242
   Email: john.loughney@nokia.com


   Spencer Dawkins
   Futurewei Technologies
   1547 Rivercrest Blvd.
   Allen, TX  75002
   USA

   Phone: +1 469 229 5397
   Email: spencer@mcsr-labs.org































Loughney & Dawkins      Expires September 6, 2006               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                Single stage                    March 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Loughney & Dawkins      Expires September 6, 2006               [Page 9]


