

   Internet Research Task Force                                  M. Eder 
   Internet Draft                                             H. Chaskar 
   Document: draft-irtf-smrg-ipsmf-01.txt                          Nokia 
                                                                  S. Nag 
   Category: Experimental                                 November  2001 
    
    
    
                 IP Service Management in the QoS Network 
    
    
   Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance 
   with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. Internet-Drafts 
   are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force 
   (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or made obsolete by other 
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- 
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work 
   in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved. 
    
   Abstract 
    
   The guiding principles in the design of IP network management were 
   simplicity and no centralized control.  The best effort service 
   paradigm was a result of the original management principles and the 
   other way around.  New methods to distinguish the service given to 
   one set of packets or flows relative to another are well underway. 
   However, as IP networks evolve the management approach of the past 
   may not apply to the QoS-capable network envisioned by some for the 
   future.  We examine some of the areas of impact that QoS is likely 
   to have on management and look at some questions that remain to be 
   addressed. 
    

IP Service Management in the QoS Network                 November 2002 

    
   1. Introduction 
    
   Simplicity above all else was one of the guiding principles in the 
   design of IP networks. However, as IP networks evolve, the concept 
   of service in IP is also evolving, and the strategies of the past 
   may not apply to the full-service QoS-capable network envisioned by 
   some for the future.  Within the IP community, their exists a good 
   deal of impetus for the argument that if the promise of IP is to be 
   fulfilled, networks will need to offer an increasing variety of 
   services.  The definition of these new services in IP has resulted 
   in a need for reassessment of the current control mechanism utilized 
   by IP networks.  Efforts to provide mechanisms to distinguish the 
   service given to one set of packets or flows relative to another are 
   well underway, yet many of the support functions necessary to 
   exploit these mechanisms are limited in scope and a complete 
   framework is non-existent.  This is complicated by the fact that 
   many of these new services will also demand some form of billing 
   framework in addition to a control one, something radically new for 
   IP. 
    
   This paper intends to evaluate the network and service management 
   issues that will need to be addressed, if the IP networks of the 
   future are going to offer more than just the traditional best effort 
   service in any kind of significant way. 
    
   2. Background 
    
   The task of defining a management framework for QoS will be 
   difficult due to the fact that these new services represent a 
   radical departure from the best effort service model that was at the 
   core of IP in the past, and had a clear design strategy to have 
   simplicity take precedence over everything else [1].  This 
   philosophy was nowhere more apparent than in the network and service 
   management area for IP [2].  Proposed changes to support a variety 
   of QoS features will impact the existing control structure in a very 
   dramatic way.  Compounding the problem is the lack of understanding 
   of what makes up a "service" in IP [3].  Unlike some other network 
   technologies, in IP it does not suffice to limit the scope of 
   service management simply to end-to-end connectivity, but the 
   transport service offered to packets and the way the transport is 
   used must also be covered.  If the available transport services in 
   IP expand, the result will be the further expansion of what is 
   considered a service.  The now de-facto inclusion of WEB services in 
   the scope of IP service, which is remarkable given that the WEB did 
   not even exist when IP was first invented, illustrates this 
   situation well.  This phenomenon can be expected to increase with 
   the current trend towards moving network decision points towards the 
   boundary of the network and, as a result, closer to the applications 
   and customers.  Additionally, the argument continues over the need 
   for QoS in IP networks at all.  New technologies based on fiber and 
   wavelength-division multiplexing have many people convinced that 
   bandwidth will be so inexpensive it is not going to be necessary to 
   have an explicit control framework for providing QoS 
    
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar     Expires May 2003                          2 

IP Service Management in the QoS Network                 November 2002 

   differentiation.  However uneconomical it is to engineer a network 
   for peak usage, a major argument in this debate certainly is the 
   cost of developing operational support systems for a QoS network and 
   deploying them in the existing networks.  Just the fact that 
   customers might be willing to pay for additional service may not be 
   justification for implementing sweeping architectural changes that 
   could seriously affect the Internet as it is known today.  The IP 
   community must be very concerned that the equality that 
   characterized the best effort Internet may be sacrificed in favor of 
   a service that has a completely different business model. If the 
   core network started to provide services that generated more 
   revenue, its could easily come at the expense of the less revenue 
   generating best effort service. 
    
   3. IP Management Standardization 
    
   Management standardization efforts in the IP community have 
   traditionally been concerned with what is commonly referred to as 
   "element management" or "device management".  Recently, new efforts 
   in IP management have added the ability to address service issues 
   and to look at the network in more abstract terms. These efforts 
   which included a logical representation of services as well as the 
   representation of resources in the network, combined with the notion 
   of a user of a service, has made possible the much talked about 
   concept of 'policy'.  Notable among these efforts are the Policy 
   work in the IETF and the DMTF work on CIM and DEN.  Crucial elements 
   of the service management framework are coming into perspective, but 
   point to a trend in IP that is a quite radical departure from the 
   control mechanisms of the past.  As the service model evolves from 
   being what was sufficient to support best effort to being able to 
   support variable levels of service, a trend towards a centralized 
   management architecture has become quite apparent. 
    
   This is becoming increasingly apparent for two reasons.  QoS 
   mechanisms need network wide information [4], and for them to 
   succeed, they must not require a tremendous amount of support from 
   the core network.  It is becoming increasingly accepted that only at 
   the edge of the network will there be sufficient resources to 
   provide the mechanisms necessary to admit and control various QoS 
   flows. 
     
   4. Telecommunications Service Management 
    
   One place to start an effort to define service management in IP 
   networks is by looking at what was been done previously in 
   telecommunications networks.  The telecommunications standards have 
   not been very successful in defining an industry accepted service 
   management framework even in an environment in which the service is 
   fairly constrained.  Yet regulation has made it necessary for 
   network operators to open their networks sufficiently to allow for 
   multiple vendor participation in providing the service.  This 
   indicates that some formalized boundaries exist or the markets are 
   sufficiently large to justify the development of interfaces.  
   International telecommunications management standards look at the 
    
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar     Expires May 2003                          3 

IP Service Management in the QoS Network                 November 2002 

   complete management problem by dividing it into separate but highly 
   related layers.  Much of the terminology used to describe the 
   management problem in IP has diffused from the telecommunications 
   standards [5].  These standards were designed specifically to 
   address telecommunications networks, and it is not clear how 
   applicable they will be to IP networks.  Service management is 
   defined in terms of the set of services found in telecommunications 
   networks and the management framework reflects the hierarchical 
   centralized control structure of these networks.  The framework for 
   service management is based on the Telecommunications Management 
   Network (TMN) layered approach to management.  Current IP standards 
   are heavily weighted towards the element management layer and 
   especially towards the gathering of statistical data with a 
   decentralized approach being emphasized.  In TMN a dependency exists 
   between layers and clear functions at their boundaries are defined.  
   To what extent service management, as defined in the TMN standards, 
   can be applied to IP which is lacking a network layer that supports 
   a Logical Layered Architecture [5] must be further investigated. 
    
   TMN concepts must be applied carefully to IP networks because 
   fundamental differences exist.  Control of IP networks is highly 
   distributed especially in the network layer.  Management is non-
   hierarchical and decentralized with many peer-to-peer relationships.  
   A formal division of management into layers, where management 
   dependencies exist at the borders of these layers, may not be 
   applicable to IP. Any effort to define service management in IP must 
   be constantly vigilant that it does not assume the 
   telecommunications concepts can be applied directly to IP networks.  
   The most basic abstraction of the network management problem into 
   element, network, and service management has as its origins in the 
   telecommunications industry's standardization work and the IP 
   management framework might not have made even these distinctions if 
   it where not for the telecommunications legacy. 
    
   5. IP Service Management: Problem Statement 
   
   In defining the Service Management Framework for IP, the nature of 
   services that are going to need to be managed must be addressed. 
   Traditionally network management frameworks consist of two parts, an 
   informational framework and the framework to distribute information 
   to the network devices.  A very straight forward relationship exists 
   in that the distribution framework must support the informational 
   one, but also more subtle relationships exists with what the 
   informational and distribution frameworks imply about the management 
   of the system.  The informational framework appears to be the easier 
   problem to address and the one that is principally being focused on 
   by the IP community. 
    
   Efforts like the DMTF CIM are currently trying to define network, 
   and to a lesser extent service, information models.  These efforts 
   show a surprising similarity to those of the telecommunications 
   industry to define information models [6].  What has not emerged is 
   a clear framework for defining how the information models are to be 
   used for network management and how the information gets 
    
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar     Expires May 2003                          4 

IP Service Management in the QoS Network                 November 2002 

   disseminated in a way that meets the requirements of a network 
   management system.    
    
   The number of elements to be managed in these networks will require 
   this information to be highly distributed.  Highly distributed 
   directories would be a prime candidate for the information that is 
   of a static nature.  For information that is of a dynamic nature the 
   problem becomes far more complex and has yet to be satisfactorily 
   addressed.  Policy management is a logical extension of having 
   distributed directories services available in the network.  The IETF 
   and DMTF are looking to Policy management to be a framework to 
   handle certain service management issues.  Much of the current 
   policy efforts are focused on access and traffic prioritization 
   within a particular network element and only for a single 
   administrative domain [7].  Classifying traffic flows and enforcing 
   policies at the edge with the intent of focusing on admission 
   issues, without addressing the end-to-end nature of the problem, 
   leaves some of the most complex service management issues still 
   unanswered.  Providing a verifiable commodity level of service, in 
   IP, will effect every facet of the network and a management solution 
   to the problem will have to address the scale and the dynamics by 
   which it operates.  
  
  5.1 Common Management Domain 
    
   Standardization efforts need to concentrate on the management 
   problems that are multi-domain in character.  The test for multi-
   domain often centers around there being a many-to-one or a one-to-
   many relationship requiring the involvement of two or more distinct 
   entities.  Domains could reflect the administrative domain, routing 
   domain, or include agreements between domains.  Unlike the 
   telecommunications network in which traffic traverses only a 
   relatively small number of domains, traffic in IP networks is likely 
   to traverse numerous domains under separate administrative control.  
   Further complicating the situation is, that unlike the 
   telecommunications network, many of these domains will be highly 
   competitive in nature, offering and accommodating varying service 
   level agreements.  Telecommunications traffic, even with 
   deregulation, passes from the access providers network to a core 
   network and then, if it is an international call, across 
   international boundaries.  The number of domains is relative to IP 
   small, the service supported in each is virtually identical, and yet 
   each domains is likely to have a different business model from the 
   other.  In contrast IP will have many domains, many services, and 
   domains will likely be highly competitive.  To be successful IP will 
   need to model the domain problem in a way that reduces the 
   complexity that arises from having many independent networks each 
   having a different service model being responsible for a single 
   flow. 
    
  5.2 Service Management Business Processes 
    
   A service management framework must address the business processes 
   that operate when providing a service.  A service can be separated 
    
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar     Expires May 2003                          5 

IP Service Management in the QoS Network                 November 2002 

   into two fundamental divisions.  The first is the definition of the 
   service and the second is the embodiment of the service.  While this 
   division may seem intuitive, a formal process that addresses these 
   two aspects of a service needs to be in place if management of the 
   service is to be actually realized.  
    
   In specifying a service it must be possible to map it onto the 
   capabilities of the underlying network architecture.  The service 
   needs to be specified in an unambiguous way so that mechanisms can 
   be put in place to enable the control of the service.  It can be a 
   useful tool to view the relationship of the definition of a service 
   to an instance of that service to the relationship between the 
   definition of an object to the instantiation of that object in 
   object oriented modeling.  As networks evolve it is going to be 
   necessary to logically describe the network capabilities to the 
   service and because IP networks are so fragmented specific service 
   classifications will need to be made available that transcend the 
   individual regions and domains.  An interface that defines and 
   controls the network capabilities, abstracted for the service 
   perspective, allows for the administration of the network by the 
   service management systems.   
    
   Services are often designed with management capabilities specific to 
   them.  These services have tended to not rely on the service aspects 
   of the network, but only on its transport capabilities.  As services 
   become more dependent on the network, Management over a shared 
   framework will be required.  Operators have recognized the business 
   need to allow the user to have as much control over the management 
   of their own services as possible.  IP services will be highly 
   diverse and customizable further necessitating that the management 
   of the service be made available to the user to the extent possible.  
   In the IP environment where they may be many separate entities 
   required to provide the service this will create a significant 
   management challenge. 
      
  5.3 Billing and Security 
    
   Paramount to the success of any service is determining how that 
   service will be billed.  The process of billing must take place at 
   the service inception.  It is here that the network support 
   necessary for billing should be addressed.  Analogously, security 
   must also be addressed in the most early stages of the service 
   definition.  It is not practical to assume that the billing and the 
   security services will be hosted by the same provider as the service 
   itself or that it will be possible to have the billing and security 
   functions specifically designed for every service.  These functions 
   will have to be a generic part of the network. 
    
  5.4 Standards 
   
   Given the limited success of the telecommunications standards bodies 
   efforts to formalize the relationship between different management 
   support functions it is highly suspect that such efforts would 
   succeed in IP networks which have an even more diverse concept of 
    
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar     Expires May 2003                          6 

IP Service Management in the QoS Network                 November 2002 

   network and services.  If the IP network is to be made up of peer 
   domains of equal dominion it will be necessary to have management 
   functionality that is able to traverse these domains.  Of course the 
   perspective of where management responsibility lies is largely 
   dependent on the reference point.  A centric vantage point indicates 
   responsibility shared equally among different domains.  From within 
   any particular domain management responsibility exists within that 
   domain and that domain only.  For a management framework to succeed 
   in IP networks logical management functions will have to be 
   identified along with an extremely flexible definition language to 
   define the interface to these management functions.  The more the 
   management functionality will have to cross boundaries of 
   responsibility, the more the network management functions have to be 
   distributed throughout the network.   
    
   5.5 Core Inter-domain Functions 
    
   The service management paradigm for IP must address management from 
   a perspective that is a combination of technical solutions as well 
   as a formula for representing vendor business relationships.  
   Currently services that need support between domains require that 
   the service level agreements (SLAs) be negotiated between the 
   providers.  At some point these agreements will likely become 
   unmanageable, if the number of agreements becomes very large and/or 
   the nature of the agreements is highly variable. This will result in 
   their being sufficient need for standardization or regulation to 
   control these agreements resulting in it becoming no longer 
   acceptable to make individual arrangements.   
    
   Bandwidth Brokers have been conceived as a method for dealing with 
   many of the problems between the domains relating to traffic from a 
   business perspective.  The premise of the Bandwidth Brokers is to 
   insure agreement between the network domains with regards to 
   traffic, but security and billing issues, that are not likely to be 
   as quantifiable, will also need to be addressed.  Service providers 
   have traditionally been reluctant to use bandwidth broker or SLA 
   types of functions since they consider that such tools expose their 
   weaknesses to competitors and customers.  While this is not a 
   technical problem, it does pose a real practical problem in managing 
   a service effectively. 
    
   Looking at the basic requirements of the QoS network of the future 
   two competing philosophies become apparent.  The network providers 
   are interested in having more control over the traffic to allow them 
   to choose what traffic gets priority especially in a congested 
   environment.  Users desire the ability to identify a path that has 
   the characteristics very similar to a leased line [8].  In either 
   situation as IP bandwidth goes from being delivered on an equal 
   basis, to being delivered based on a particular authorities formula, 
   there will become a need to provide authentication and validation to 
   verify who gets what service.  This will include the ability to 
   measure that the service specified is being provided, to define the 
   exact parameters of the service, and to verify that only an 
   authorized level of service is being provided.   
    
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar     Expires May 2003                          7 

IP Service Management in the QoS Network                 November 2002 

    
   Some of the earlier work on an architectural framework for mixed 
   traffic networks has suggested that the only method that will work 
   between administrative domains is that of bilateral agreement [9].  
   Multilateral agreements may indeed be complex to administer, but 
   another type of multilateral agreements exists that is not so 
   complex.  This is the multilateral agreements mandated by means of 
   national or international regulation.  Bilateral agreements will not 
   scale well and if the traffic needs to traverse many administrative 
   domains it will be hard to quantify the end-to-end service being 
   provided. Instability in the ownership and administration of domains 
   will also limit the usability of bilateral agreements in predicting 
   end-to-end service.  Only through a regulated process will it be 
   possible to eliminate the effects competitive pressures will have on 
   these types of agreements and make it possible to get a truly open 
   environment.  Much pressure of a non-technical nature exists today 
   to discourage this scenario.  If traffic agreements between the 
   boundaries of networks is not mandated or standardized a continuing 
   consolidation of network providers will result.  Providers unable to 
   induce other providers to pair with them will lose business if QoS 
   networks become commonplace.  This would be especially visible for 
   small and midsize service providers who would be pressured to 
   combine with a larger provider or face not being able to offer the 
   highest levels of service. 
 
   5.6 Network Services 
    
   The majority of current activity on higher level management 
   functions for IP networks have been restricted to the issue of 
   providing QoS.  Many service issues still remain to be resolved with 
   respect to the current best effort paradigm and many more can be 
   expected if true QoS support is realized.  Authentication, 
   authorization and accounting services still inadequate for the 
   existing best effort service will need additional work to support 
   QoS services.  
    
   It is reasonable that services can be classified into application 
   level services and transport level services.  Transport services are 
   the services that the network provides independent of any 
   application. These include services such as Packet Forwarding and 
   Routing, QoS differentiation, Traffic Engineering etc.  These might 
   also include such functions as security (Ipsec) and Directory 
   services.  In IP networks a distinction is often made between QoS 
   transport services that are viewed as end-to-end (RSVP) or per-hop 
   (Diffserv).  From a service management perspective the two are very 
   similar.  Transport level services are not very flexible, requiring 
   application level services to fit into the transport framework.  An 
   application that needs additional transport level services will need 
   to be a mass-market application where the investment in new 
   infrastructure can be justified.  Because of the effort in altering 
   transport services, applications that need new ones will have a 
   longer time to market and the effort and cost to develop a framework 
   necessary to support new transport services should not be 
   underestimated. 
    
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar     Expires May 2003                          8 

IP Service Management in the QoS Network                 November 2002 

    
   Application level services are those specific to the application. 
   Many service management functions occur between the application 
   supplier and the application consumer which require no knowledge or 
   support by the existing network.  By keeping service management 
   functions at this level time to market and costs can be greatly 
   reduced.  The disadvantages are that many applications need the same 
   functionality causing inefficient use of the network resources.  
   Services supplied by the network are able to be built more robustly 
   and can provide additional functionality, by virtue of having access 
   to information that applications can not, providing additional 
   benefit over application level services.  An example of an 
   application level service that could benefit from a Network service 
   is the AAA paradigm for Web based E-Commerce which is largely 
   restricted to user input of credit card information.  Sometimes 
   application level service requirements have the disadvantages of 
   both transport service and application service level.  For instance, 
   in IP telephony, this may include services provided by a gateway or 
   other network device specific to IP telephony to support such 
   services as call forwarding or call waiting.  The mass appeal of IP 
   telephony makes it possible to suggest considerable infrastructure 
   changes, but the nature of this kind of change has contributed to 
   the slow penetration of IP telephony applications. 
    
   6. A New Service Management Architecture 
    
   An overview of some of the problems in the previous sections shows a 
   need for a consolidated framework.  Transport level QoS will demand 
   traffic engineering that has a view of the complete network that is 
   far more comprehensive than what is currently available via the 
   Routing protocols.  This view will need to including dynamic network 
   congestion information as well as connectivity information.  The 
   current existing best-effort transport control may become more of a 
   hindrance to new services and may be of questionable value if the IP 
   network will truly become a full service QoS network.  Both IntServ 
   and DiffServ QoS schemes require network provisioning to adequately 
   support QoS within a particular domain and agreements for traffic 
   traversing domains.  Policy management, object oriented information 
   models, and domain gateways are leading to a need for a more 
   centralized management structure that provides full service 
   throughout the network and across domains. Given the probable cost 
   and complexity of such a system failure to come up with a standard, 
   even if it is a de facto standard, will have serious implications 
   for the Internet in the future. 
    
   For the current trends in QoS to succeed, there will need to be 
   harmonization across the new and existing control structures.  By 
   utilizing a structure very similar to the existing routing control 
   structures, it should be possible develop functionality, not in the 
   data path, that can allocate traffic within a domain and use inter-
   domain signaling to distribute between domains.  Additional 
   functionality, necessary to support QoS-like authorization and 
   authentication functions for edge devices admitting QoS traffic and 
   administering and allocating traffic between administrative domains 
    
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar     Expires May 2003                          9 

IP Service Management in the QoS Network                 November 2002 

   could also be supported.  While meeting the requirements for a 
   bandwidth broker [9], additional functionality of making more 
   general policy decisions and QoS routing could also be performed.  
   Given that these tasks are interrelated it makes sense to integrate 
   them if possible.  
    
   The new service architecture must meet the need for allocating 
   traffic within a particular administrative domain and of signaling 
   traffic requirements across domains, while at the same time it must 
   provide the same functionality as what currently happens in a 
   routing domain.  This could be accomplished by redirecting routing 
   messages to a central function which would then calculate paths 
   based on the entire network and the transport requirements.  Across 
   domains communication would occur as necessary to establish and 
   maintain service levels and edge devices would provide traffic 
   information to billing interfaces and to verify the service was 
   being supplied.  For scalability the central function would need to 
   be able to be distributed in large domains.  Routing messages, very 
   similar in content to the existing ones, would provide information 
   sufficient to support the traffic engineering requirements without 
   changing the basic forwarding functions of the devices.  Having 
   routes computed centrally would simplify the network devices and 
   release them from performing computationally intensive routing 
   related tasks. 
    
   Given the scale of the Internet the core can not know about 
   individual flow states [10].  At the same time it is not practical 
   to expect that the edge devices can determine paths that will 
   optimally utilize the network resources.  As the information needed 
   to forward traffic through the network becomes related to complex 
   parameters that can not be determined on a per hop basis and have 
   nothing to do with the forwarding of packets, which routers do best, 
   it makes sense to move the function of determining routes to network 
   components specifically designed for the task so it is no longer a 
   function of routers.  In a QoS network routing decisions become 
   increasingly dependent on information not easily discernable from 
   the data that routers can logically share between themselves.  This 
   will necessitate the need for additional functionality to determine 
   the routing of data through the network and further suggests that 
   all the information needed to allow a router to forward packets 
   might not be better provided external to the routers functions. 
    
   At the edges of the network where the traffic is admitted it will be 
   necessary to have mechanisms that will insure the traffic is within 
   the bounds of what has been specified.  To achieve this it will be 
   necessary to buffer and control the input traffic.  Second the 
   traffic would need to be marked so the other network elements are 
   able to identify that this is preferred traffic without having to 
   keep flow information.  Conversely, a path could be chosen for the 
   traffic that was dedicated to the level of service being requested 
   that was per flow based.  A combination of the two would be possible 
   that would allow a reservation of resources that would accommodate 
   multiple flows.  They are all more similar than they first appear 
   from a management perspective and are really identical in that one 
    
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar     Expires May 2003                         10 

IP Service Management in the QoS Network                 November 2002 

   method represents just a virtual path based on the handling of the 
   packets by the device in the network and the second would be a pre-
   reserved path through the network.  Existing best effort routing 
   will not provide the optimum routes for these new levels of service 
   and to achieve this it would be necessary to have either routing 
   protocols that supported optimum path discovery or mechanisms to 
   configure paths necessary to support the required services.  In 
   addition to specific service parameters reliability will also be a 
   potential service discriminator.  It is unlikely using traditional 
   path determination methods that in the event of a failure a new path 
   could be determined sufficiently quickly to maintain the agreed 
   service level.  This would imply the need for multiple path 
   reservations in some instances.  Because Per flow reservations are 
   too resource intensive virtual trunks would provide a good way to 
   reduce the amount of management traffic by reserving blocks of 
   capacity and would provide stability in the event of a failure in 
   the resource reservation and route selection functions. 
    
   There are implications of providing shaping at the network 
   boundaries.  Shaping would include both rate and burst parameters as 
   well as possible delay aspects.  Having to provision services with 
   specific qualities would present both major business and technical 
   problems.  By definition, packet data is bursty in nature and there 
   exist periods of idleness during the session.  It is not practical 
   to expect a consumer paying a premium for a service would not check 
   that the service was truly available.  Such a service model seems to 
   be filled with peril for the existing best effort Internet, because 
   any significant amount of bandwidth that was reserved for exclusive 
   use or a high priority flow that was artificially kept constant to 
   verify the availability of a contracted service, would not be 
   available for best effort data.   
    
   With respect to traffic within the network itself there will be the 
   need to pre-configure routes and to provide the ability to have 
   routes be dynamically configured.  Some of the problems with pre-
   configured traffic include it's basic inconsistency with the way 
   traffic is currently engineered through the Internet and the 
   difficulty in developing arrangements between administrative 
   domains.  The current Internet has been developed with one of the 
   most egalitarian yet simplistic methods of sharing bandwidth.  
   Supporting the existing best effort service, in an unbiased way, 
   while at the same time providing for other classes of service could 
   potentially add a tremendous amount of complexity to the QoS scheme.  
   On the other hand, if the reserved bandwidth is not shared it could 
   result in a significant impact on the availability of the bandwidth 
   in the Internet as we know it today.  QoS could potentially 
   contribute more to their being insufficient bandwidth, by reserving 
   bandwidth within the network that can not be used by other services, 
   even though it can be expected that this bandwidth will be 
   underutilized for much of the time.  Add to that the motivation of 
   the service providers in wanting to sell commodity bandwidth, and 
   there could be tremendous pressures on the availability of Internet 
   bandwidth. 
    
    
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar     Expires May 2003                         11 

IP Service Management in the QoS Network                 November 2002 

   Current work within the IP community on defining mechanisms to 
   provide QoS have centered on a particular few architectures and a 
   handful of new protocols.  In the following sections, we will 
   examine some of the particular issues with regards to the current IP 
   community efforts as they relate to the previous discussions.  It is 
   not the goal of this paper to serve as a tutorial on these efforts 
   but rather to identify some of the support issues related to using 
   particular technologies that support some form of classifiable 
   service within an IP network.  
    
   7. The DiffServ Architecture 
    
   The DiffServ management problem is two pronged.  First there is the 
   management within the administrative domain that must be addressed, 
   and then the management between the domains.  The second is 
   certainly easier to address because there has been little actual 
   work on this aspect of the architecture.  What work there has been 
   anticipates that service level agreements will be reached between 
   the administrative domains, and that end-to-end service will be a 
   concatenation of these various service level agreements.  This is 
   problematic for many reasons.  From the business perspective, it 
   presumes that agreements reached bilaterally could be concatenated 
   and continue to provide a level of end-to-end service the customer 
   would be willing to pay a premium for.  Problems discussed earlier, 
   with trying to maintain large numbers of these agreements between 
   competitive networks would also apply, and tend to limit the 
   effectiveness of this approach.  
    
   Guaranteeing a class of service on a per hop basis is in no way a 
   guarantee of the service on an end-to-end basis.  It is not likely 
   that a customer would be willing to pay for an improved level of 
   service if it did not include guarantees on the bandwidth and the 
   quantitative bounds on delay and error rates guaranteed end-to-end.  
   This would necessitate engineering the paths through the network so 
   as to achieve a desired end-to-end result.  While it is very likely 
   that an initial attempt at providing this kind of service will 
   specify only a particular ingress and egress border, for robustness 
   and flexibility it will be desirable to have a network that can 
   support such service without such limitations.  The Intserv 
   approach, as opposed to the DiffServ architecture, would require too 
   much per flow and overhead information in the core network and not 
   be scaleable [10].  A DiffServ type architecture, with a limited 
   number of service classes, could be pre-provisioned, and as network 
   circumstances warranted, be modified to support the actual dynamics 
   of the network. 
    
   The high level functional requirements for edge routers has been 
   quite well defined in the DiffServ architecture, but the true scope 
   of the effort to implement this functionality has not been well 
   recognized.  While interesting differences exist between the QoS 
   architecture of the Internet and the circuit switched network used 
   for telecommunications much of the lessons learned in 
   telecommunications should, even if they might do little else, 
   provide some insight into the level of effort needed to implement 
    
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar     Expires May 2003                         12 

IP Service Management in the QoS Network                 November 2002 

   these kinds of requirements.  Ironically, given the Internet 
   community in the past has rejected the level of standardization that 
   was proposed for management of telecommunications networks, it may 
   be the full service internet where it becomes actually imperative 
   that such requirements be completed if the desired services will 
   ever be offered. 
    
   8. Common QoS Functional Areas 
    
   The management of QoS will need to provide functionality to the 
   application and/or at the access, at the core, and at the boundaries 
   to administrative regions.  
    
   QoS traffic functions will need to include admission control, 
   authentication and authorization, and billing.  Verification that 
   traffic is within agreed parameters and programmatic interfaces to 
   advise when the service is outside the agreed limits.  Interfaces 
   that provide service verification, fault notification, and re-
   instantiation and termination will also be necessary. 
    
   Core functions will include traffic engineering, network device 
   configuration, fault detection, and recovery.  Network devices will 
   need to inform the management system of their available resources 
   and the management system will need to tell devices how and where to 
   forward data. 
    
   Between administrative regions accounting, service signaling, 
   service verification will be needed.  At the administrative 
   boundaries of the network functions similar to those provided at the 
   edge will be necessary.  Peer entities in different administrative 
   domains would signal their needs across the boundary.  Verification 
   at the boundary could then occur consistent with the verification at 
   the edge.  Actual traffic through the boundaries could be measured 
   and billing information be transferred between the domains.  The 
   central management function would be responsible for re-routing 
   traffic in the event of a failure or to better utilize the existing 
   network resources.  Future work in the IRTF Service Management 
   Research Group intends to look in detail at these requirements. 
    
   9. Summary 
    
   The paradigm for service management in IP networks has been adopted 
   from that of telecommunications networks.  Basic differences between 
   the service models of these networks call into question if this is 
   realistic.  Further analysis is needed to determine what is the 
   proper paradigm for IP service management and to define a common 
   vocabulary for it.  
    
   The IP community is currently very active in solving problems 
   relating to transport QoS issues.  These activities are illustrated 
   by the work of the Diffserv, Intserv, and Policy working groups.  In 
   contrast not enough effort is being focused on service issues 
   relating to applications.  The present solution is for applications 
   to build in their own service management functionality.  This is 
    
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar     Expires May 2003                         13 

IP Service Management in the QoS Network                 November 2002 

   often an inefficient use of network resources, but more importantly 
   will not provide for access to transport level services and the 
   functionality that they offer.   
    
   The IP community needs to focus on adding service functionality that 
   is flexible enough to be molded to specific application needs, yet 
   will have access to service information that will be necessary to 
   provide superior application functionality.  Principal needs to be 
   addressed relate to developing transport level services for billing 
   and security.  Directory services and extending the work done to 
   define AAA services are promising starting points for developing 
   this needed functionality. 
    
   10. Authors 
    
   Michael Eder 
     Nokia Research Center 
     5 Wayside Road 
     Burlington,  MA  01803 
     Phone:    +1-781-993-3636 
     Fax:      +1-781-993-1907 
     E-mail:   Michael.eder@nokia.com 
    
   Sid Nag 
     PO Box 104 
     Holmdel, NJ 07733 
     Phone:    +1-732-687-1762 
     E-mail:   thinker@monmouth.com 
      
   Hemant Chaskar 
     Nokia Research Center 
     5 Wayside Road 
     Burlington,  MA  01803 
     Phone:    +1-781-993-3785 
     Fax:      +1-781-993-1907 
     E-mail:   hemant.chaskar@nokia.com 


















    
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar     Expires May 2003                         14 

IP Service Management in the QoS Network                 November 2002 

    
   11. References 
 
                     
   [1]   Laurent Mathy, Christopher Edwards, David Hutchison, "The 
   Internet: A Global Telecommunications Solution?", IEEE Network, 
   July/August 2000. 
    
   [2]   Barry M. Leiner, Vinton G. Cerf, et. al., ôA Brief History of 
   the Internetö version 3.31, revised 4 Aug 2000 
     
   [3]   Michael Eder, Sid Nag, Raj Bansal, "Service Management 
   Architectures Issues and Review", RFC 3052, January 2001. 
    
   [4]   Yoram Bernet, "The Complementary Roles of RSVP and 
   Differentiated Services in the Full-Service QoS Network", IEEE 
   Communications Magazine, February 2000 
    
   [5]   Recommendation M.3010 (02/00) - Principles for a 
   telecommunications management network, ITU-T 
    
   [6]   Recommendation M.3100 (07/95) - Generic network information 
   model, ITU-T 
     
   [7]   B. Moore, et. al., "Policy Core Information Model -- Version 
   1 Specification", IETF, RFC 3060, February 2001 
    
   [8]   Van Jacobson, Differentiated Services for the Internet, 
   Internet2 Joint Applications/Engineering QoS Workshop 
     
   [9]   K. Nichols, V. Jacobson, L. Zhang, A Two-bit Differentiated 
   Services Architecture for the Internet, RFC 2638, July 1999 
     
   [10]  Mankin, A., Baker, F., Braden, R., O'Dell, M., Romanow, A., 
   Weinrib, A. and L. Zhang, "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) 
   Version 1 Applicability Statement", RFC 2208, September 1997. 


















    
   Eder, Nag, Chaskar     Expires May 2003                         15 
