





Internet Engineering Task Force                     Ran Atkinson, Editor
INTERNET DRAFT                                       Sally Floyd, Editor
draft-iab-research-funding-00.txt            Internet Architecture Board
                                                           February 2003




 IAB Concerns & Recommendations Regarding Internet Research & Evolution


                          Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   This document discusses IAB concerns that ongoing research is needed
   to further the evolution of the Internet infrastructure, and that
   consistent, sufficient non-commercial funding is needed to enable
   such research.

   This draft is being submitted as a first step towards getting
   feedback from the wider community.  Feedback can be sent to the IAB
   mailing list at iab@ietf.org, or to the editors at
   rja@extremenetworks.com and floyd@icir.org.   We hope to set up a
   mailing list for feedback at research-funding@ietf.org.  When this
   gets set up, requests to join can be sent to research-funding-
   request@ietf.org.




IAB                           Informational                     [Page 1]





draft-iab-research-funding                                 February 2003


1.  Introduction

   This document discusses the history of funding for Internet research,
   expresses concern about the current state of such funding, and
   outlines several specific areas that the IAB believes merit
   additional research.  Current funding levels for Internet research
   are not generally adequate, and several important research areas are
   significantly underfunded.  This situation needs to be rectified for
   the Internet to continue its evolution and development.

1.1  Document Organization

   The first part of the document is a high-level discussion of the
   history of funding for Internet research to provide some historical
   context to this document.  The early funding of Internet research was
   largely from the U.S. government, followed by a period in the second
   half of the 1990s of commercial funding and of funding from several
   governments.  [Add a citation.]  However, the commercial funding for
   Internet research has been reduced due to the recent economic
   downturn.

   The second part of the document provides an incomplete set of open
   Internet research topics.  These are only examples, intended to
   illustrate the breadth of open research topics.  This second section
   supports the general thesis that ongoing research is needed to
   further the evolution of the Internet infrastructure.  This includes
   research on the medium-time-scale evolution of the Internet
   infrastructure as well as research on longer-time-scale grand
   challenges.  This also includes many research issues that are already
   being actively investigated in the Internet research community.

   Areas that are discussed in this section include the following:
   naming, routing, security, network management, and transport.  Issues
   that require more research also include more general architectural
   issues such as layering and communication between layers.  In
   addition, general topics discussed in this section include modeling,
   measurement, simulation, test-beds, etc.  We are focusing on topics
   that are related to the IETF and IRTF (Internet Research Task Force)
   agendas.  (E.g., issues related to the global grid are not discussed
   in this document because these issues are addressed through the
   Global Grid Forum and other grid-specific organizations, not in the
   IETF.)

   Where at all possible, the examples in the paper point to separate
   documents on these issues, and only give a high-level summary of the
   issues raised in those documents.





IAB                           Informational                     [Page 2]





draft-iab-research-funding                                 February 2003


1.2  IAB Concerns

   Recently, in the aftermath of September 11 2001, there seems to be a
   renewed interest by governments in funding research for Internet-
   related security issues.  From [J02]: "It is generally agreed that
   the security and reliability of the basic protocols underlying the
   Internet have not received enough attention because no one has a
   proprietary interest in them".

   That quote brings out a key issue in funding for Internet research,
   which is that because no single organization (e.g., no single
   government, software company, equipment vendor, or network operator)
   has a sense of ownership of the global Internet infrastructure,
   research on the general issues of the Internet infrastructure are
   often not adequately funded.  In our current challenging economic
   climate, it is not surprising that commercial funding sources are
   more likely to fund that research that leads to a direct competitive
   advantage.

   One of the principal theses of this document is that if commercial
   funding is the main source of funding for future Internet research,
   the future of the Internet infrastructure could be in trouble.  In
   addition to issues about which projects were funded, the funding
   source can also affect the content of the research, for example,
   towards or against the development of open standards, or taking
   varying degrees of care about the effect of the developed protocols
   on the other traffic on the Internet.

   At the same time, many significant research contributions in
   networking have come from commercial funding.  However, for most of
   the topics in this document, relying solely on commercially-funded
   research would not be adequate.  Much of today's commercial funding
   is focused on technology transition, taking results from non-
   commercial research and putting them into shipping commercial
   products.  We have not tried to delve into each of the research
   issues below to discuss, for each issue, what are the potentials and
   limitations of commercial funding for research in that area.

   On a more practical note, if there was no commercial funding for
   Internet research, then few research projects would be taken to
   completion with implementations, deployment, and follow-up
   evaluation.

   While it is theoretically possible for there to be too much funding
   for Internet research, that is far from the current problem.






IAB                           Informational                     [Page 3]





draft-iab-research-funding                                 February 2003


1.3  Contributions to this Document

   A number of people have directly contributed text for this document,
   even though, following current conventions, the official RFC author
   list includes only the key editors of the document.  The
   Acknowledgements section at the end of the document thanks other
   people who contributed to this document in some form.

2.  History of Internet Research & Research Funding

2.1  Prior to 1980

   Most of the early research into packet-switched networks was
   sponsored by the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
   (DARPA) [CSTB99].  This includes the initial design, implementation,
   and deployment of the ARPAnet connecting several universities and
   other DARPA contractors.  The ARPAnet originally came online in the
   late 1960s.  It grew in size during the 1970s, still chiefly with
   DARPA funding, and demonstrated the utility of packet-switched
   networking.

2.2  1980s and early 1990s

   The ARPAnet converted to the Internet Protocol on January 1, 1983,
   approximately 20 years before this document was written.  Throughout
   the 1980s, the U.S. Government continued strong research and
   development funding for Internet technology.  DARPA continued to be
   the key funding source, but was supplemented by other DoD (US
   Department of Defense) funding (e.g. via DCA's Defense Data Network
   (DDN) program) and other U.S. Government funding (e.g. US Department
   of Energy (DoE) funding for research networks at DoE national
   laboratories, (US) National Science Foundation (NSF) funding for
   academic institutions).  This funding included basic research,
   applied research (including freely distributable prototypes), the
   purchase of IP-capable products, and operating support for the IP-
   based government networks such as ARPAnet, ESnet, MILnet, and NSFnet.

   In the late 1980s, the U.S. DoD desired to leave the business of
   providing operational network services to academic institutions, so
   funding for many academic activities moved over to the NSF.  NSF
   funding included research projects into networking, as well as
   creating the NSFnet backbone and sponsoring the creation of several
   NSF regional networks (e.g. SURAnet) and interconnections with
   several international research networks.

   Most research funding outside the U.S. during the 1980s and early
   1990s was focused on the ISO OSI networking project.




IAB                           Informational                     [Page 4]





draft-iab-research-funding                                 February 2003


2.3  Mid-1990s to 2003

   Starting in the middle 1990s, U.S. Government funding for Internet
   research and development was significantly reduced.  The premise for
   this was that the growing Internet industry would pay for whatever
   research and development that was needed.  Some funding for Internet
   research and development has continued in this period from European
   and Asian organizations (e.g., the WIDE Project in Japan [WIDE]).
   RIPE (Reseaux IP Europeens) [RIPE] is an example of market-funded
   research in Europe during this period.

   Experience during this period has been that commercial firms have
   often focused on donating equipment to academic institutions and
   promoting somewhat vocationally-focused educational projects.  Some
   of the commercially-funded research and development projects appear
   to have been selected because they appeared likely to give the
   funding source a specific short-term economic advantage over its
   competitors.  Higher risk, more innovative research proposals
   generally have not been funded by industry.

2.4  Current Status

   The net result of reduced U.S. Government funding and profit-focused,
   low-risk, short-term industry funding has been a sharp decline in
   higher-risk but more innovative research activities.  Industry has
   also been less interested in research to evolve the overall Internet
   architecture, because such work does not translate into a competitive
   advantage for the firm funding such work.  The IAB believes that it
   would be helpful for governments and other non-commercial sponsors to
   increase their funding of both basic research and applied research
   relating to the Internet.  Furthermore, those increased funding
   levels should be sustained and protected against inflation going
   forward.

3.  Open Internet Research Topics

   This section primarily discusses some specific topics that the IAB
   believes merit additional research.  Research, of course, includes
   not just devising a theory, algorithm, or mechanism to accomplish a
   goal, but also evaluating the general efficacy of the approach and
   then the benefits vs. the costs of deploying that algorithm or
   mechanism.  Important cautionary notes about this discussion are
   given in the next sub-section.  This particular set of topics is not
   intended to be comprehensive, but instead is intended to demonstrate
   the breadth of open Internet research questions.






IAB                           Informational                     [Page 5]





draft-iab-research-funding                                 February 2003


3.1  Scope & Limitations

   This document is NOT intended as a guide for funding organizations as
   to exactly which projects or proposals should or should not be
   funded.

   In particular, this document is NOT intended to be a comprehensive
   list of *all* of the research questions that are important to further
   the evolution of the Internet; that would be a daunting task, and
   would presuppose a wider and more intensive effort than we have
   undertaken in this document.

   Similarly, this document is not intended to list the research
   questions that are judged to be only of peripheral importance, or to
   survey the current (global; governmental, commercial, and academic)
   avenues for funding for Internet research, or to make specific
   recommendations about which areas need additional funding.  The
   purpose of the document is to persuade the reader that ongoing
   research is needed towards the continued evolution of the Internet
   infrastructure; the purpose is not to make binding pronouncements
   about which specific areas are and are not worthy of future funding.

   For some research clearly relevant to the future evolution of the
   Internet, there are grand controversies between competing proposals
   or competing schools of thought; it is not the purpose of this
   document to take positions in these controversies, or to take
   positions on the nature of the solutions for areas needing further
   research.  That approach would not be appropriate in a general, high-
   level overview document.

   That all carefully noted, the remainder of this section discusses a
   broad set of research areas, noting a subset of particular topics of
   interest in each of those research areas.  Again, this list is NOT
   comprehensive, but rather is intended to suggest that a broad range
   of ongoing research is needed, and to propose some candidate topics.

3.2  Naming

   The Internet currently has several different namespaces, including IP
   addresses, sockets (specified by the IP address, upper-layer
   protocol, and upper-layer port number), and the Fully-Qualified
   Domain Name (FQDN).  Many of the Internet's namespaces are supported
   by the widely deployed Domain Name System [RFC refs] or by various
   Internet applications [RFC-2407, Section 4.6.2.1]







IAB                           Informational                     [Page 6]





draft-iab-research-funding                                 February 2003


3.2.1  Domain Name System (DNS)

   The DNS system, while it works well given its current constraints,
   has several stress points.

   [More will be added here later about the DNS-specific concerns and
   research opportunities, such as DNSsec, signing the root zone,
   overloading of namespaces, etc.]

3.2.2  New Namespaces

   Additionally, the Namespace Research Group (NSRG) of the Internet
   Research Task Force (IRTF) studied adding one or more additional
   namespaces to the Internet Architecture [LD2002]. Many participants
   in the IRTF NSRG membership believe that there would be significant
   architectural benefit to adding one or more additional namespaces to
   the Internet Architecture.  Because smooth consensus on that question
   or on the properties of a new namespace was not obtained, the IRTF
   NSRG did not make a formal recommendation to the IETF community
   regarding namespaces.  The IAB believes that this is an open research
   question worth examining further.

   Finally, we believe that future research into the evolution of
   Internet-based distributed computing might well benefit from studying
   adding additional namespaces as part of a new approach to distributed
   computing.

3.3  Routing

   The currently deployed unicast routing system works reasonably well
   for most users.  However, the current unicast routing architecture is
   suboptimal in several areas, including the following: end-to-end
   convergence times in global-scale catenets (a system of networks
   interconnected via gateways); the ability of the existing inter-
   domain path-vector algorithm to scale well beyond 200K prefixes; the
   ability of both intra-domain and inter-domain routing to use multiple
   metrics and multiple kinds of metrics concurrently; and the ability
   of IPv4 and IPv6 to support widespread site multi-homing without
   undue adverse impact on the inter-domain routing system.  Integrating
   policy into routing is also a general concern, both for intra-domain
   and inter-domain routing.


3.3.1  Inter-domain Routing

   The current operational inter-domain routing system has between
   150,000 and 200,000 routing prefixes in the default-free zone (DFZ)
   [RFC-3221].  ASIC technology obviates concerns about the ability to



IAB                           Informational                     [Page 7]





draft-iab-research-funding                                 February 2003


   forward packets at very high speeds.  ASIC technology also obviates
   concerns about the time required to perform longest-prefix-match
   computations.  However, some senior members of the Internet routing
   community have concerns that the end-to-end convergence properties of
   the global Internet might hit algorithmic limitations (i.e. not
   hardware limitations) when the DFZ is somewhere between 200,000 and
   300,000 prefixes.  Research into whether this concern is well-founded
   in scientific terms seems very timely.

   The current approach to site multi-homing has the highly undesirable
   side-effect of significantly increasing the growth rate of prefix
   entries in the DFZ (by impairing the deployment of prefix
   aggregation).  Research is needed into new routing architectures that
   can support large-scale site multi-homing without the undesirable
   impacts on inter-domain routing of the current multi-homing
   technique.

3.3.2  Routing Integrity

   Recently there has been increased awareness of the longstanding issue
   of deploying strong authentication into the Internet inter-domain
   routing system.  Currently deployed mechanisms (e.g. BGP TCP MD5
   [RFC2385], OSPF MD5, RIP MD5 [RFC2082]) provide cryptographic
   authentication of routing protocol messages, but no authentication of
   the actual routing data.  Current proposals (e.g. S-BGP [KLMS2000])
   for improving this in inter-domain routing are unduly challenging to
   deploy across the Internet because of their reliance on a single
   trust hierarchy (e.g., a single PKI).  Similar proposals (e.g. OSPF
   with Digital Signatures, [RFC2154]) for intra-domain routing are
   argued to be computationally infeasible to deploy in a large network.

   Alternative approaches to authentication of data in the routing
   system need to be developed.  In particular, the ability to perform
   partial authentication of routing data would facilitate incremental
   deployment of routing authentication mechanisms.  Also, the ability
   to use non-hierarchical trust models (e.g. the web of trust used in
   the PGP application) might facilitate incremental deployment and
   might resolve existing concerns about centralized administration of
   the routing system, hence merits additional study and consideration.

3.3.3  Routing Algorithms

   The current Internet routing system relies primarily on only three
   algorithms.  Link-state routing uses the Dijkstra algorithm
   [Dijkstra59].  The Distance-Vector and Path-Vector algorithms use the
   Bellman-Ford algorithm [Bellman1957, FF1962].  Additional ongoing
   basic research into graph theory as applied to routing is worthwhile
   and might yield algorithms that would enable a new routing



IAB                           Informational                     [Page 8]





draft-iab-research-funding                                 February 2003


   architecture or otherwise provide improvements to the routing system.

   Currently deployed multicast routing relies on the Deering RPF
   algorithm [Deering1988].  Ongoing research into alternative multicast
   routing algorithms and protocols might help alleviate current
   concerns with the scalability of multicast routing.

   The deployed Internet routing system assumes that the shortest path
   is always the best path.  This is provably false, however it is a
   reasonable compromise given the routing protocols currently
   available.  Research into policy-based routing or routing with
   alternative metrics (i.e. some metric other than the number of hops
   to the destination) would be worthwhile.  Examples of alternative
   policies include: the path with lowest monetary cost; the path with
   the lowest probability of packet loss; the path with minimized
   jitter; and the path with minimized latency.  Policy metrics are also
   needed that take business relationships into account.



3.3.4  Mobile & Ad-Hoc Routing

   Mobile routing [IM1993] and mobile ad-hoc routing [RFC2501] are
   relatively recent arrivals in the Internet, and are not yet widely
   deployed.  The current approaches are not the last word in either of
   those arenas.  We believe that additional research into routing
   support for mobile hosts and mobile networks is needed.  Additional
   research for ad-hoc mobile hosts and mobile networks is also
   worthwhile.  Ideally, mobile routing and mobile ad-hoc routing
   capabilities should be native inherent capabilities of the Internet
   routing architecture.  This probably will require a significant
   evolution from the existing Internet routing architecture.  (NB: The
   term "mobility" as used here is not limited to mobile telephones, but
   instead is very broadly defined, including laptops that people carry,
   cars/trains/aircraft, and so forth.)

   Included in this topic are a wide variety of issues.  The more
   distributed and dynamic nature of partially or completely self-
   organizing routing systems (including the associated end nodes)
   creates unique security challenges (especially relating to AAA and
   key management).  Scalability of wireless networks can be difficult
   to measure or to achieve.  Enforced hierarchy is one approach, but
   can be very limiting.  Research into alternative approaches to
   wireless scalability (e.g. optimized flooding, fuzzy-sighted routing)
   seems worthwhile.  Because wireless link-layer protocols usually have
   more knowledge about the details of the current propagation
   characteristics, it might be desirable to find ways to let network-
   layer routing use such data.  This raises architectural questions of



IAB                           Informational                     [Page 9]





draft-iab-research-funding                                 February 2003


   what the proper layering should be, which functions should be in
   which layer, and also practical considerations of how and when such
   information sharing should occur in real implementations.

3.4.  Security

   The Internet has a reputation for not having sufficient security.  In
   fact, the Internet has a number of security mechanisms standardized,
   some of which are widely deployed.  However, there are a number of
   open research questions relating to Internet security.


3.4.1  Freely Distributable Prototypes

   U.S.'s DARPA has historically funded development of freely
   distributable implementations of various security technologies, such
   as IP security, in a variety of operating systems.  Experience has
   shown that a good way to speed deployment of a new technology is to
   provide an unencumbered, freely-distributable prototype.  We believe
   that applied research projects in Internet security will have an
   increased probability of success if the research project teams make
   their resulting software implementations freely available for both
   commercial and non-commercial uses.  Examples of successes here
   include the DARPA funding of TCP/IPv4 integration into the 4.2 BSD
   system and DARPA/USN funding of ESP/AH design and integration into
   the 4.4 BSD system.

3.4.2 Formal Methods

   There is an ongoing need for funding of basic research relating to
   Internet security, including funding of formal methods research that
   relates to security algorithms, protocols, and systems.  For example,
   while there has been significant work into hierarchical security
   models (e.g. Bell-Lapadula) [BL1976], there has not been adequate
   formal study of alternative security models (e.g. PGP's Web-of-Trust
   model) that might be more applicable to nodes in ad-hoc networks,
   mobile networks, or new distributed computing paradigms.  Additional
   study of alternative trust models seems worthwhile.  While there has
   been some work on the application of formal methods to cryptographic
   algorithms and cryptographic protocols, there is a continued need for
   research in that area and also into how formal methods might be
   applied to the design of new cryptographic algorithms or protocols.
   The creation of automated tools for applying formal methods to
   cryptographic algorithms and protocols would be highly desirable.







IAB                           Informational                    [Page 10]





draft-iab-research-funding                                 February 2003


3.4.3 Key Management

   A recurring challenge to the Internet community is how to design,
   implement, and deploy key management appropriate to the myriad
   security contexts existing in the global Internet.  Some examples of
   topics worthy of additional research include key management
   techniques, such as non-hierarchical key management architectures,
   that are useful by ad-hoc groups in mobile networks and/or
   distributed computing.

   Although some progress has been made in recent years, scalable
   multicast key management is far from being a solved problem.
   Existing approaches to scalable multicast key management add
   significant constraints on the problem scope in order to come up with
   a deployable technical solution.  Having a more general approach to
   scalable multicast key management (i.e. one having broader
   applicability and fewer constraints) would enhance the Internet's
   capabilities.

   In many cases, attribute negotiation is an important capability of a
   key management protocol.  Experience with the Internet Key Exchange
   (IKE) to date has been that it is unduly complex.  Much of IKE's
   complexity derives from its very general attribute negotiation
   capabilities.  A new key management approach that supported
   significant attribute negotiation without creating challenging levels
   of deployment and operations complexity is desired.

3.4.4  Cryptography

   There is an ongoing need to continue the open-world research funding
   into both cryptography and cryptanalysis.  Most governments focus
   their cryptographic research in the military-sector.  While this is
   understandable, those efforts often have limited (or no) publications
   in the open literature.  Since the Internet engineering community
   must work from the open literature, it is important that open-world
   research continues in the future.

3.4.5  Security for Distributed Computing

   MIT's Project Athena was an important and broadly successful research
   project into distributed computing.  Project Athena developed the
   Kerberos [RFC-1510] security system, which has significant deployment
   today in campus environments.  However, inter-realm Kerberos is
   neither as widely deployed nor perceived as widely successful as
   single-realm Kerberos.  Inter-domain user authentication is an
   important open research topic.  More generally, the Internet would
   benefit from additional research into security architectures and
   protocols to support distributed computing, including architectures



IAB                           Informational                    [Page 11]





draft-iab-research-funding                                 February 2003


   that support ad-hoc and mobile distributed computing environments.

3.4.6  Deployment Considerations in Security

   Lots of work has been done on theoretically perfect security that is
   impossible to deploy.  Unfortunately, Kent's S-BGP proposal is an
   example of a good research product that makes a non-deployable
   protocol.  Unfortunately, it isn't obvious how one can tweak S-BGP
   and make it into a deployable protocol [cite].  Security mechanisms
   that need infrastructure have not been deployed well.  We desperately
   need security that is general, easy to install, and easy to manage.

3.5.  Network Management

   The Internet had early success in network device monitoring with the
   Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) and its associated
   Management Information Bases (MIBs).  There has been comparatively
   less success in managing networks, in contrast to the hierarchical
   monitoring of individual devices.

   Unfortunately, network management research has historically been very
   underfunded, because it is difficult to get funding bodies to
   recognize this as legitimate networking research.

3.5.1  Configuration Management

   Operators at the recent IAB Network Management Workshop reported that
   scalable distributed configuration management for sets of network
   devices is a significant challenge today.  An enhanced network
   management architecture that more fully supports real operational
   needs is desirable.  Even individual improvements in configuration
   management for sets of networked devices would be very welcome.  Such
   improvements would need to include an integrated approach to security
   for the configuration data.

3.5.1  Enhanced Monitoring Capabilities

   SNMP does not scale very well to monitoring large numbers of objects
   in many devices in different parts of the network.  An alternative
   approach worth exploring is how to provide scalable and distributed
   monitoring, not on individual devices, but instead on groups of
   devices and networks-as-a-whole.

3.5.2  Managing Networks, Not Devices

   In particular, at present there are few or no good tools for managing
   a whole network of devices, though SNMP (Simple Network Management
   Protocol) and CMIP (Common Management Information Protocol) are fine



IAB                           Informational                    [Page 12]





draft-iab-research-funding                                 February 2003


   for reading status of well-defined objects from individual boxes.
   Applied research into methods of managing sets of networked devices
   seems worthwhile.  Ideally this configuration management approach
   would support distributed management, rather than being strictly
   hierarchical.

   As an example, the current set of network management tools for
   managing multimedia (voice and video) IP networks is inadequate, and
   research would be useful in this area.

3.5.3  Application of AI to Network Management

   An open issue related to network management is helping users and
   others to identify and resolve problems in the network.  If a user
   can't access a web page, it would be useful if the user could find
   out, easily, without having to run ping and traceroute, whether the
   problem was that the web server was down, that the network was
   partitioned due to a link failure, that there was heavy congestion
   along the path, that the DNS name couldn't be resolved, that the
   firewall prohibited the access, or something else.  We encourage work
   on application of artificial intelligence (AI) or expert system
   techniques to network management systems.

3.6.  Quality of Service

   There has been an intensive body of research and development work on
   adding QoS to the Internet architecture for more than ten years now
   [cite intserv, diffserv, rsvp], yet we still don't have end-to-end
   QoS in the Internet [RFC-2990].  There is a need for further research
   and development.  The IETF is good at defining QoS mechanisms, but
   poor at work on QoS architectures.  Thus, while Differentiated
   Services (DiffServ) mechanisms have been standardized as per-hop
   behaviors, there is still much to be learned about the deployment of
   that or other QoS mechanisms for end-to-end QoS.  In addition to work
   on purely technical issues, this includes close attention to the
   economic models and deployment strategies that would enable an
   increased deployment of QoS in the network.

   One of the factors that has blunted the demand for QoS has been the
   transition of the Internet infrastructure from heavy congestion in
   the early 1990s, to overprovisioning in backbones and in many
   international links now.  Thus, research in QoS mechanisms also has
   to include some careful attention to the relative costs and benefits
   of QoS in different places in the network.







IAB                           Informational                    [Page 13]





draft-iab-research-funding                                 February 2003


3.6.1  Inter-Domain QoS Architecture

   Deploying existing Quality-of-Service (QoS) mechanisms, for example
   Differentiated Services or Integrated Services, across an inter-
   domain boundary creates a significant and easily exploited denial-of-
   service vulnerability for any network that provides inter-domain QoS
   support.  This has caused network operators to refrain from
   supporting inter-domain QoS.  The Internet would benefit from
   additional research into alternative approaches to QoS, approaches
   that do not create such vulnerabilities and can be deployed end-to-
   end [RFC-2990].


3.6.2  New Queuing Disciplines

   The overall Quality-of-Service for traffic is in part determined by
   the scheduling and queue management mechanisms at the routers.
   Continued work is needed into new queuing and queue management
   disciplines that could be used for DiffServ traffic, for other QoS
   mechanisms, and for better QoS for best-effort traffic.

3.7.  Congestion control.

   TCP's congestion control mechanisms, from 1988 [J88], have been a key
   factor in maintaining the stability of the Internet, and are used by
   the bulk of the Internet's traffic.  However, the congestion control
   mechanisms of the Internet need to be expanded and modified to meet a
   wide range of new stresses, from new applications such as streaming
   media and multicast to new environments such as wireless networks or
   very high bandwidth paths, and new requirements for minimizing
   queueing delay.  While there are significant bodies of work in
   several of these issues, considerably more needs to be done.  (We
   would note that research on TCP congestion control is also not yet
   "done", with much still to be accomplished in high-speed TCP, or in
   adding robust performance over paths with significant reordering,
   intermittent connectivity, non-congestive packet loss, and the like.)

   Several of these issues bring up difficult fundamental questions
   about the potential costs and benefits of increased communication
   between layers.  Would it help transport to receive hints or other
   information from routing, from link layers, or from other transport-
   level connections?  If so, what would be the cost to robust operation
   across diverse environments?

   For congestion control mechanisms in routers, active queue management
   and Explicit Congestion Notification are generally not yet deployed,
   and there are a range of proposals, in various states of maturity, in
   this area.  At the same time, there is a great deal that we still do



IAB                           Informational                    [Page 14]





draft-iab-research-funding                                 February 2003


   not understand about the interactions of queue management mechanisms
   with other factors in the network.  Router-based congestion control
   mechanisms are also needed for detecting and responding to aggregate
   congestion such as in Distributed Denial of Service attacks and flash
   crowds.

   As more applications have the need to transfer very large files over
   high delay-bandwidth-product paths, the stresses on current
   congestion control mechanisms raise the question of whether we need
   more fine-grained feedback from routers.  This includes the challenge
   of allowing connections to avoid the delays of slow-start, and to
   rapidly make use of newly-available bandwidth.

   There is also a need for long-term research in congestion control
   that is separate from specific functional requirements like the ones
   listed above.  We know very little about congestion control dynamics
   or traffic dynamics a large, complex network like the global
   Internet, with its heterogeneous and changing traffic mixes, link-
   level technologies, network protocols and router mechanisms, patterns
   of congestion, pricing models, and the like.  Expanding our knowledge
   in this area seems likely to require a rich mix of measurement,
   analysis, simulations, and experimentation.

3.8.  Studying the Evolution of the Internet Infrastructure

   The evolution of the Internet infrastructure has been frustratingly
   slow and difficult, with long stories about the difficulties in
   adding IPv6, QoS, multicast, and other functionality to the Internet.
   We need a more scientific understanding of the evolutionary
   potentials and evolutionary difficulties of the Internet
   infrastructure.

   This evolutionary potential is affected not only by the technical
   issues of the layered IP architecture, but by other factors as well.
   These factors include the changes in the environment over time (e.g.,
   the recent overprovisioning of backbones, the deployment of
   firewalls), and the role of standardization process.  Economic and
   public policy factors are also critical, including the central fact
   of the Internet as a decentralized system, with key players being not
   only individuals, but also ISPs, companies, and entire industries.
   Deployment issues are also key factors in the evolution of the
   Internet, including the continual chicken-and-egg problem of having
   enough customers to merit rolling out a service whose utility depends
   on the size of the customer base in the first place.

   Overlay networks could sometimes serve as a transition technology for
   new functionality, with an initial deployment in overlay networks,
   and with that functionality moving later into the core if it seems



IAB                           Informational                    [Page 15]





draft-iab-research-funding                                 February 2003


   warranted.

   There are also increased obstacles to the evolution of the Internet
   in the form of increased complexity [WD02], unanticipated feature
   interactions [K00], interactions between layers, interventions by
   middleboxes, and the like.  Because increasing complexity appears
   inevitable, research is needed to understand architectural mechanisms
   that can accommodate increased complexity without decreasing
   robustness of performance in unknown environments, and without
   closing off future possibilities for evolution.


3.9.  Middleboxes

   [A section will be added on research that is needed to address the
   challenges posed by middleboxes.  This includes issues of security,
   control, and data integrity, and on the general impact of middleboxes
   on the architecture.  In many ways middleboxes are a direct outgrowth
   of commercial interests, but there is a need to look beyond the near-
   term need for the technology to research its broader implications and
   ways to improve how middleboxes fit into the architecture.]

3.10.  Meeting the Needs of the Future

   As network size, link bandwidth, CPU capacity, and the number of
   users all increase, research will be needed to ensure that the
   Internet of the future scales to meet these increasing demands.  We
   have discussed some of these scaling issues in specific sections
   above.  However, for all of the research questions discussed in this
   document, the goal of the research must be not only to meet the
   challenges already experienced today, but also to meet the challenges
   that can be expected to emerge in the future.

3.11.  Additional topics

   We have not yet included in this document discussions about the need
   for additional research in providing tools for researchers (e.g.,
   modeling, simulations, test-beds).

   We also don't yet have sections on the research needs in network
   measurement.

   [Any new material should be focused on the problems that need to be
   addressed, rather than focused on the new approaches or technologies
   that might be promising answers to those problems.]






IAB                           Informational                    [Page 16]





draft-iab-research-funding                                 February 2003


4.  Conclusions

   This document has summarized the history of research funding for the
   Internet and highlighted examples of open research questions.  The
   IAB believes that more research is required to further the evolution
   of the Internet infrastructure, and that consistent, sufficient non-
   commercial funding is needed to enable such research.

5.  Acknowledgements

   The people who directly contributed to this document in some form
   include the following: Ran Atkinson, Jon Crowcroft, Sally Floyd,
   James Kempf, Vern Paxson, Mike St. Johns.

   We have also drawn widely on the following sources: [Cyberspace02],
   [Netvision2012], [NSF02], [NSF03].  Upcoming workshops include the
   following: [COST-NSF03].

6  References

   There are no Normative References because this is an Informational
   document.

   Informative References

   [CSTB99] Funding a Revolution: Government Support for Computing
   Research, CSTB publication, 1999, URL
   "http://www7.nationalacademies.org/cstb/pub_revolution.html".

   [Cyberspace02] National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace, September
   2002, URL "http://www.whitehouse.gov/pcipb/".

   [Bellman1957] R.E. Bellman, "Dynamic Programming", Princeton
   University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1957.

   [BL1976] D. E. Bell & L. J. LaPadula, "Secure Computer Systems:
   Unified Exposition and Multics Interpretation", MITRE Technical
   Report NMTR-1997 (ESD-TR-75-306), The Mitre Corporation, March 1976.

   [COST-NSF03] COST-IST(EU)--NSF(USA) Workshop on Networking, June,
   2003.  URL "http://cgi.di.uoa.gr/~istavrak/costnsf/".

   [Deering1988] S. Deering, "Multicast Routing in Internetworks and
   LANs", ACM Computer Communications Review, Volume 18, Issue 4, August
   1988.

   [Dijkstra59] E. Dijkstra, "A note on two problems in connexion with
   graphs", Numerishe Mathematik, 1, 1959, pp.269-271.



IAB                           Informational                    [Page 17]





draft-iab-research-funding                                 February 2003


   [FF1962] L.R. Ford Jr. & D.R. Fulkerson, "Flows in Networks",
   Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1962.

   [Handley02] Mark Handley's viewgraphs to an NSF meeting, 2002.

   [IM1993] J. Ioannidis & G. Maguire Jr., "The Design and
   Implementation of a Mobile Internetworking Architecture", Proceedings
   of the Winter USENIX Technical Conference, pages 489-500, January
   1993.

   [J88] Van Jacobson, Congestion Avoidance and Control, SIGCOMM, 1988.
   URL "http://citeseer.nj.nec.com/jacobson88congestion.html".

   [J02] William Jackson, "U.S. should fund R&D for secure Internet
   protocols, Clarke says", 10/31/02, URL
   "http://www.gcn.com/vol1_no1/security/20382-1.html".

   [K00] Hans Kruse, The Pitfalls of Distributed Protocol Development:
   Unintentional Interactions between Network Operations and
   Applications Protocols, 8th International Conference on
   Telecommunication Systems Design, Nashville, March 2000.  URL
   "http://www.csm.ohiou.edu/kruse/publications/TSYS2000.pdf".

   [KLMS2000] S. Kent, C. Lynn, J. Mikkelson, & K. Seo, "Secure Border
   Gateway Protocol (S-BGP)", Proceedings of ISoc Network & Distributed
   Systems Security Symposium, Internet Society, Reston, VA, February
   2000.

   [LD2002] E. Lear & R. Droms, "What's in a Name: Thoughts from the
   NSRG", Internet-Draft, December 2002.

   [NetManagement] IAB Network Management workshop, 2002.

   [Netvision2012] NetVision 2012, DARPA's Ten-Year Strategic Plan for
   Networking Research, October 2002, December 2002.  Citation for
   acknowledgement purposes only.

   [NSF02] NSF Workshop on Network Research Testbeds, October 2002.  URL
   "http://www-net.cs.umass.edu/testbed_workshop/".

   [NSF03] NSF ANIR Principal Investigator meeting, January 9-10, 2003,
   URL "http://www.ncne.org/training/nsf-pi/2003/nsfpimain.html".

   [ResearchQuestions] Web Page on "Papers about Research Questions for
   the Internet", URL
   "http://www.icir.org/floyd/research_questions.html".

   [RFC-1510] J. Kohl & C. Neuman, "The Kerberos Network Authentication



IAB                           Informational                    [Page 18]





draft-iab-research-funding                                 February 2003


   Service (V5)", RFC 1510, September 1993.

   [RFC-2082] F. Baker & R. Atkinson, "RIPv2 MD5 Authentication",
   RFC-2082, January 1997.

   [RFC-2154] S. Murphy, M. Badger, & B. Wellington, "OSPF with Digital
   Signatures", RFC-2154, June 1997.

   [RFC-2385] A. Heffernan, "Protection of BGP Sessions via the TCP MD5
   Signature Option", RFC-2385, August 1998.

   [RFC-2407] D. Piper, "The Internet IP Security Domain of
   Interpretation for ISAKMP", RFC-2407, November 1998.

   [RFC-2501] S. Corson & J. Macker, "Mobile Ad Hoc Networking (MANET):
   Routing Protocol Performance Issues and Evaluation Considerations",
   RFC-2501, January 1999.

   [RFC-2990] G. Huston, "Next Steps for the IP QoS Architecture",
   RFC-1990, November 2000.

   [RFC-3221] G. Huston, "Commentary on Inter-Domain Routing in the
   Internet", RFC-3221, December 2001.

   [RIPE] RIPE (Reseaux IP Europeens), URL "http://www.ripe.net/ripe/".

   [WD02] Walter Willinger and John Doyle, "Robustness and the Internet:
   Design and Evolution", 2002, URL
   "http://netlab.caltech.edu/internet/".

   [WIDE] WIDE Project, URL "http://www.wide.ad.jp/".

7.  Security Considerations

   This document does not itself create any new security issues for the
   Internet community.  Security issues within the Internet Architecture
   primarily are discussed in Section 3.4 above.

8.  IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations regarding this document.

9. AUTHORS' ADDRESSES


   Internet Architecture Board
   EMail:  iab@iab.org




IAB                           Informational                    [Page 19]





draft-iab-research-funding                                 February 2003


   IAB Membership at time this document was completed:

   Harald Alvestrand (IETF chair)
   Ran Atkinson
   Rob Austein
   Fred Baker
   Leslie Daigle (IAB chair)
   Sally Floyd
   Ted Hardie
   Geoff Huston
   Charlie Kaufman
   James Kempf
   Vern Paxson (IRTF chair)
   Eric Rescorla
   Mike St. Johns

   This draft was created in November 2002 and revised January 2003
   and February 2003.

































IAB                           Informational                    [Page 20]


