





PKIX Working Group                                   R. Housley (SPYRUS)
Internet Draft                                            W. Polk (NIST)
expires in six months                                   October 14, 1997


                   Internet Public Key Infrastructure

         Representation of Key Exchange Algorithm (KEA) Keys in
            Internet Public Key Infrastructure Certificates

                   <draft-ietf-pkix-ipki-kea-01.txt>


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet- Drafts Shadow
   Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
   munnari.oz.au Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or
   ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).


Abstract

   This is the second draft of a profile for specification of Key
   Exchange Algorithm (KEA) keys in Internet Public Key Infrastructure
   X.509 certificates. Please send comments on this document to the
   ietf-pkix@tandem.com mail list.


1  Executive Summary

   This specification contains guidance on the use of the Internet
   Public Key Infrastructure certificates to convey Key Exchange
   Algorithm (KEA) keys. This specification is an addendum to RFC xxxx,
   "Internet Public Key Infrastructure:  Certificate and CRL Profile".
   Implementations of this specification must also conform to RFC xxxx.
   Implementations of this specification are not required to conform to



Housley & Polk                                                  [Page 1]





INTERNET DRAFT                                              July 30 1997


   other parts from that series.

   The Key Exchange Algorithm (KEA) is a classified algorithm for
   exchanging keys.  This specification profiles the format and
   semantics of fields in X.509 V3 certificates containing KEA keys. The
   specification addresses the subjectPublicKeyInfo field and the
   keyUsage extension.

2  Requirements and Assumptions

   The goal is to augment the X.509 certificate profile presented in
   Part 1 to facilitate the management of KEA keys for those communities
   which use this algorithm.

2.1  Communication and Topology

   This profile, as presented in Part 1 and augmented by this
   specification, supports users without high bandwidth, real-time IP
   connectivity, or high connection availablity.  In addition, the
   profile allows for the presence of firewall or other filtered
   communication.

   This profile does not assume the deployment of an X.500 Directory
   system.  The profile does not prohibit the use of an X.500 Directory,
   but other means of distributing certificates and certificate
   revocation lists (CRLs) are supported.

2.2  Acceptability Criteria

   The goal of the Internet Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) is to meet
   the needs of deterministic, automated identification, authentication,
   access control, and authorization functions. Support for these
   services determines the attributes contained in the certificate as
   well as the ancillary control information in the certificate such as
   policy data and certification path constraints.

   The goal of this document is to profile KEA certificates, specifying
   the contants and semantics of attributes which were not fully
   specified by Part 1.  If not specifically addressed by this document,
   the contents and semantics of the fields and extensions must be as
   described in Part 1.

2.3  User Expectations

   Users of the Internet PKI are people and processes who use client
   software and are the subjects named in certificates.  These uses
   include readers and writers of electronic mail, the clients for WWW
   browsers, WWW servers, and the key manager for IPSEC within a router.



Housley & Polk                                                  [Page 2]





INTERNET DRAFT                                              July 30 1997


   This profile recognizes the limitations of the platforms these users
   employ and the sophistication/attentiveness of the users themselves.
   This manifests itself in minimal user configuration responsibility
   (e.g., root keys, rules), explicit platform usage constraints within
   the certificate, certification path constraints which shield the user
   from many malicious actions, and applications which sensibly automate
   validation functions.

2.4  Administrator Expectations

   As with users, the Internet PKI profile is structured to support the
   individuals who generally operate Certification Authorities (CAs).
   Providing administrators with unbounded choices increases the chances
   that a subtle CA administrator mistake will result in broad
   compromise or unnecessarily limit interoperability.  This profile
   defines the object identifiers and data formats that must be
   supported to intepret KEA public keys.

3  KEA Algorithm Support

   This section describes object identifiers and data formats which may
   be used with PKIX certicate profile to describe X.509 certificates
   containing a KEA public key.  Conforming CAs are required to use the
   object identifiers and data formats when issuing KEA certificates.
   Conforming applications shall recognize the object identifiers and
   process the data formats when processing such certificates.

3.1  Subject Public Key Info

   The certificate identifies the KEA algorithm, conveys optional
   parameters, and specifies the KEA public key in the
   subjectPublicKeyInfo field. The subjectPublicKeyInfo field is a
   SEQUENCE of an algorithm identifier and the subjectPublicKey field.

   The certificate indicates the algorithm through an algorithm
   identifier.  This algorithm identifier consists of an object
   identifier (OID) and optional associated parameters.  Section 3.1.1
   identifies the preferred OID and parameters for the KEA algorithm.
   Conforming CAs shall use the identified OID when issuing certificates
   containing public keys for the KEA algorithm. Conforming applications
   supporting the KEA algorithm shall, at a minimum, recognize the OID
   identified in section 3.1.1.

   The certificate conveys the KEA public key through the
   subjectPublicKey field.  This subjectPublicKey field is a BIT STRING.
   Section 3.1.2 specifies the method for encoding a KEA public key as a
   BIT STRING.  Conforming CAs shall encode the KEA public key as
   described in Section 3.1.2 when issuing certificates containing



Housley & Polk                                                  [Page 3]





INTERNET DRAFT                                              July 30 1997


   public keys for the KEA algorithm. Conforming applications supporting
   the KEA algorithm shall decode the subjectPublicKey as described in
   section 3.1.2 when the algorithm identifier is the one presented in
   3.1.1.

3.1.1 Algorithm Identifier and Parameters

   The Key Exchange Algorithm (KEA) is a classified algorithm for
   exchanging keys.  A KEA "pairwise key" may be generated between two
   users if their KEA public keys were generated with the same KEA
   parameters.  The KEA parameters are not included in a certificate;
   instead a "domain identifier" is supplied in the parameters field.

   When the subjectPublicKeyInfo field contains a KEA key, the algorithm
   identifier and parameters shall be as defined in [sdn.701r]:

      id-keyExchangeAlgorithm  OBJECT IDENTIFIER   ::=
             { 2 16 840 1 101 2 1 1 22 }

      KEA-Parms-Id     ::= OCTET STRING


   CAs shall populate the parameters field of the AlgorithmIdentifier
   within the subjectPublicKeyInfo field of each certificate containing
   a KEA public key with an 80-bit parameter identifier (OCTET STRING),
   also known as the domain identifier. The domain identifier will be
   computed in three steps: (1) the KEA parameters are DER encoded using
   the Dss-Parms structure; (2) a 160-bit SHA-1 hash is generated from
   the parameters; and (3) the 160-bit hash is reduced to 80-bits by
   performing an "exclusive or" of the 80 high order bits with the 80
   low order bits.  The resulting value is encoded such that the most
   significant byte of the 80-bit value is the first octet in the octet
   string.

   The Dss-Parms is provided in [RFC xxx] and reproduced below for
   completeness.

        Dss-Parms  ::=  SEQUENCE  {
            p             INTEGER,
            q             INTEGER,
            g             INTEGER  }

3.1.2 Encoding of KEA Public Keys

   A KEA public key, y, is conveyed in the subjectPublicKey BIT STRING
   such that the most significant bit (MSB) of y becomes the MSB of the
   BIT STRING value field and the least significant bit (LSB) of y
   becomes the LSB of the BIT STRING value field.  This results in the



Housley & Polk                                                  [Page 4]





INTERNET DRAFT                                              July 30 1997


   following encoding: BIT STRING tag, BIT STRING length, 0 (indicating
   that there are zero unused bits in the final octet of y), BIT STRING
   value field including y.

3.2 Key Usage Extension in KEA certificates

The key usage extension may optionally appear in a KEA certificate.  If
a KEA certificate includes the keyUsage extension, only the following
values may be asserted:

      keyAgreement;
      encipherOnly; and
      decipherOnly.

   The encipherOnly and decipherOnly values may only be asserted if the
   keyAgreement value is also asserted.  At most one of encipherOnly and
   decipherOnly shall be asserted in keyUsage extension.

   References


   [SDN.701R] SDN.701, "Message Security Protocol", Revision 4.0
              1996-06-07 with "Corrections to Message Security Protocol,
              SDN.701, Rev 4.0, 96-06-07." August 30, 1996.

   [RFC xxxx] R. Housley, W. Ford, W. Polk and D. Solo "Internet Public
              Key Infrastructure: X.509 Certificate and CRL Profile",
              October 14, 1997.

Patent Statements

   This specification references classified public key encryption
   technology for provisioning key exchange services.

Security Considerations

   This entire memo is about security mechanisms.

Author Addresses:

   Russell Housley
   SPYRUS
   PO Box 1198
   Herndon, VA 20172
   USA
   housley@spyrus.com

   Tim Polk



Housley & Polk                                                  [Page 5]





INTERNET DRAFT                                              July 30 1997


   NIST
   Building 820, Room 426
   Gaithersburg, MD 20899
   USA
   wpolk@nist.gov














































Housley & Polk                                                  [Page 6]


