


SIPCORE Working Group                                           A.Klimov
Internet-Draft                                             Synterra-Ural
Intended status: Informational                               26 May 2009
Expires: November 28, 2009

                    B2BUA with Survivability Feature
               draft-klimov-sipcore-b2bua-survivability-00

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 27, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.  This document is subject to
   BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions Relating to IETF
   Documents in effect on the date of publication of this document
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).  Please review these
   documents carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions
   with respect to this document.

Abstract

   This draft describes the behavior of Session Initiation Protocol
   (SIP) [RFC3261] Back-To-Back User-Agent (B2BUA) with survivability
   feature, we can define it as a survivable SIP proxy (SSP), and how it
   should process calls in two different modes one is normal (no-
   failure) mode and the other is survivable (breakdown) mode.



Klimov                 Expires: November 28, 2009               [Page 1]



Internet-Draft      B2BUA with Survivability Feature         26 May 2009


1. Introduction

   It is preferable that standalone B2BUA which connects users on one
   network with SIP server located in other network has possibility to
   serve calls in case of emergency. Emergency implies that the
   connection with SIP proxy is lost.  Survivability in this meaning
   should be possibility to accept REGISTER requests alongside with
   ability to route SIP signalling traffic to another SIP server.  The
   behavior of B2BUA with survivability feature should differ in
   different modes.

2.  Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, RFC 2119
   [RFC2119].

3. Definitions

   There are two types of SIP servers in this scenario should be
   defined.  Main SIP server - SIP proxy or registrar to which SIP
   signalling messages from UAC are redirected in no-failure mode.It
   MUST be aware for UAC registration.  Backup SIP server - SIP proxy to
   which SIP signalling messages except REGISTER requests from UAC are
   redirected in breakdown mode.  There are two modes of work possible
   first is no-failure mode when SSP works as a B2BUA and the second is
   breakdown mode when SSP works as a local registrar within working as
   B2BUA.

4. B2BUA behavior in normal (no-failure) mode.

   In no-failure mode SSP MUST redirect SIP signalling messages from UAC
   to main SIP server until it is reachable. Survivable SIP proxy MUST
   store registration information in its cache. Reachability state
   should be checked by means of sending OPTIONS SIP messages to main
   SIP server.  The time period of reachability checking SHOULD be
   configurable.  In this mode the backup SIP server does not
   participate in work.  SSP should accept signalling messages from main
   SIP proxy and forward them to UAC.

5. B2BUA behavior in survivable (breakdown) mode.

   In case of main SIP server is unreachable survivable SIP proxy (SSP)
   SHOULD switch to breakdown mode and MUST use registration information
   from its cache and terminate registration requests on itself instead
   of sending them to any SIP server.  Survivable SIP proxy (SSP) SHOULD
   continue check the reachability of Main SIP server by sending OPTIONS



Klimov                 Expires: November 28, 2009               [Page 2]



Internet-Draft      B2BUA with Survivability Feature         26 May 2009


   SIP messages.  SSP SHOULD redirect all UAC messages except REGISTER
   messages to backup SIP server.

   Incoming calls will go to UAC from backup SIP server so SSP SHOULD be
   responsible for accepting SIP signalling from backup SIP server.

   In case of backup SIP server is unreachable survivable SIP proxy
   (SSP) MUST use registration information from its cache and terminate
   registration requests on itself instead of sending them to any SIP
   server. Thus UAC has a valid registration.  These registrations
   should enable calls between UACs registered on SSP.  In case main SIP
   server is reachable survivable SIP proxy (SSP) should switch to
   normal mode and forward SIP messages from UAC to main SIP Server.

6.  Acknowledgments

   The author would like to acknowledge many people who invent the idea
   of survivability feature.


7. Security Considerations

   There are no security considerations.

8. IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA Considerations.

9.  References

9.1. Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
   A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.  Schooler, "SIP:
   Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

Author's Address

   Klimov Andrey
   Synterra-Ural Ltd.
   Ternopolskaya, 6
   Chelyabinsk,
   Russia,
   454091
   Phone: + 7 351 2470700
   EMail: andrey.klimov@synterra-ural.ru



Klimov                 Expires: November 28, 2009               [Page 3]


