




INTERNET-DRAFT                                             Thomas Narten
                                                                     IBM
<draft-narten-ipv6-3177bis-48boundary-03.txt>               Geoff Huston
                                                                   APNIC
                                                             Lea Roberts
                                                     Stanford University
                                                       November 19, 2007

                   IPv6 Address Assignment to End Sites

               <draft-narten-ipv6-3177bis-48boundary-03.txt>


Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft expires in six months.


Abstract

   RFC 3177 argued that in IPv6, end sites should be assigned /48 blocks
   in most cases. The Regional Internet Registries (RIRs) adopted that
   recommendation in 2002, but began reconsidering the policy in 2005.
   This document revisits and updates the RFC 3177 recommendations on
   the assignment of IPv6 address space to end sites.  The exact choice
   of how much address space to assign end sites is a policy issue under
   the purview of the RIRs, subject to IPv6 architectural and



draft-narten-ipv6-3177bis-48boundary-03.txt                     [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                         November 19, 2007


   operational considerations. This document reviews the architectural
   and operational considerations of end site assignments as well as the
   motivations behind the original 3177 recommendations. The document
   clarifies that changing the /48 recommendation is one of policy, and
   has minimal impact on the IPv6 architecture and on IETF Standards.

   This document updates and replaces RFC 3177.

Contents

   Status of this Memo..........................................    1

   1.  Introduction.............................................    2

   2.  On /48 Assignments to End Sites..........................    3

   3.  Other RFC 3177 considerations............................    5

   4.  Impact on IPv6 Standards.................................    5
      4.1.  RFC3056: Connection of IPv6 Domains via IPv4 Clouds.    5
      4.2.  IPv6 Multicast Addressing...........................    5

   5.  Summary..................................................    6

   6.  Security Considerations..................................    6

   7.  IANA Considerations......................................    7

   8.  Acknowledgments..........................................    7

   9.  Normative References.....................................    7

   10.  Informative References..................................    7

   11.  Author's Address........................................    8


1.  Introduction

   There are a number of considerations that factor into address
   assignment policies. For example, to provide for the long-term health
   and scalability of the public routing infrastructure, it is important
   that addresses aggregate well [ROUTE-SCALING]. Likewise, giving out
   an excessive amount of address space could result in premature
   depletion of the address space. This document focuses on the (more
   narrow) question of what is an appropriate IPv6 address assignment
   size for end sites. That is, when end sites request IPv6 address
   space from ISPs, what is an appropriate assignment size.



draft-narten-ipv6-3177bis-48boundary-03.txt                     [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                         November 19, 2007


   RFC 3177 [RFC3177] called for a default end site IPv6 assignment size
   of /48. Subsequently, the Regional Internet Registries (RIRs)
   developed and adopted IPv6 address assignment and allocation policies
   consistent with the RFC 3177 recommendations [RIR-IPV6]. In 2005, the
   RIRs began discussing IPv6 address assignment policy again. Since
   then, APNIC [APNIC-ENDSITE], ARIN [ARIN-ENDSITE] and RIPE [RIPE-
   ENDSITE] have revised the end site assignment policy to encourage the
   assignment of smaller (i.e., /56) blocks to end sites.  Additional
   history and discussion of IPv6 address policy and its long-term
   implications can be found in [IPV6-HISTORY].

   This document revisits and updates the RFC 3177 recommendations.

   This document does not make a formal recommendation on what the exact
   assignment size should be.  The exact choice of how much address
   space to assign end sites is a policy issue under the purview of the
   RIRs, subject to IPv6 architectural and operational considerations.
   This document is input into those discussions.  The focus of this
   document is to examine the architectural issues and some of the
   operational considerations relating to the size of the end site
   assignment.


2.  On /48 Assignments to End Sites

   Looking back at some of the original motivations behind the /48
   recommendation [RFC3177], there were three main concerns. The first
   motivation was to ensure that end sites could easily obtain
   sufficient address space without having to "jump through hoops" to do
   so. For example, if someone felt they needed more space, just the act
   of asking would at some level be sufficient justification.  As a
   comparison point, in IPv4, typical home users are given a single
   public IP address (though even this is not always assured), but
   getting any more than one address is often difficult or even
   impossible -- unless one is willing to pay a (significantly)
   increased fee for what is often considered to be a "higher grade" of
   service.  (It should be noted that increased ISP charges to obtain a
   small number of additional addresses cannot usually be justified by
   the real per-address cost levied by RIRs, but additional addresses
   are frequently only available to end users as part of a different
   type or "higher grade" of service, for which an additional charge is
   levied. The point here is that the additional cost is not due to the
   RIR fee structures, but to business choices ISPs make.) An important
   goal in IPv6 is to significantly change the default and minimal end
   site assignment, from "a single address" to "multiple networks" and
   to ensure that end sites can easily obtain address space.

   A second motivation behind the original /48 recommendation was to



draft-narten-ipv6-3177bis-48boundary-03.txt                     [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                         November 19, 2007


   simplify the management of an end site's addressing plan in the
   presence of renumbering (e.g., when switching ISPs).  In IPv6, a site
   may simultaneously use multiple prefixes, including one or more
   public prefixes from ISPs as well as Unique Local Addresses [ULA-
   ADDRESSES]. In the presence of multiple prefixes, it is significantly
   less complex to manage a numbering plan if the same subnet numbering
   plan can be used for all prefixes. That is, for a link that has (say)
   three different prefixes assigned to it, the subnet portion of those
   prefixes would be identical for all assigned addresses.  In contrast,
   renumbering from a larger set of "subnet bits" into a smaller set is
   often painful, as it it can require making changes to the network
   itself (e.g., collapsing subnets). Hence renumbering a site into a
   prefix that has (at least) the same number of subnet bits is more
   straightforward, because only the top-level bits of the address need
   to change. A key goal of the RFC 3177 recommendations is to ensure
   that upon renumbering, one does not have to deal with renumbering
   into a smaller subnet size.

   It should be noted that similar arguments apply to the management of
   zone files in the DNS. In particular, managing the reverse (ip6.arpa)
   tree is simplified when all links are numbered using the same subnet
   ids.

   A third motivation behind the /48 recommendation was to better
   support network growth common at many sites. In IPv4, it is usually
   difficult (or impossible) to obtain public address space for more
   than a few months worth of projected growth. Thus, even slow growth
   over several years can lead to the need to renumber into a larger
   address blocks. With IPv6's vast address space, end sites can easily
   be given more address space (compared with IPv4) to support possible
   growth over multi-year time periods.

   While the /48 recommendation does simplify address space management
   for end sites, it has also been widely criticized as being wasteful.
   For example, a large business (which may have thousands of employees)
   would receive the same amount of address space as a home user, who
   today typically has a single LAN and (at most) a small number of
   machines. While it seems likely that the size of a typical home
   network will grow over the next few decades, it is hard to argue that
   home sites will make use of 65K subnets within the foreseeable
   future. At the same time, it might be tempting to give home sites a
   single /64, since that is already significantly more address space
   compared with today's IPv4 practice. However, this precludes the
   expectation that even home sites will grow to support multiple
   subnets going forward. Hence, it is strongly intended that even home
   sites be given multiple subnets worth of space by default.

   The above-mentioned RFC3177 goals can easily be met by giving home



draft-narten-ipv6-3177bis-48boundary-03.txt                     [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                         November 19, 2007


   users a /56 assignment by default.



3.  Other RFC 3177 considerations

   RFC3177 suggested that some multihoming approaches (e.g., GSE) might
   benefit from having a fixed /48 boundary. This no longer appears to
   be a consideration.

   RFC3177 argued that having a "one size fits all" default assignment
   size reduced the need for customers to continually or repeatedly
   justify usage of existing address space in order to get "a little
   more".  Likewise, it also reduces the need for ISPs to evaluate such
   requests. Given the large amount of address space in IPv6, there is
   plenty of space to grant end sites enough space to consistent with
   reasonable growth projections over multi-year time frames. Thus, it
   remains highly desirable to provide end sites with enough space (on
   both initial and subsequent assignments) to last several years.
   Fortunately, this goal can be achieved in a number of ways and does
   not require that all end sites receive the same default size
   assignment.


4.  Impact on IPv6 Standards


4.1.  RFC3056: Connection of IPv6 Domains via IPv4 Clouds

   RFC3056 [RFC3056] describes a way of generating IPv6 addresses from
   an existing public IPv4 address. That document describes an address
   format in which the first 48 bits concatenate a well-known prefix
   with a globally unique public IPv4 address. The "SLA ID" field is
   assumed to be 16 bits, consistent with a 16-bit "subnet id" field. To
   facilitate transitioning from an RFC3056 address numbering scheme to
   one based on a prefix obtained from an ISP, an end site would be
   advised to number out of the right most bits first, using the left
   most bits only if the size of the site made that necessary.

   Similar considerations apply to other documents that allow for a
   subnet id of 16 bits, including [ULA-ADDRESSES].


4.2.  IPv6 Multicast Addressing

   Some IPv6 multicast address assignment schemes embed a unicast IPv6
   prefix into the multicast address itself [RFC3306]. Such documents do
   not assume a particular size for the subnet id per se, but do assume



draft-narten-ipv6-3177bis-48boundary-03.txt                     [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                         November 19, 2007


   that the IPv6 prefix is a /64. Thus, the relative size of the subnet
   id has no direct impact on multicast address schemes.


5.  Summary

   The exact choice of how much address space to assign end sites is a
   policy issue under the purview of the RIRs, subject to IPv6
   architectural and operational considerations. The RFC 3177
   recommendation to assign /48s as a default is not a requirement of
   the IPv6 architecture; anything of length /64 or shorter works from a
   standards perspective.  However, there are important operational
   considerations as well, some of which are important if users are to
   share in the key benefit of IPv6: expanding the usable address space
   of the Internet.  The IETF recommends that any policy on IPv6 address
   assignment policy to end sites take into consideration:

     - it should be easy for an end site to obtain address space to
        number multiple subnets (i.e., a block larger than a single /64)
        and to support reasonable growth projections over long time
        periods (e.g., a decade or more).

     - the default assignment size should take into consideration the
        likelihood that an end site will have need for multiple subnets
        in the future and avoid the IPv4 practice of having frequent and
        continual justification for obtaining small amounts of
        additional space

     Although a /64 can (in theory) address an almost unlimited number
        of devices, sites should be given sufficient address space to be
        able to lay out subnets as appropriate, and not be forced to use
        address conservation techniques such as using bridging (if not
        desired).

     - it is generally unacceptable to have one ISP assign a longer
        prefix to an end site when compared with the existing prefixes
        the end site already has assigned to it

     - the operational considerations of managing and delegating the
        reverse DNS tree under ip6.arpa on nibble vs. non-nibble
        boundaries should be given adequate consideration



6.  Security Considerations

   This document has no known security implications.




draft-narten-ipv6-3177bis-48boundary-03.txt                     [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                         November 19, 2007


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no requests to IANA.


8.  Acknowledgments

   This document was motivated by and benefited from numerous
   conversations held during the ARIN XV and RIPE 50 meetings in April-
   May, 2005.


9.  Normative References



10.  Informative References

   [APNIC-ENDSITE] "prop-031: Proposal to amend APNIC IPv6 assignment
                    and utilisation requirement policy,"
                    http://www.apnic.net/policy/proposals/prop-031-v002.html

   [ARIN-ENDSITE] "2005-8: Proposal to amend ARIN IPv6 assignment and
                    utilisation requirement",
                    http://www.arin.net/policy/proposals/2005_8.html

   [IPV6-HISTORY] Issues Related to the Management of IPv6 Address
                    Space, draft-narten-iana-rir-
                    ipv6-considerations-00.txt

   [RIR-IPV6] ARIN: http://www.arin.net/policy/nrpm.html#ipv6; RIPE
                    Document ID: ripe-267, Date: 22 January 2003
                    http://www.ripe.net/ripe/docs/ipv6policy.html;
                    APNIC:
                    http://www.apnic.net/docs/policy/ipv6-address-
                    policy.html

   [RFC3056] "Connection of IPv6 Domains via IPv4 Clouds," B. Carpenter,
                    K.  Moore, RFC 3056, February 2001.

   [RFC3306] "Unicast-Prefix-based IPv6 Multicast Addresses," B.
                    Haberman, D.  Thaler, RFC 3306, August 2002.

   [RFC3177] IAB/IESG Recommendations on IPv6 Address Allocations to
                    Sites.  IAB, IESG. September 2001.

   [RIPE-ENDSITE] "Proposal to Amend the IPv6 Assignment and Utilisation
                    Requirement Policy", 2005-8,



draft-narten-ipv6-3177bis-48boundary-03.txt                     [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                         November 19, 2007


                    http://ripe.net/ripe/policies/proposals/2005-08.html

   [ROUTE-SCALING] "Routing and Addressing Problem Statement", draft-
                    narten-radir-problem-statement-01.txt

   [ULA-ADDRESSES] RFC 4193 "Unique Local IPv6 Unicast Addresses," R.
                    Hinden, B. Haberman, RFC 4193, October 2005.



11.  Author's Address

   Thomas Narten
   IBM Corporation
   3039 Cornwallis Ave.
   PO Box 12195 - BRQA/502
   Research Triangle Park, NC 27709-2195

   Phone: 919-254-7798
   EMail: narten@us.ibm.com

   Geoff Huston
   APNIC

   EMail: gih@apnic.net

   Rosalea G Roberts
   Stanford University, Networking Systems
   241 Panama Street
   Pine Hall, room 175B
   Stanford, CA  94305-4102

   Email: lea.roberts@stanford.edu
   Phone: +1-650-723-3352



Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND



draft-narten-ipv6-3177bis-48boundary-03.txt                     [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                         November 19, 2007


   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org.






















draft-narten-ipv6-3177bis-48boundary-03.txt                     [Page 9]

