INT		                                      Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
Internet-Draft							Ex-Sun Employee
Intended status: Standards Track                                  	Individual
Expires: Aug 03, 2019                          		      	      Feb 03, 2019
                                                      		
                                                          


                 Need for associating Internet Unique names to device address and phone numbers
			and emails ability to send messages using sms and email
                         draft-xplorer-device-association-01


Abstract

    This document describes the need for associating Internet Unique names to device address
    			and phone numbers and ability to send messages using sms and email

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on Aug 03,2019.



Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Aug 03, 2019             [Page 1]
Internet-Draft    Need for associating Internet Unique names to device address and phone numbers
			and emails ability to send messages using sms and email  Feb 03, 2019

Copyright Notice

Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents
   1. Introduction ............................................... 2
   2. Background ..................................................2
   3. General Information of the service ..........................3
   4. Authors Addresses ...........................................3
   5. Acknowledgements ............................................3


1. Introduction

    To implement a standard that can allow an Internet Unique Name to be mapped to a device 
 			address and phone number and email addresses

2. Background
     I have to be able to buy an smart phone and associate my unique name that can be used
	 as my email to that device.I should be able to associate my phone number also to that
     		and send and recieve emails.

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Aug 03, 2019             [Page 2]
Internet-Draft    Need for associating Internet Unique names to device address and phone numbers
			and emails ability to send messages using sms and email Feb 03, 2019
	
3. General Information of the service
	

      For the user who just want emails and not net savvy, He or she has to be able
to walk into a store and get a device like android smart phone and associate his or her
 Internet unique name with that smart phone. The buyer should also be to map his phone number to unique name.
I should be able to type phone number or Unique name in the to field of email or sms and get it delivered
to the device that has the phone number or device MAC Address.

As an example My Unique name is Pradeep Kumar Xplorer Califorina that i  have chosen to use.
WHen i buy a device i should be able to map the device MAC address of that device to that Unique
name. If it is not available i have to chose a different name.

Some one in their sixties or seventies most probably are not internet web savvy. Those who
are in other domains professions may also not be internet web savvy.He or
she may not want or know how to install an Application like MailDroid and setup Imap
settings. They just need to type the Internet Unique name of the person they want to send message
to send emails.This prevents hidden cost of signing up for a service provider like gmail.com
or hotmail.com and also protects privacy by not having their messages on some remote servers.

This increases usability. This with restrictions on functions to a device 
by using some programming like https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-pradeep-kumar-xplorer-posvm/
to allow a device to be used only for emails can make emails usable to a wider
audience who are not computer savvy.

I am victim of a very serious cybercrime as a yoga guide for last 15 years i created and published
 as self employed in individual capacity a website with some unique intellectual property. I do not know who
is accessing my website. I added some software scripts to print the IP address and location of
the viewers of my website. The crime is that some others know who my website viewers are lying
about me and running an organisation company in black by contacting them. These are the logs
http://www.pradeepkumarxplorer.com/2016/vieweremails.txt
Instead of IP address if i get the device MAC or Unique name then i can send them an email
and have a channel to communicate to them directly.

When i purchase a smart phone or computer i should be able to associate my Device MAP to my
Unique name in some internet databases. This is just a matter of software implementation.
To communicate to a willing recipient who can send messages back i just need the 
Internet Unique name of that person.

I am victim of being forced to use facebook one decade and i have developed really no 
frendships. Even now the same status quo continues. I have been prevented from being
in California where i used to meet and be with community in yoga studios and hotsprings
and other places and forced to use facebook and has been used as a Guinea pig and they have
probably used my money also. 


4.Authors' Addresses

    Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
    EMail: pradeepan88@hotmail.com
    URI: http://www.pradeepkumarxplorer.com

5.Acknowledgement  

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Aug 03, 2019             [Page 3]
Internet-Draft    Need for associating Internet Unique names to device address and phone numbers
			and emails ability to send messages using sms and email Feb 03, 2019
	






