


Network Working Group                                            C. Vogt
Internet-Draft                               Universitaet Karlsruhe (TH)
Expires: January 24, 2007                                       J. Kempf
                                                         DoCoMo USA Labs
                                                           July 23, 2006


    Security Threats to Network-Based Localized Mobility Management
                    draft-ietf-netlmm-threats-02.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 24, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document discusses security threats to network-based localized
   mobility management.  Threats may occur on two interfaces:  the
   interface between an LMA and a MAG, as well as the interface between
   a MAG and a mobile node.  Threats to the former interface impact the
   localized mobility management protocol itself.





Vogt & Kempf            Expires January 24, 2007                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM              July 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1   Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Threats to Interface between LMA and MAG . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1   LMA Compromise or Impersonation  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.2   MAG Compromise or Impersonation  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.3   Man in the Middle Attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.4   Denial of Service Attack on the LMA  . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.  Threats to Interface between MAG and Mobile Node . . . . . . .  7
     3.1   Network Access Identity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.2   Impersonation of Mobile Nodes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.3   Man in the Middle Attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  Acknowledgment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   A.  Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 14































Vogt & Kempf            Expires January 24, 2007                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM              July 2006


1.  Introduction

   The network-based localized mobility management (NETLMM) architecture
   [1] supports movement of IPv6 mobile nodes locally within a domain
   without requiring mobility support in the mobile nodes' network
   stacks.  A mobile node can keep its IP address constant as it moves
   from link to link, avoiding the signaling overhead and latency
   associated with changing the IP address.  While software specifically
   for localized mobility management is not required on the mobile node,
   IP-layer movement detection software may be necessary, and driver
   software for link-layer mobility is prerequisite.

   The IP addresses of mobile nodes have a prefix that routes to a
   localized mobility anchor (LMA).  This LMA maintains an individual
   route for each mobile node.  Any particular mobile node's route
   terminates at a mobile access gateway (MAG) which the mobile node
   uses as a default router on its current access link.  MAGs are
   responsible for updating the mobile node's route on the LMA as the
   mobile node moves.  The localized mobility management architecture
   therefore has two interfaces:

   1.  The interface between MAGs and the LMA where route update
       signaling occurs.

   2.  The interface between mobile nodes and their currently selected
       MAGs where link-layer handoff signaling and possibly IP-layer
       movement detection signaling occurs.

   The localized mobility management architecture specifies no
   standardized protocol for a MAG to detect the arrival or departure of
   mobile nodes on its local link and initiate route update signaling
   with the LMA.  An appropriate mechanism may be entirely implemented
   at the link layer, such as is common for cellular networks.  In that
   case, the IP layer never detects any movement, even when a mobile
   node moves from one link to another handled by a different MAG.  If
   the link layer does not provide the necessary functionality, the
   mobile node must perform active IP-layer movement detection signaling
   so as to trigger route update signaling at the MAG.

   This document discusses security threats on both interfaces of
   localized mobility management.  The discussion is limited to threats
   specific to localized mobility management; threats to IPv6 in general
   are documented in [2].


1.1  Terminology

   The terminology in this document follows the definitions in [3], with



Vogt & Kempf            Expires January 24, 2007                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM              July 2006


   those revisions and additions from [1].  In addition, the following
   definition is used:

   Network access identity

      An identity established for the mobile node during network access
      authentication that allows the network to unambiguously identify
      the mobile node for signaling purposes.  The network access
      identity may, e.g., be bound to a link-layer session key, a
      network access identifier (NAI) [4], or a SEND public key [5].




2.  Threats to Interface between LMA and MAG

   The localized mobility management protocol executed on the interface
   between the LMA and a MAG serves to establish, update, and tear down
   routes for data plane traffic of mobile nodes.  Threats to this
   interface can be separated into compromise or impersonation of a
   legitimate LMA, compromise or impersonation of a legitimate MAG, man-
   in-the-middle attacks, and denial-of-service attacks on the LMA.


2.1  LMA Compromise or Impersonation

   A compromised LMA can ignore routing updates from a legitimate MAG,
   or forge routing updates for a victim mobile node in order to
   redirect or deny the mobile node's traffic.  Since data plane traffic
   for all mobile nodes routes through the LMA, a compromised LMA can
   also intercept, inspect, modify, redirect, or drop such traffic on a
   MAG supported by the LMA.  The attack can be conducted transiently,
   to selectively disable traffic for any particular mobile node or MAG
   at particular times.

   Moreover, a compromised LMA may manipulate its routing table such
   that all packets are directed towards a single MAG.  This may result
   in a DoS attack against that MAG and its attached link.

   These threats also emanate from an attacker which tricks a MAG into
   believing that it is the legitimate LMA.  This attacker can cause the
   MAG to conduct route update signaling with the attacker instead of
   with the legitimate LMA, enabling it to ignore route updates from the
   MAG, or forge route updates in order to redirect or deny a victim
   mobile node's traffic.  The attacker does not necessarily have to be
   on the original control plane path between the legitimate LMA and the
   MAG, provided that it can somehow make its presence known to the MAG.
   E.g., the IP address of a mobility anchor point in hierarchical



Vogt & Kempf            Expires January 24, 2007                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM              July 2006


   Mobile IPv6 mobility management [6] may be proliferated across a
   domain hop by hop in Router Advertisement messages.  Failure to
   properly authenticate a comparable mechanism for localized mobility
   management would allow an attacker to establish itself as a rouge
   LMA.

   The attacker may further be able to intercept, inspect, modify,
   redirect, or drop data plane traffic to and from a mobile node.  This
   is obvious if the attacker is on the original data plane path between
   the legitimate LMA and the mobile node's current MAG, which may
   happen independent of whether or not the attacker is on the original
   control plane path.  If the attacker is not on this path, it may be
   able to leverage the localized mobility management protocol to
   redefine the prefix that the mobile node uses in IP address
   configuration.  The attacker can then specify a prefix that routes to
   itself.  Whether or not outgoing data plane packets sourced by the
   mobile node can be interfered with by an attacker off the original
   data plane path depends on the specific data plane forwarding
   mechanism within the localized mobility management domain.  E.g., if
   IP-in-IP encapsulation or an equivalent per-mobile-node approach is
   used for outbound data plane packets, the packets will route through
   the attacker.  On the other hand, standard IP routing may cause the
   packets to be relayed via the legitimate LMA and hence to circumvent
   the attacker.


2.2  MAG Compromise or Impersonation

   A compromised MAG can redirect a victim mobile node's traffic onto
   its local access link arbitrarily, without authorization from the
   mobile node.  This threat is similar to an attack on a typical
   routing protocol where a malicious stub router injects a bogus host
   route for the mobile node.  In general, forgery of a subnet prefix in
   link state or distance vector routing protocols requires support of
   multiple routers in order to obtain a meaningful change in forwarding
   behavior.  But a bogus host route is likely to take precedence over
   the routing information advertised by legitimate routers, which is
   usually less specific, hence the attack should succeed even if the
   attacker is not supported by other routers.  A difference between
   redirection in a routing protocol and redirection in localized
   mobility management is that the former impacts the routing tables of
   multiple routers, whereas the latter involves only the compromised
   MAG and the LMA.

   A compromised MAG can further ignore the presence of a mobile node on
   its local access link and refrain from registering the mobile node at
   the LMA.  The mobile node then loses its traffic.  Attacks that the
   MAG can mount on its access link interface are common for any regular



Vogt & Kempf            Expires January 24, 2007                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM              July 2006


   IPv6 access router [2].

   Moreover, a compromised MAG may be able to cause interruption to a
   mobile node by deregistering the mobile node at the LMA, pretending
   that the mobile node has powered down.  The mobile node then needs to
   reinitiate the network access authentication procedure, which the
   compromised MAG may prevent repeatedly until the mobile node moves to
   a different MAG.  The mobile node should be able to handle this
   situation, but the recovery process may be lengthy and hence impair
   ongoing communication sessions to a significant extent.

   All of these threats apply not just to a MAG that is compromised, but
   also to an attacker that manages to counterfeit the identity of an
   authorized MAG in interacting with both mobile nodes and the LMA.
   Such an attacker can behave towards mobile nodes like a legitimate
   MAG and engage the LMA in route update signaling.  The attack may be
   conducted transiently, to selectively disable traffic for any
   particular mobile node at particular times.


2.3  Man in the Middle Attack

   An attacker that manages to interject itself between the legitimate
   LMA and a legitimate MAG can act as a man in the middle with respect
   to both control plane signaling and data plane traffic.  If the
   attacker is on the original control plane path, it can forge, modify,
   or drop route update packets so as to cause the establishment of
   incorrect routes or the removal of routes that are in active use.
   Similarly, an attacker on the original data plane path can intercept,
   inspect, modify, redirect, and drop data plane packets sourced by or
   destined to a victim mobile node.

   A compromised router located between the LMA and a MAG may cause
   similar damage.  Any router on the control plane path can forge,
   modify, or drop control plane packets, and thereby interfere with
   route establishment.  Any router on the data plane path can
   intercept, inspect, modify, and drop data plane packets, or rewrite
   their IP headers so as to divert the packets from their original
   path.

   An attacker between the LMA and a MAG may further impersonate the MAG
   towards the LMA and vice versa in route update signaling.  The
   attacker can so interfere with route establishment even if it is not
   on the original control plane path between the LMA and the MAG.  An
   attacker off the original data plane path may undertake the same to
   cause inbound data plane packets destined to the mobile node to be
   routed first from the LMA to the attacker, and from there to the
   mobile node's MAG and finally to the mobile node itself.  As



Vogt & Kempf            Expires January 24, 2007                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM              July 2006


   explained in Section 2.1, here, too, it depends on the specific data
   plane forwarding mechanism within the localized mobility management
   domain whether or not the attacker can influence the route of
   outgoing data plane packets sourced by the mobile node.


2.4  Denial of Service Attack on the LMA

   An attacker may launch a denial-of-service attack on the LMA by
   sending packets to arbitrary IP addresses which are potentially in
   use by mobile nodes within the localized mobility management domain.
   Like a border router, the LMA is in a topological position through
   which all data plane traffic goes, so it must process the flooding
   packets and perform a routing table lookup for each of them.  The LMA
   can discard packets for which the IP destination address is not
   registered in the routing table.  But other packets must be
   encapsulated and forwarded.  A target MAG as well as any mobile nodes
   attached to its access link are also likely to suffer damage because
   the unrequested packets must be decapsulated and consume link
   bandwidth as well as processing capacities on the receivers.  This
   threat is in principle the same as for denial of service on a regular
   IPv6 border router, but because either the routing table lookup
   enables the LMA to drop a flooding packet early or, on the contrary,
   additional tunneling workload is required, the impact of an attack
   against localized mobility management may be different.

   In a related attack, the villain manages to obtain a globally
   routable IP address of an LMA or a different network entity within
   the localized mobility management domain and perpetrates a denial-of-
   service attack against that IP address.  Localized mobility
   management is in general somewhat resistant to such an attack because
   mobile nodes need never obtain a globally routable IP address of any
   entity within the localized mobility management domain.  A
   compromised mobile node hence cannot pass such an IP address off to a
   remote attacker, limiting the feasibility of extracting information
   on the topology of the localized mobility management domain.  It is
   still possible for an attacker to perform IP address scanning if MAGs
   and LMAs have globally routable IP addresses, but the much larger
   IPv6 address space makes scanning considerably more time consuming.



3.  Threats to Interface between MAG and Mobile Node

   In order to detect the arrival and departure of mobile nodes and
   accordingly initiate route updates with the LMA, a MAG monitors the
   mobile nodes' link-layer handoff signaling or IP-layer movement
   detection signaling.  Cellular access technologies utilize only the



Vogt & Kempf            Expires January 24, 2007                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM              July 2006


   signaling at the wireless link layer, and the IP stack never sees any
   change when the mobile node moves from one MAG to a MAG on a
   different link.  For non-cellular access technologies, such as IEEE
   802.11 or wired Ethernet, the link-layer signaling may not hide a
   handoff from the IP layer.  Instead, IP-layer movement detection
   signaling may have to be performed in response to a notification from
   the link layer that a change in link-layer attachment has occurred.
   This signaling may involve extensions [7] for IPv6 Neighbor Discovery
   [8], DHCPv6 [9], or additional technology-specific functionality at
   the IP layer.  In any case, the security threats on the interface
   between the MAG and a mobile node are the same.  They either pertain
   to impersonation of the mobile node or to man-in-the-middle attacks.


3.1  Network Access Identity

   In order for localized mobility management to be able to definitively
   and unambiguously identify a mobile node upon handoff, the mobile
   node must establish a network access identity when it initially
   connects to the localized mobility managment domain.  E.g., the
   mobile node may authenticate itself to the domain based on its NAI
   [4] and an AAA-based protocol.  The network access identity is
   conceptually independent of the mobile node's IP or link-layer
   addresses.  For some wireless access technologies, the network access
   identity must be re-established on every link-layer handoff.

   Localized mobility management requires the establishment of a secure
   binding between the network access identity and either the IP
   addresses of the mobile node, or any authentication keys associated
   with these IP addresses.  The binding is used by the MAG to deduce
   that the mobile node has handed over onto the MAG's access link,
   thereby providing the trigger for route update signaling to the LMA.
   The binding must be robust to spoofing because it would otherwise
   facilitate impersonation of the mobile node by a third party or man-
   in-the-middle attacks.


3.2  Impersonation of Mobile Nodes

   An attacker that is able to forge the network access identity of a
   neighboring victim mobile node can trick its MAG into redirecting the
   mobile node's packets to itself.  Such an on-link attack is common
   for any regular IPv6 network [2].

   However, if handoff signaling cannot definitively be linked back to
   the legitimate network access identity, an attacker may be capable of
   fabricating handoff signaling of a victim mobile node that currently
   attaches to a different link.  The attacker can thus trick its MAG



Vogt & Kempf            Expires January 24, 2007                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM              July 2006


   into believing that the mobile node has handed over onto the MAG's
   access link.  The MAG will then initiate route update signaling to
   the LMA, causing the LMA to redirect inbound data plane packets for
   the mobile node to the attacker's MAG and finally to the attacker
   itself.  The attacker can so examine the packets that legitimately
   belong to the mobile node, or discard the packets and deny the mobile
   node service.  This is conceivable both if the attacker and the
   mobile node are on links that connect to different MAGs, as well as
   if they are on separate links connecting to the same MAG.  In the
   former case, two MAGs would think they see the mobile node and both
   would independently perform route update signaling with the LMA.  In
   the latter case, route update signaling is likely to be performed
   only once, and the redirection of packets from the mobile node to the
   attacker is internal to the MAG.  The mobile node can always
   recapture its traffic back from the attacker through another run of
   link-layer handoff signaling and/or IP-layer movement detection
   signaling.  But standard mobile nodes are generally not prepared to
   counteract this kind of attack, and even where network stacks include
   suitable functionality, the attack may not be noticeable early enough
   at the link or IP layer to quickly institute countermeasures.  The
   attack is therefore disruptive at a minimum, and may potentially
   persist until the mobile node initiates signaling again upon a
   subsequent handoff.

   Off-link impersonation attacks can be prevented at the link layer.
   E.g., they are not possible with cellular access technologies, where
   the handoff signaling is completely controlled by the wireless link
   layer.  Here, an attacker must be on the same link as the victim
   mobile node in order to disrupt the negotiation between the mobile
   node and the network.  Cellular access technologies also provide
   other cryptographic and non-cryptographic attack barriers at the link
   layer, which make mounting an impersonation attack, both on-link and
   off-link, very difficult.  For non-cellular access technologies,
   however, off-link impersonation attacks may be possible.


3.3  Man in the Middle Attack

   An attacker which can interpose between a victim mobile node and the
   MAG during link-layer handoff signaling and/or IP-layer signaling for
   movement detection, router discovery, and IP address configuration
   can mount a man-in-the-middle attack on the mobile node, spoofing the
   mobile node into believing that it has a legitimate connection with
   the localized mobility management domain.  The attacker can thus
   intercept, inspect, modify, or selectively drop packets sourced by or
   destined to the mobile node.





Vogt & Kempf            Expires January 24, 2007                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM              July 2006


4.  Security Considerations

   This document describes threats to network-based localized mobility
   management.  These may either occur on the interface between the LMA
   and a MAG, or on the interface between a MAG and a mobile node.
   Mitigation measures for the threats, as well as the security
   considerations associated with those measures, are described in the
   respective protocol specifications [10][11] for the two interfaces.



5.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.



6.  Acknowledgment

   The authors would like to thank the NETLMM working group, especially
   Jari Arkko, Gregory Daley, Gerardo Giaretta, Wassim Haddad, Julien
   Laganier, Lakshminath Dondeti, Henrik Levkowetz, Phil Roberts, Vidya
   Narayanan, and Pekka Savola (in alphabetical order) for valuable
   comments and suggestions regarding this document.



























Vogt & Kempf            Expires January 24, 2007               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM              July 2006


7.  Informative References

   [1]   Kempf, J., "Problem Statement for Network-based Localized
         Mobility Management", IETF Internet Draft
         draft-ietf-netlmm-nohost-ps-04.txt (work in progress),
         June 2006.

   [2]   Nikander, P., Kempf, J., and E. Nordmark, "IPv6 Neighbor
         Discovery (ND) Trust Models and Threats", IETF Request for
         Comments 3756, May 2004.

   [3]   Manner, J. and M. Kojo, "Mobility Related Terminology",
         IETF Request for Comments 3753, June 2004.

   [4]   Aboba, B., Beadles, M., Arkko, J., and P. Eronen, "The Network
         Access Identifier", IETF Request for Comments 4282,
         December 2005.

   [5]   Aura, T., "Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGA)",
         IETF Request for Comments 3972, March 2005.

   [6]   Soliman, H., Castelluccia, C., El Malki, K., and L. Bellier,
         "Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 Mobility Management (HMIPv6)",
         IETF Request for Comments 4140, August 2005.

   [7]   Kempf, J., Narayanan, S., Nordmark, E., Pentland, B., and JH.
         Choi, "Detecting Network Attachment in IPv6 Networks (DNAv6)",
         IETF Internet Draft draft-ietf-dna-protocol-01.txt (work in
         progress), June 2006.

   [8]   Narten, T., "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)",
         IETF Internet Draft draft-ietf-ipv6-2461bis-07.txt (work in
         progress), May 2006.

   [9]   Droms, R., Bound, J., Volz, B., Lemon, T., E., C., and M.
         Carney, "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6
         (DHCPv6)", IETF Request for Comments 3315, July 2003.

   [10]  Giaretta, G., "NetLMM Protocol", IETF Internet Draft
         draft-giaretta-netlmm-dt-protocol-00.txt (work in progress),
         June 2006.

   [11]  Laganier, J., Narayanan, S., and F. Templin, "Network-based
         Localized Mobility Management Interface between Mobile Node and
         Access Router", IETF Internet Draft
         draft-ietf-netlmm-mn-ar-if-01.txt (work in progress),
         June 2006.




Vogt & Kempf            Expires January 24, 2007               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM              July 2006


Authors' Addresses

   Christian Vogt
   Institute of Telematics
   Universitaet Karlsruhe (TH)
   P.O. Box 6980
   76128 Karlsruhe
   Germany

   Email: chvogt@tm.uka.de


   James Kempf
   DoCoMo USA Labs
   181 Metro Drive, Suite 300
   San Jose, CA 95110
   USA

   Phone: +1 408 451 4711
   Email: kempf@docomolabs-usa.com



Appendix A.  Change Log

   The following is a list of technical changes that were made from
   version 01 to version 02 of the document.  Editorial revisions are
   not explicitly identified.

   o  Section 2.1:  Included DoS/flooding attack against MAG.  Also
      clarified how a malicious node off the control plane path between
      the authorized LMA and one or multiple target MAGs could
      impersonate the authorized LMA against the MAGs.  Such an attacker
      could use various means to interfer with data plane traffic even
      if it is off the original data plane path between the legitimate
      LMA and the MAGs.

   o  Section 2.2:  Malicious MAG may deregister an actively
      communicating mobile node, without consent of the mobile node.

   o  Section 2.3:  Included related threats pertaining to MITM between
      LMA and MAG, which were formerly described in other sections.

   o  Section 2.4:  Included description of DoS/flooding attack against
      LMA, including its impact on the target MAGs, their links, and the
      target mobile nodes.





Vogt & Kempf            Expires January 24, 2007               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM              July 2006


   o  Section 3:  Revised the structure of this section.  Threats are
      now divided into attacks against a mobile node's network access
      identity; impersonation of a mobile node, both from the mobile
      node's link and from off link; as well as man-in-the-middle
      attacks.

   o  Section 3.1:  The binding with the network access identity may be
      with the authentication keys associated with the mobile node's IP
      address, not necessarily with the IP addresses themselves.

   o  Section 3.2:  Off-link attack may be mounted from a link that
      connects to a different MAG than the victim mobile node's MAG.







































Vogt & Kempf            Expires January 24, 2007               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM              July 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

   The IETF has been notified of intellectual property rights claimed in
   regard to some or all of the specification contained in this
   document.  For more information consult the online list of claimed
   rights.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.





Vogt & Kempf            Expires January 24, 2007               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM              July 2006


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.















































Vogt & Kempf            Expires January 24, 2007               [Page 15]

