
 
 
 
 
 
Internet Draft                                                 J. Morris 
Document: draft-morris-geopriv-core-01.txt          Center for Democracy 
Expires September 2003                                    and Technology 
 
                                                             D. Mulligan 
                                              Samuelson Law, Technology, 
                                                and Public Policy Clinic 
 
                                                              J. Cuellar 
                                                              Siemens AG 
 
                                                              March 2003 
 
                      Core Privacy Protections for 
                        Geopriv Location Object 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   The working group has generally agreed that the Geopriv Location 
   Object MUST be able to contain a limited set of Privacy Rules.   This 
   Internet-Draft suggests the set of Privacy Rules that the authors 
   believe should be includable in the Location Object.  
    
    
   Morris, Mulligan, Cuellar                                         1 
                       Core Privacy Protections              March 2003 

 
Table of Contents 
    
    
   1.  Introduction and Overview.....................................  2 
   2.  Conventions used in this document.............................  3 
   3.  Privacy Rules to be Includable in a Geopriv Location Object...  3 
    3.1. Human- AND Machine-Readable Privacy Elements and Rules......  4 
    3.2. Machine-Readable Privacy Elements and Rules.................  4 
   4.  Additional Discussion of Proposed Privacy Elements and Rules..  7 
   5.  Reasons to Include Privacy Rules in Location Object...........  8 
   6.  Security Considerations.......................................  9 
   7.  Acknowledgements..............................................  9 
   8.  References....................................................  9 
   9.  Author's Addresses............................................ 10 
   10. Full Copyright Statement...................................... 10 
    
    
    
1. Introduction and Overview 
    
   The authors believe that there exists working group consensus that 
   that the Geopriv Location Object (LO) MUST be able to contain a 
   limited set of Privacy Rules.  This document suggests the set of 
   Privacy Rules that the authors believe should be includable in the 
   Location Object. 
    
   The threshold question of whether the LO should contain any Privacy 
   Rules was discussed at IETF-55 in Atlanta.  A brief explanation as to 
   why a limited set of Privacy Rules should be includable in the LO is 
   set out in Section 5 below.  
    
   The proposal in this _01 document is intended to reflect the "back of 
   the napkin" modification to the proposal in the _00 version of this 
   document.  This modification was presented and briefly discussed at 
   the working group meeting at IETF-55 in Atlanta. 
    
   An important element of the "back of the napkin" modification was to 
   separate the proposed Privacy Rules into two groups, both of which 
   must be includable in a Geopriv Location Object.  The first group 
   would contain three of the most basic Privacy Rules, and can be 
   transmitted between and among any of the entities in a Geopriv 
   transaction.  Two different forms of this first group would be 
   defined - a compact form suitable for low bandwidth applications, and 
   a human-readable form suitable for transmission to the Viewer (i.e., 
   the final recipient of Location Information).  (For those familiar 
   with the -00 version of this document, this group contains what was 
   previously designated as Elements A, B, and F.) 
    
   The second group of Privacy Rules that can be contained in a LO is 
   intended for use in transmissions between Location Servers.  This 
   second group will contain a limited core set of Privacy Rules, in 

    
   Morris, Mulligan, Cuellar                                         2 
                       Core Privacy Protections              March 2003 

   machine-readable form.  It is the authors' expectation that a high 
   percentage of users' complete Privacy Rules will be expressible 
   entirely using these two groups of Privacy Rules discussed here.  
   (For those familiar with the -00 version of this document, this group 
   contains what was previously designated as Elements C, D, and E, plus 
   some additional possible elements discussed in Section 5 of the -00 
   draft.) 
    
   One small part of the "back of the napkin" modification to the -00 
   document was to remove one proposed element (the former Element G) 
   from consideration as a "privacy rule," and instead designate the 
   proposed functionality simply as a feature to be included in a final 
   definition of a Geopriv Location Object.  The resulting proposal is 
   that the LO should be able to contain the following instruction:  
    
        Promptly transmit my location to [abc] individual or entity, 
        along with [xyz] instruction (where the contents of [xyz] are 
        NOT defined by Geopriv except for technical parameters such as 
        maximum size). 
    
   Although this proposal does not itself directly advance a privacy 
   objective, it would greatly facilitate the future development of 
   privacy protecting (and other) business models.  It would also 
   promote the ability of a Target to bypass the location services 
   offered by a Location Generator (such as a wireless carrier) in favor 
   of location services offered by a competitive third party.  This 
   specific proposal is not further discussed in this document. 
    
    
    
2. Conventions used in this document 
    
   Terms with initial capitals (such as, for example, "Location Object," 
   "Privacy Rule," and "Viewer") have the same meaning as defined in the 
   Geopriv Requirements document, draft-ietf-geopriv-reqs-03.txt. 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in [1]. 
    
    
    
3. Privacy Rules to be Includable in a Geopriv Location Object 
    
   This section details two groups of core elements of Privacy Rules 
   that should be expressible in the Geopriv Location Object.  For each 
   of the core elements (designated as Elements A through L), a more 
   precisely stated "rule" is also provided, with Elements D through L 
   being stated in a permissions table as part of a single rule. 
    



    
   Morris, Mulligan, Cuellar                                         3 
                       Core Privacy Protections              March 2003 

   Section 4 below contains some additional substantive discussion of 
   these elements (such as, for example, why elements D and E should be 
   separately articulated). 
    
   Note that some of the elements and rules discussed below are phrased 
   in terms of prohibitions ("do not disclose except to . . ."), but 
   could probably as effectively be phrased in terms of permissions 
   ("permitted to disclosed only to . . . "). 
    
    
3.1. Human- AND Machine-Readable Privacy Elements and Rules 
    
   This first group of privacy elements and resulting rules represent 
   the most basic Privacy Rules, and can be transmitted between and 
   among any of the entities in a Geopriv transaction.   
    
   Two different forms of this first group would be defined - a compact 
   and machine-readable form suitable for low bandwidth applications, 
   and a human-readable form suitable for transmission to the Viewer 
   (i.e., the final recipient of Location Information).  This latter 
   approach would permit, for example, the return of a Location Object 
   in response to a HTTP request from a web browser. 
    
   The three privacy elements in this group are: 
    
      Element A:  Requirement that external privacy rules be followed 
       
      Element B:  Limitation on length of data retention 
       
      Element C:  Limitation on any retransmission or further 
                  disclosure 
       
   The following expresses these three broad elements in more precise 
   language: 
       
      Rule 1:     Do not retransmit or further disclose my location 
                  information except in full compliance with the 
                  privacy rules located at [url/uri]. (Element A) 
       
      Rule 2:     Do not retain my location information [past xyz 
                  time+date OR longer than xyz duration]. (Element B) 
       
      Rule 3:     Do not retransmit or further disclose my location 
                  information. (Element C) 
    
    
3.2. Machine-Readable Privacy Elements and Rules 
    
   The second group of Privacy Rules that can be contained in a LO is 
   intended for use in transmissions between Location Servers, in 
   machine-readable form.  
    

    
   Morris, Mulligan, Cuellar                                         4 
                       Core Privacy Protections              March 2003 

   The authors believe that, taken together, Elements A - L would allow 
   the expression of a very high percentage of users' complete set of 
   Privacy Rules, and thus in many cases could obviate the need for 
   reference to any external set of Privacy Rules. 
    
   The privacy elements in this group are: 
    
    
      Element D:  Permission to disclose only to specified individual 
                  or entity 
       
      Element E:  Permission to disclose only to someone presenting a 
                  specified key (for instance, a shared key or the 
                  private key corresponding to a particular public 
                  key), or a special type of credential (an e-token to 
                  be defined). 
       
      Element F:  Requirement that the granularity/precision of 
                  location information be reduced 
       
      Element G:  The ability to provide additional Privacy Rules for 
                  specific requestors or groups of requestors 
       
      Element H:  The ability to define a time until which a permission 
                  is valid 
       
      Element I:  The ability to define a geographical area for which 
                  the permission is valid ("if I am in area x then you 
                  can tell y my location") 
       
      Element J:  The ability to define a repeatable time window (such 
                  as weekdays during office hours) during which a 
                  permission is valid 
       
      Element K:  The ability to require that express consent of the 
                  Target/Rule Maker be obtained prior to disclosing 
                  location 
       
      Element L:  The ability to require that notice be provided to the 
                  Target if location is provided 
    
    
   Elements D through L can be expressed in the form of a single 
   permissions table: 
       
       







    
   Morris, Mulligan, Cuellar                                         5 
                       Core Privacy Protections              March 2003 

      Rule 4:     Do not retransmit or further disclose my location 
                  information EXCEPT in accordance to the following 
                  permissions table: 
       
   |LocSeek|Credent|Accuracy|Policy|Valid|LocRes|TimeRes|Consent|Notice| 
   |       |       |        |      |     |      |       |       |      | 
   | abc1  | xyz1  |  uvw1  |  p1  | v1  |  r1  |  t1   |  c1   |  n1  | 
   | abc2  | xyz2  |  uvw2  |  p2  | v2  |  r2  |  t2   |  c2   |  n2  | 
   | abc3  | xyz3  |  uvw3  |  p3  | v3  |  r3  |  t3   |  c3   |  n3  | 
   | abc4  | xyz4  |  uvw4  |  p4  | v4  |  r4  |  t4   |  c4   |  n4  | 
       
                  where 
    
        abc     Location Seeker: allows for wildcards including "any" or 
                "any@some-specific-domain" (Element D) 
         
        xyz     Credential: allows for wildcards and "no additional 
                credential required beyond [abc] identity" (Element E) 
         
        uvw     Accuracy: has one of the following values (Element F): 
                A = no granularity change required 
                B = 10 kilometer radius (or within lat/long quadrant) 
                C = 100 kilometer radius (or within larger quadrant) 
                D = local or municipal civil designation (e.g., city) 
                E = state or regional civil designation (e.g., state) 
                F = national designation (e.g., country) 
                G = time zone 
    
        p       Policy: pointer to the privacy rules/policy that must be 
                followed for this specific Location Seeker (Element G) 
         
        v       Validity: this permission is valid until time v (Element 
                H) 
         
        r       Location Restriction:  r represents a region where this 
                permission applies (for instance, if I am in Munich, 
                then it is OK to pass this information) (Element I) 
         
        t       Time Restriction: this permission is only valid within 
                the recurring time window t (for instance, only during 
                working hours may my boss obtain my location) (Element 
                J) 
         
        c       Consent Bit: ask me for permission in real time (and let 
                the Location Seeker abc wait until I tell you) (Element 
                K) 
         
        n       Notification Bit: send me a notification if you send 
                this Location Information to Location Seeker abc 
                (Element L) 



    
   Morris, Mulligan, Cuellar                                         6 
                       Core Privacy Protections              March 2003 

         
         
4. Additional Discussion of Proposed Privacy Elements and Rules 
    
   The following are additional comments and explanations of the above 
   privacy elements and rules: 
    
        a.  Rules 1 - 3 should be expressible in both machine-readable 
   form as well as an optional human-readable form.  Rule 4 is primarily 
   intended to be read by Location Servers that have sufficient 
   intelligence to process the rules.  When sending Location Information 
   to an ultimate Viewer, it is possible that the Geopriv Location 
   Object (LO) itself would need to contain human-readable information 
   (for example, if the LO is sent to a Viewer using SMTP or HTTP).  
   This approach is analogous to the full and compact versions of 
   privacy policies under P3P. 
    
        b.  Element C and Rule 3 could possibly be omitted as a separate 
   flag or field, because a "do not distribute" instruction should be a 
   fundamental default for the Geopriv Location Object.  Nevertheless, 
   there is value in having an express "do not redistribute" indicator, 
   especially to emphasize that instruction to an ultimate Viewer (who, 
   as discussed above, may well be a human receiving the LO essentially 
   directly). 
    
        c.  Elements D (disclose only to specified individual) and E 
   (disclose only to someone presenting a key or credential) could 
   theoretically be consolidated, because establishing the identity in C 
   would effectively be using some form of credential.  The elements, 
   however, are expressed separately to emphasize that a Rule Maker 
   should be able to allow access to defined individuals or groups of 
   individuals, and ALSO to anonymous requestors who present a specified 
   key or credential.  In the proposed Rules, those two elements are 
   consolidated into Rule 4, but the possibility of an anonymous-but-
   credentialed Location Seeker is preserved. 
    
        e.  To be clear, the proposal of making specific Privacy Rules 
   includable in a Location Object does NOT mean that all of the 
   proposed privacy rules would be transmitted in every Location Object 
   within a given location transaction.  It is quite possible that a LO 
   at an early stage of a location transaction might carry full 
   specifics on Rules 1 - 4.  But a later stage of the same location 
   transaction (say, from a Location Server to an ultimate Viewer) might 
   only carry Rules 1 - 3 (which would be the only rules directly 
   applicable to the Viewer). 
    
    
    





    
   Morris, Mulligan, Cuellar                                         7 
                       Core Privacy Protections              March 2003 

5. Reasons to Include Privacy Rules in Location Object 
    
   It is not the purpose of this Internet-Draft to explain in full the 
   reasons why a limited set of Privacy Rules should be includable in 
   the Location Object.  A brief discussion, however, may assist a 
   reader who is unfamiliar with past working group discussions on the 
   topic.  
    
   A critical question that faced the Geopriv working group was whether 
   the Location Object (LO) to be designed should include fields for 
   particular privacy-protecting rules, or instead should simply refer 
   to an external set of privacy rules.  The three most plausible 
   answers to this question would be: 
    
        (1)  "Entirely External" -- the LO should only contain a URI 
             reference to an external set of privacy rules that must be 
             followed by any recipient of the LO. 
         
        (2)  "Limited Internal" -- the LO should contain a limited set 
             of rules that cover the great bulk of likely privacy 
             situations (as well as the ability to include a URI 
             reference to an external set of privacy rules if more 
             robust rules are needed, or external rule storage is 
             preferred). 
 
        (3)  "Full Internal" -- the LO should be defined to be able to 
             contain a full, robust, and potentially complex set of 
             privacy rules. 
    
   The "Full Internal" option would yield the most complex LO, would be 
   the most complex to define and implement, and may not be consistent 
   with the goal of enabling the use of the Geopriv LO on constrained 
   devices or with limited bandwidth. 
    
   The "Entirely External" approach would be the quickest for the 
   working group to accomplish, and if fully implemented in the 
   marketplace this approach could give end users a great deal of 
   control and flexibility in the protection of Location Information.  
   Under this approach, however, privacy protection would heavily depend 
   on marketplace developments wholly external to the work of Geopriv, 
   and thus may not fulfill the mission of the working group as defined 
   by its charter. 
    
   Certain working group participants (including the authors here) 
   argued that the most effective way to ensure that users have some 
   privacy control is for the Location Object to be able to carry a 
   limited number of privacy rules.  In discussions at IETF-55 in 
   Atlanta, the working group agreed to pursue the "Limited Internal" 
   approach, although the group did not determine the precise elements 
   to be included in a "Limited Internal" approach.  It is to this 
   latter question that this document is addressed. 
    

    
   Morris, Mulligan, Cuellar                                         8 
                       Core Privacy Protections              March 2003 

   Note that the "Limited Internal" approach is effectively a superset 
   of the "Entirely External" approach, so that both of those models 
   could be implemented in appropriate situations even if the LO can 
   carry a larger set of rules.  Thus, where a particular location 
   service application in fact offers users robust and effective means 
   to create and maintain an external set of privacy rules, that 
   application could simply transmit the URI/URL of those external rules 
   in the Location Object.  But where an application lacks robust and 
   effective external rule servers, the "Limited Internal" approach 
   would allow a core set of rules to be carried with the LO. 
    
    
6. Security Considerations 
    
   Security is, of course, is a core goal of the Geopriv working group.  
   The questions addressed in this Internet-Draft -- what privacy rules 
   should be includable in the Geopriv Location Object -- have 
   significant security implications, most directly on the security of 
   the privacy rules themselves.  The inappropriate disclosure of some 
   privacy rules could itself harm privacy, and thus a decision to 
   include some privacy rules in the Location Object could expose those 
   rules to a higher chance of security (and thus privacy) violation.  
   On the other hand, if including rules in the Location Object 
   increases the likelihood that those privacy rules would in fact be 
   known and followed, then the added security risk of transmitting 
   those rules may be outweighed by the added privacy protection 
   afforded. 
    
    
7. Acknowledgements 
    
   We wish to thank Jon Peterson for his constructive criticism of the 
   proposals advanced in the prior version of this document. 
    
    
8. References 
    
   [1] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
          Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
 












    
   Morris, Mulligan, Cuellar                                         9 
                       Core Privacy Protections              March 2003 

9. Author's Addresses 
    
   John B. Morris, Jr. 
   Director, Internet Standards, Technology & Policy Project 
   Center for Democracy and Technology 
   1634 I Street NW, Suite 1100 
   Washington, DC 20006                         Email:  jmorris@cdt.org 
   USA                                               http://www.cdt.org 
    
   Deirdre K. Mulligan 
   Samuelson Law, Technology and Public Policy Clinic 
   Boalt Hall School of Law 
   University of California 
   Berkeley, CA 94720-7              Email:  dmulligan@law.berkeley.edu 
   USA 
    
   Jorge R Cuellar 
   Siemens AG 
   Corporate Technology 
   CT IC 3 
   81730 Munich                       Email:  Jorge.Cuellar@siemens.com 
   Germany 
    
    
10. Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date).  All Rights Reserved. 
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 


    
   Morris, Mulligan, Cuellar                                        10 
