

Internet Engineering Task Force                          H. Cruickshank 
Internet Draft                                               S. Iyengar 
Document: draft-cruickshank-ipdvb-sec-req-00.txt   University of Surrey 
                                                              S. Combes 
                                                           L. Duquerroy 
                                                          Alcatel Space 
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Category: Internet Draft                              13 September 2005 
 
 
        Security requirements for the Unidirectional Lightweight 
        Encapsulation (ULE) protocol 
                 
 
Status of this Draft 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- 
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress". 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
   Abstract 
    
   This document provides a threat analysis and derives security 
   requirements for MPEG-2 transmission links using the Unidirectional 
   Lightweight Encapsulation (ULE).  It also provides the motivation 
   for ULE link level security. 
    
   Table of Contents 
    
           < to be completed > 
            
            
            


  
Expires March 2006                                            [page 1] 
INTERNET DRAFT  Encapsulation for IP over MPEG-2/DVB         Sept. 2005 
 
 
           1. Introduction  
    
   A security analysis was provided in the RFC defining the ULE method 
   [ULE] and the ipdvb architecture [ipdvb-arch].  This document 
   extends that analysis and derives the security requirements. The 
   document provides an overview of threats that are important to an IP 
   network that utilises ULE over an underlying MPEG-2 transmission 
   network.  
    
    
   The MPEG-2 Transport Stream (TS) has been widely accepted not only 
   for providing digital TV services, but also as a subnetwork 
   technology for building IP networks.  The Unidirectional Lightweight 
   Encapsulation (ULE) mechanism described in [ULE] for the transport 
   of IPv4 and IPv6 Datagrams, bridged Ethernet frames and other 
   network protocol packets directly over the ISO MPEG-2 Transport 
   Stream as TS Private Data. ULE specifies a base encapsulation format 
   and supports an extension format that allows it to carry additional 
   header information to assist in network/Receiver processing. 
    
   Key characteristics of MPEG-2 transmission networks are that they 
   may provide link-level broadcast capability, and that many support 
   applications that require access to a very large number of 
   subnetwork nodes [ipdvb-arch]. In addition, the majority of MPEG-2 
   transmission networks are bandwidth-limited, encapsulation protocols 
   must therefore add minimal overhead to ensure good link efficiency 
   while providing adequate network services. They also need to be 
   simple to minimize processing, robust to errors and security 
   threats, and extensible to a wide range of services.  
    
    
1.1 System Components 
    
   There are several entities in within the MPEG-2 transmission network 
   architecture, as defined in [ipdvb-arch]). These include (ULE) 
   Encapsulation Gateways, TS multiplexors (including re-multiplexors), 
   modulators and Receivers. 
    
   The ULE link security focuses on security between the Encapsulation 
   Gateways (ULE source) and Receivers only.  












  
Expires Feb. 2005                                             [page 2] 
INTERNET DRAFT  Encapsulation for IP over MPEG-2/DVB         Sept. 2005 
 
 
    
2. Threat Analysis 
    
   In the security considerations section of [ipdvb-arch], there is an 
   initial analysis of the security requirements in MPEG-2 transmission 
   networks. For example, when the MPEG-2 transmission network is not 
   using a wireline network, the normal security issues relating to the 
   use of wireless links for transport of Internet traffic should be 
   considered [RFC3819].  As such, it recommends that any new 
   encapsulation defined by the IETF should allow Transport Stream 
   encryption and also supports optional link level encryption / 
   authentication of the SNDU payload. In this document, we extend the 
   [ipdvb-arch] threats analysis and derive a more detailed the 
   security requirements. 
    
   The simplest type of network threat is a passive threat. Passive 
   attacks include eavesdropping or monitoring of transmissions, with a 
   goal to obtain information that is being transmitted. In broadcast 
   networks (especially those utilising widely available low-cost 
   physical layer interfaces, such as DVB) passive threats are 
   considered the major threats. An example of such a threat is an 
   intruder monitoring the MPEG-2 transmission broadcast and being able 
   to extract traffic communicated between IP hosts. Another example is 
   an intruder trying to gain information about the communication 
   parties by monitoring their Layer 2 MAC/NPA addresses; an intruder 
   can gain some information by just knowing the identity of the 
   communicating parties and the volume of their traffic. This is a 
   well-known issue in the security field, however it is more 
   problematic in the case of broadcast networks such as MPEG-2 
   transmission networks. 
    
   Active threats (or attacks) are, in general, more difficult to 
   implement successfully than passive threats, and usually require 
   more sophisticated resources and may require access to the 
   transmitter. Examples of active attacks are:  
    
   - Masquerading: where an entity pretends to be a different entity.  
     This includes masquerading other users and subnetwork control 
     plane messages 
   - Modification of messages in an unauthorised manner. 
   - Repudiation: Repudiation of origin occurs when a party denies 
     being the originator of a message and repudiation of destination 
     occurs when a party denies the reception of a message.  However, 
     this is an application layer issue and does not apply to link or 
     network layer communications. 
   - Replay attacks: When an intruder sends some old (authentic) 
     messages to the Receiver. 
   - Denial of service attacks:  When an entity fails to perform its 
     proper function or acts in a way that prevents other entities from 
     performing their proper functions.  
    

  
Expires Feb. 2005                                             [page 3] 
INTERNET DRAFT  Encapsulation for IP over MPEG-2/DVB         Sept. 2005 
 
 
   Active threats such as replay masquerading, modification of messages 
   and injecting IP packet attacks are major security concerns for the 
   Internet community and several of these attacks have been described 
   [Bellovin].  The defence against such attacks is data integrity 
   using cryptographic techniques and sequence numbers.  
    
   In the context of active threats in MPEG-2 transmission networks, 
   ULE source authentication (i.e. verification that packets are being 
   sent by the expected Encapsulation Gateway) is required by the ULE 
   Receivers. Although attacks such as masquerading, modification of 
   messages and injecting IP packets are more difficult. However such 
   attacks on individual ULE Receivers are possible and can pass 
   unnoticed by the ULE network operators or ISPs.  
    
   However, Active threats need a careful consideration in the context 
   of MPEG-2 transmission links, where the ULE method is a lightweight 
   protocol and we need to be careful not to turn it into a heavyweight 
   protocol by adding such security features.  A typical integrity 
   check such as MD5 is 20 bytes and a typical sequence numbering 
   requires 4 bytes.  Therefore new lightweight data integrity methods 
   or procedures are needed. 
    






























  
Expires Feb. 2005                                             [page 4] 
INTERNET DRAFT  Encapsulation for IP over MPEG-2/DVB         Sept. 2005 
 
 
    
3. Security Requirements for IP over MPEG-2 TS 
    
   From the above analysis, the following security requirements can be 
   derived: 
    
   - Data confidentiality is the major requirement against passive 
     threats (using encryption).  L2 encryption or L3 (IPsec) 
     encryption can satisfy this requirement.  However IPsec must be 
     used in tunnel mode between ULE senders and receivers, which has 
     more overhead. 
    
   - Optional protection of Layer 2 MAC/NPA address.  This is needed 
     particularly in the MPEG-2 broadcast networks to stop an intruder 
     gaining information by observing the identity of the communicating 
     parties and the volume of their traffic.  IPsec can not provide 
     this service, however this is possible with L2 security systems. 
    
   - Layer L2 terminal authentication.  This will be part of the key 
     management.  It will be performed during the initial key exchange 
     and authentication phase. 
    
   - For active threats: ULE source authentication and data integrity 
     are required, using techniques such as message authentication code 
     and digital signatures.  Sequence numbers are required to stop 
     replay attacks.  Therefore, L2 data integrity/authentication is 
     optional, but still important in environments in which several 
     independent networks share a single transmission resource.  In 
     addition, functions to determine the integrity of control and 
     management messages in MPEG-2 transmission networks are another 
     optional requirement. 
 
   - End-to-end security (such as IPsec and TLS) and ULE link security 
     should work in parallel without obstructing each other. 
    
   - Decoupling of ULE key management functions from ULE encryption.  
     This will allow the independent definition of these systems such 
     as the re-use of existing security management systems (e.g. GSAKMP 
     [msec-gsakmp] and GDOI [msec-gdoi]), plus other systems such as 
     DVB-RCS [ETSI-DVBRCS] and/or the development of new systems, as 
     required. 
    
   - There is a need to take into account the two cases described in 
     [ipdvb-arch] for unidirectional and bi-directional transfers. 
    
   - Other general requirements are: 
 
    
     Protection of the management system and the infrastructure from 
     unauthorised people. ULE encryption will provide partial 
     protection through the key management procedures and data 
     encryption. 
  
Expires Feb. 2005                                             [page 5] 
INTERNET DRAFT  Encapsulation for IP over MPEG-2/DVB         Sept. 2005 
 
 
      
     Operational issues: Because of the possible large coverage of a 
     broadcast transmission network, it may be required to deliver data 
     to many different countries that may have different security 
     legislation (related to authorized encryption algorithms and the 
     length of keys). Therefore the ULE security system should allow a 
     wide range of security parameters during the negotiation phase in 
     order to offer flexibility to operators.  In ULE security, the 
     choice of such algorithms will be decided by the key management 
     system in use. 
      
     Compatibility with other networking functions: Other networking 
     functions such as NAT (Network Address Translation) [RFC 3715] or 
     TCP acceleration can be used in a wireless DVB networks. The ULE 
     security solution should be compatible with functions such as 
     NAT/NAPT, IPsec, TLS, etc.  This requirement is met by ULE 
     security. 
      
     Traceability (such as using intrusion detection systems):To 
     monitor transmission network (e.g. using log files to record the 
     activities on the network).  This is out of scope for ULE 
     security. 
    
    
   4. IPsec and MPEG-2 Transmission Networks 
    
   IPsec supports two modes of use: transport mode and tunnel mode.  In 
   transport mode, AH and ESP provide protection primarily for next 
   layer protocols; in tunnel mode, AH and ESP are applied to tunnelled 
   IP packets. In both modes, data integrity is provided and in 
   addition, ESP provides the data privacy service as well.  
    
   It is possible to use IPsec to secure ULE links.  The major 
   advantage of IPsec is its wide implementation in IP routers and 
   hosts. The Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol 
   [RFC2401BIS] describes security services for traffic at the IP 
   layer. That architecture primarily defines services for Internet 
   Protocol (IP) unicast packets, as well as manually configured IP 
   multicast packets. 
    
   However, IP Multicast is considered as a major service over MPEG-2 
   Transmission Networks. A document produced by the IETF msece Working 
   Group on IPsec extensions for multicast [msec-ipsec-ext] describes 
   extensions to [RFC2401BIS] that further define the IPsec security 
   architecture for packets that carry a multicast address in the IP 
   destination field, allowing these to remain IP multicast packets. 
    
    
   4.1 Tunnel mode use of IPsec for multicast 
    
   In the context of MPEG-2 transmission links, if IPsec is used to 
   secure a ULE link, then the ULE gateways and Receivers are 
  
Expires Feb. 2005                                             [page 6] 
INTERNET DRAFT  Encapsulation for IP over MPEG-2/DVB         Sept. 2005 
 
 
   equivalent to the security gateways in IPsec terminology. A security 
   gateway implementation of IPsec using the multicast extensions MUST 
   use tunnel mode. In particular, the security gateway must use the 
   tunnel mode to encapsulate incoming fragments.  
    
   With IPsec tunnel mode, there are two challenges: First, if the 
   destination of an IP multicast packet is changed it will no longer 
   be properly routed.  Secondly, IP multicast routing protocols also 
   typically create multicast distribution trees based on the source 
   address. An IPsec security gateway that changes the source address 
   of an IP multicast packet, again this will cause multicast routing 
   problems.  The [msec-ipsec-ext] document defines a way for retaining 
   both the IP source and destination addresses of the inner IP header 
   to allow IP multicast routing protocols to route the packet 
   irrespective of the packet being IPsec protected. This 
   interpretation of tunnel mode is known as tunnel mode with address 
   preservation. 
    
    
   4.2 IPsec and L2 security 
    
   IPsec in transport mode can be used for end-to-end security 
   transparently of MPEG-2 transmission links with no impact. 
    
   However, if IPsec is used to secure ULE links, then it must be used 
   in tunnel mode. Such usage has the following disadvantages: 
    
   - There is a need to protect the identity of ULE 
     encapsulator/Receivers over the ULE broadcast medium; IPsec can 
     not provide this service. 
    
   - There is an extra overheads associated with using IPsec in tunnel 
     mode, i.e. the extra IP header (IPv4 or IPv6). 
    
   - Multicast is considered as a major service over ULE links.  The 
     current IPsec specifications [RFC 2401] only define a pairwise 
     tunnel between two IPsec devices with manual keying. Work in 
     progress [msec-ipsec-ext] is defining the extra detail needed for 
     multicast and to use the tunnel mode with address preservation.  
     In the ULE link context, in addition to the IPsec tunnelling 
     overhead, the source and destination address preservation means 
     that these IP addresses are broadcast in the clear.  This provides 
     an opportunity to intercept the traffic information (weakening the 
     ability to provide the identity hiding).  However [msec-ipsec-ext] 
     mentions the possibility that multicast data is sent through a 
     service provider network, and is encapsulated under a different IP 
     multicast address while in the provider network. The source 
     address of the encapsulating (outside) IP header could be changed 
     to that of the ULE gateway. 
    
 
 
  
Expires Feb. 2005                                             [page 7] 
INTERNET DRAFT  Encapsulation for IP over MPEG-2/DVB         Sept. 2005 
 
 
5. Motivation for ULE link-layer security 
    
   Examination of the threat analysis and security requirements in 
   sections 2 and 3, has shown that there is a need to provide link-
   layer (L2) security in MPEG-2 transmission networks employing ULE. 
   Particularly when network-layer and transport-layer security (e.g. 
   IPsec, TLS) are insufficient. 
 
   ULE link security is therefore considered an additional security 
   mechanism to IP, transport, and application layer security, not a 
   replacement. It should provide similar functions to that of IPsec 
   [IPsec], but in addition provides link confidentiality and Receiver 
   identity hiding. End-to-end security, IPsec and ULE link security 
   should work in parallel:  IPsec providing the end-to-end security 
   between hosts and ULE providing the security over the MPEG-2 
   transmission link.  However, no direct interaction between the IPsec 
   and the ULE security system is invisaged.  
    
   A modular design to ULE Security may allow it to use and benefit 
   from IETF key management protocols, such as the MSEC [msec-
   gsakmp]and GDOI [msec-gdoi, RFC 3547].  This does not preclude the 
   use of other key management methods in scenarios that benefit from 
   this. 
    
    
5.1 Link security below the Encapsulation layer 
    
   Link layer security can be provided in the MPEG-TS level (below 
   ULE). MPEG-TS encryption encrypts all TS Packets sent with a 
   specific PID value. However an MPEG-TS may multiplex several IP 
   streams using a common PID. Therefore all multiplexed traffic will 
   share the same security keys.   
    
   This has the following advantages: 
    
   - The bit stream sent on the broadcast network does not expose any 
     L2 or L3 headers, specifically all addresses, type fields, and 
     length fields are encrypted prior to transmission. 
 
   - This method does not preclude the use of IPsec, or any other form 
     of higher-layer security. 
    
   This had the following disadvantages: 
    
   - Each ULE Receiver needs to decrypt all MPEG-2 TS Packets with a 
     matching PID, possibly including those that are not required to be 
     forwarded. 
    
   - ULE Receivers will be able to see the private traffic destined to 
     other ULE Receivers, since they share a common key. 
 

  
Expires Feb. 2005                                             [page 8] 
INTERNET DRAFT  Encapsulation for IP over MPEG-2/DVB         Sept. 2005 
 
 
   - If the key is compromised, then this will impact several ULE 
     Receivers. 
    
    
5.2 Link security as a part of the Encapsulation layer 
    
   Therefore major advantages for ULE link security are: 
    
   - The protection of the complete ULE Protocol Data Unit (PDU) 
     including IP addresses [RFC 3819]. 
    
   - Ability to protect the identity of the Receiver within the MPEG-2 
     transmission network. 
 
   - Efficient protection of IP multicast over ULE links. 
 
   - Transparency to the use of Network Address Translation (NATs) [RFC 
     3715] and TCP Performance Enhancing Proxies (PEP) [RFC3135], which 
     require the ability to inspect and modify the packets sent over 
     the ULE link. 
    
   - This method does not preclude the use of IPsec. IPsec also 
     provides a proven security architecture defining key exchange 
     mechanisms and the ability to use a range of cryptographic 
     algorithms. ULE security can make use of these mechanisms and 
     algorithms. 
 
   In some current encapsulation methods, e.g. MPE [DVB-DAT], 
   encryption of the MAC address requires each Receiver to decrypt all 
   encrypted data sent using a TS Logical Channel (PID), before it can 
   then filter the PDUs that match the set of MAC/NPA addresses that 
   the Receiver wishes to receive, therefore encryption of the MPE MAC 
   address is not permitted in such systems. For ULE security, an 
   optional support for Layer 2 MAC/NPA address hiding should be 
   provided. 
    
   Examining the threat analysis in section 2, has shown that 
   protection of ULE link from eavesdropping and ULE Receiver identity 
   hiding are major requirements. Such requirements can be met using 
   ULE link encryption. 
    
   In the context of active threats in MPEG-2 transmission networks, 
   ULE source authentication is required by the ULE Receivers. Attacks 
   such as masquerading, modification of messages and injecting IP 
   packets are more difficult. However, such attacks on individual ULE 
   Receivers are possible, and can pass unnoticed by the ULE network 
   operators or ISPs. Therefore new lightweight data integrity methods 
   or procedures can be provided by the ULE security system 
    
   The ULE security system should be incremental and provide ULE link 
   encryption as a basic service.  Additional services such as data 

  
Expires Feb. 2005                                             [page 9] 
INTERNET DRAFT  Encapsulation for IP over MPEG-2/DVB         Sept. 2005 
 
 
   integrity and sequence number should be only provided where it is 
   needed. 
    
    
6. Summary 
    
   This document analyses a set of threats and security requirements. 
   It also defines the requirements for ULE security and states the 
   motivation for Link security as a part of the Encapsulation layer.  
   In summary, there is a need for L2 encryption, ULE Receiver identity 
   hiding, L2 source authentications and protection against insertion 
   of other data into the ULE stream. 
    
 
7. Acknowledgments 
    
   The authors acknowledge the help and advice from Gorry Fairhurst 
   (University of Aberdeen) in the preparation of this draft. 
    
    
8. Security Considerations 
    
   Link-level (L2) encryption of IP traffic is commonly used in 
   broadcast/radio links to supplement End-to-End security (e.g. 
   provided by TLS, SSH, Open PGP, S/MIME, IPsec). A common objective 
   is to provide the same level of privacy as wired links. An ISP or 
   User may also wish to provide end-to-end security services to the 
   end-users (based on the well known mechanisms such as IPsec).  
    
   This document provides a threat analysis and derives the security 
   requirements to provide optional link encryption and link-level 
   integrity / authentication of the SNDU payload.  
    
    
9. References 
    
9.1 Normative References  
    
   [ISO-MPEG] ISO/IEC DIS 13818-1 "Information technology -- Generic 
   coding of moving pictures and associated audio information: 
   Systems", International Standards Organisation (ISO). 
    
   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key Words for Use in RFCs to Indicate 
   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   [ULE] Fairhurst, G., Collini-Nocker, "Ultra Lightweight 
   Encapsulation (ULE) for transmission of IP datagrams over an MPEG-2 
   Transport Stream", <draft-ietf-ule-06.txt>, IETF Work in Progress. 
    
   [ipdvb-arch] M.J. Montpetit ed., et al, "Framework for transmission 
   of IP datagrams over MPEG-2 Networks", <draft-ietf-ipdvb-arch-
   04.txt>, IETF Work in Progress. 
  
Expires Feb. 2005                                            [page 10] 
INTERNET DRAFT  Encapsulation for IP over MPEG-2/DVB         Sept. 2005 
 
 
    
9.2 Informative References 
         
   [Bellovin] Bellovin, S., "Problem Area for the IP Security 
   Protocols", Computer Communications Review 2:19, pp. 32-48, April 
   1989. http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~smb/ . 
    
   [ETSI-DVBRCS] "Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB) -- interaction 
   channel for satellite distribution systems", ETSI EN 301 790 V1.4.1 
   (2005-04) 
    
   [IPsec] http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/wg-
   dir.html#Security%20Area. RFCs 2401, 2402 and 2406 
    
   [msec] http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/msec-charter.html 
    
   [msec-gsakmp] H Harney (SPARTA ), et al, "GSAKMP: Group Secure 
   Association Group Management Protocol", <draft-ietf-msec-gsakmp-sec-
   10.txt>, IETF Work in Progress. 
    
   [msec-gdoi], RFC 3547] M. Baugher , et al, "GDOI: The Group Domain 
   of Interpretation", RFC 3547. 
    
   [msec-ipsec-ext] Weis B., et al, "Multicast Extensions to the 
   Security Architecture for the Internet", <draft-ietf-msec-ipsec-
   extensions-00.txt>, IETF Work in Progress. 
    
   [NAT, RFC 3715] B. Aboba and W Dixson, "IPsec-Network Address 
   Translation (NAT) Compatibility Requirements" 
    
   [TLS] http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/tls-charter.html 
    
   [RFC3135] Border, J., Kojo, M., Griner, J., Montenegro, G., and Z. 
   Shelby, "Performance Enhancing Proxies Intended to Mitigate Link-
   Related Degradations", RFC 3135, June 2001. 
    
   [RFC2401] Kent, S., et al, "Security Architecture for the Internet 
   Protocol", RFC 2401, November 1998. 
    
   [RFC2401BIS] Kent, S. and Seo K., "Security Architecture for the 
   Internet Protocol", draft-ietf-ipsec-rfc2401bis-06.txt, March, 2005. 
    
   [RFC3819] Karn, P., Bormann, C., Fairhurst, G., Grossman, D., 
   Ludwig, R., Mahdavi, J., Montenegro, G., Touch, J., and L. Wood, 
   "Advice for Internet Subnetwork Designers", BCP 89, RFC 3819, July 
   2004. 
    
    
    
    
    
    
  
Expires Feb. 2005                                            [page 11] 
INTERNET DRAFT  Encapsulation for IP over MPEG-2/DVB         Sept. 2005 
 
 
10.Authors' Addresses 
    
Haitham Cruickshank   
Centre for Communications System Research (CCSR)   
University of Surrey  
Guildford, Surrey, GU2 7XH   
UK   
Email: h.cruickshank@surrey.ac.uk   
 
Sunil Iyengar   
Centre for Communications System Research (CCSR)   
University of Surrey  
Guildford, Surrey, GU2 7XH   
UK   
Email: S.Iyengar@surrey.ac.uk   
 
Stephane Combes   
Research Department/Advanced Telecom Satellite Systems  
Alcatel Space, Toulouse  
France  
E-Mail: stephane.combes@space.alcatel.fr  
 
Laurence Duquerroy   
Research Department/Advanced Telecom Satellite Systems  
Alcatel Space, Toulouse  
France  
E-Mail: Laurence.Duquerroy@space.alcatel.fr  
 
 
11. IPR Notices  
  
11.1 Intellectual Property Statement  
     
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any  
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed   
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described  
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such   
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that  
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC   
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.  
     
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any  
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an  
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use  
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this  
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository  
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.  
     
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any  
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary  
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement  
  
Expires Feb. 2005                                            [page 12] 
INTERNET DRAFT  Encapsulation for IP over MPEG-2/DVB         Sept. 2005 
 
 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-  
   ipr@ietf.org.  
     
    
11.2 Disclaimer of Validity  
     
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on  
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE  
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE  
   INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR  
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF  
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED  
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
     
     
12. Copyright Statement  
     
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  
     
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions  
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors  
   retain all their rights.  
    
    
13. IANA Considerations   
    
   This document does not define any protocol and does not require any 
   IANA assignments. 
    























  
Expires Feb. 2005                                            [page 13] 