

 Internet Draft                                                 B. Wyld 
 Document: draft-ietf-speechsc-protocol-eval-02                  Editor 
 Expires: October 2003                                         Eloquant 
 Version 02                                                   June 2003 
  
                        SPEECHSC Protocol Evaluation 
  
 Status of this Memo  
     
    This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
    all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  
         
    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
    other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
    Drafts.  
         
    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
    documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
    as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
    progress."  
         
    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  
         http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at  
         http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.  
         
 Abstract  
     
    This document is the Protocol Evaluation Document for the SPEECHSC 
    Working Group.  Section 3 provides the summary of the  individual 
    protocol comparisons (in the sections 4-N following) against the 
    SPEECHSC requirements [1]. 
   
 Table of Contents 
     
    1.   Overview...................................................2 
    2.   Protocol Proposals.........................................3 
    3.   Protocol Evaluation Summary and Conclusion.................3 
    4.   Session Control : ôBeepö Compliance Evaluation (Jerry Carter)
         3 
       4.1.   General notes:........................................3 
       4.2.   Analysis of General Requirements......................4 
       4.3.   Analysis of Duplexing and Parallel Operation 
       Requirements..................................................4 
       4.4.   Analysis of additional considerations (non-normative).5 
       4.5.   Analysis of Security considerations...................5 
       4.6.   Interaction Model.....................................5 
    5.   Session Control : ôSIPö Complience Evaluation (Rajiv 
    Dharmadhikari)...................................................5 
       5.1.   Introduction..........................................5 
       5.2.   Analysis of General Requirements......................6 
       5.3.   Analysis of Duplexing and Parallel Operation 
       Requirements..................................................7 
       5.4.   Analysis of additional considerations (non-normative).7 
       5.5.   Analysis of Security considerations...................7 
       5.6.   Other Criteria........................................7 
       5.7.   Interaction Model.....................................8 
    6.   Session Control : ôRTSPö Complience Evaluation (Brian Wyld)8 
       6.1.   General Introduction..................................8 
  
  
 Wyld                    Expires û October 2003               [Page 1] 
                 SPEECHSC Protocol Evaluation Template      June 2003 
  
  
       6.2.   Analysis of General Requirements......................9 
       6.3.   Analysis of Duplexing and Parallel Operation 
       Requirements..................................................9 
       6.4.   Analysis of additional considerations (non-normative).9 
       6.5.   Analysis of Security considerations..................10 
       6.6.   Interaction Model....................................10 
    7.   Session Control : ôWeb Servicesö Complience Evaluation 
    (Stephane H. Maes)..............................................10 
       7.1.   General Notes:.......................................10 
       7.2.   Analysis of General Requirements.....................11 
       7.3.   Analysis of Duplexing and Parallel Operation 
       Requirements.................................................13 
       7.4.   Analysis of additional considerations (non-normative)13 
       7.5.   Analysis of Security considerations..................14 
       7.6.   Interaction Model....................................14 
    8.   Resource Control : ôMRCPö Complience Evaluation (Sarvi 
    Shanmugham).....................................................14 
       8.1.   General..............................................14 
       8.2.   Analysis of TTS requirements.........................15 
       8.3.   Analysis of ASR requirements.........................16 
       8.4.   Analysis of Speaker Identification and Verification 
       Requirements.................................................17 
    9.   Resource Control : ôRTSPö Complience Evaluation (Brian Wyld)
         18 
       9.1.   General Introduction.................................18 
       9.2.   Analysis of TTS requirements.........................18 
       9.3.   Analysis of ASR requirements.........................18 
       9.4.   Analysis of Speaker Identification and Verification 
       Requirements.................................................19 
    10.  Security Considerations...................................19 
    11.  References................................................19 
        
      1. Overview  
         
    This document provides the template for the content for the 
    SPEECHSC Protocol Evaluation document.    
         
    This section will contain an overview of the process. 
     
    Section 2 contains a list of the proposed protocols submitted to 
    WG. These protocols are in fact of 3 different natures: 
       - a generic service/resource access system (Web Services) 
       - æclassicÆ session control protocols for media channels (BEEP, 
          SIP, RTSP), of which RTSP also provides resource control. 
       - a specific ASR/TTS resource control message set designed to 
          be tunneled in a session control protocol (MRCP) 
  
    Section 3 provides a conclusion of the evaluations of the proposed 
    protocols against the Requirements and framework, and recommends a 
    direction for the creation of the speechsc protocol.  
  
    Sections 4-7 provide the individual protocol evaluations for the 
    protocols providing session control against the SPEECHSC 
    requirements [1] that relate to these needs. 
     
    Sections 8 and 9 provide individual protocol evaluations for 
    protocols providing resource control against the SPEECHSC resource 
    control requirements. 
         

  
  
 Wyld                    Expires û October 2003               [Page 2] 
                 SPEECHSC Protocol Evaluation Template      June 2003 
  
  
      2. Protocol Proposals 
  
    This section contains a list of the existing protocols submitted to 
    the SPEECHSC WG for consideration by the deadline.  
          1. BEEP 
          2. SIP 
          3. RTSP 
          4. MRCP (initial submission) 
          5. Web Services 
     
     
    Each protocol section contains a review of the protocolÆs level of 
    compliance to each of the SPEECHSC Requirements [1] as derived from 
    the proposed protocol documents. The following key will be used to 
    identify the level of compliancy of each of the individual 
    protocols: 
     
    T = Total Complience.  Meets the requirement fully. 
    P = Partial Compliance.  Meets some aspect of the requirement. 
    P+ = Complience possible. Could meet the requirement with ônaturalö 
    evolution of the protocol.  
    F = Failed Compliance.  Does not meet the requirement.  
     
      3. Protocol Evaluation Summary and Conclusion 
     
    In summary, it appears that the decomposition of the problem into 
    session control and resource control gives rise to: 
     
     - SIP is a good fit for session control for the speechsc 
    requirements 
     
     - MRCP is a good start for resource control for the speechsc 
    requirements 
     
    The conclusion for the protocol evaluation is therefore to: 
       - create a new speechsc specific resource control only 
          protocol, based on MRCP 
       - use sessions that have been established by SIP (and defines a 
          means of referring to these sessions) 
     
     
      4. Session Control : ôBeepö Compliance Evaluation (Jerry Carter) 

         4.1. General notes: 
     
    The BEEP protocol provides a general framework for establishing  
    connections, defining new channels, negotiating security, and 
    performing user authentication. Protocols build on beep must define 
    a profile detailing how connections are established and must define 
    a set of messages which will be delivered using BEEP. The protocol 
    is peer-to-peer although client-server style requests could be 
    easily handled. 
     
    The following sub-sections compare each individual requirement 
    against the protocol. 




  
  
 Wyld                    Expires û October 2003               [Page 3] 
                 SPEECHSC Protocol Evaluation Template      June 2003 
  
  
         4.2. Analysis of General Requirements 

           4.2.1. Reuse existing protocols [5.1] 
     
    T: Beep is a published protocol, listed as RFC 3080 
    (http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3080.txt). 

           4.2.2. Maintain Existing Protocol Integrity [5.2] 
     
    P: BEEP assumes that protocols, such as SpeechSC, will add 
    messages. 
     
    Supporting multiple clients using TCP may require some effort. 

           4.2.3. Avoid Duplicating Existing Protocols [5.3] 
     
    T: Building SpeechSC over BEEP would allow the specification to 
    focus on managing the ASR, media server, and SI/SV resources and 
    the possible interactions between them. The operations for 
    establishing connections and defining new channels would be handled 
    by BEEP. 

           4.2.4. Protocol efficiency [5.4] 
     
    P+: BEEP imposes a small overhead (roughly 40 bytes per message). 
    It provides a mechanism for supporting multiple communication 
    channels over a single port. If grouping of requests is desired, 
    this would need to be handled by grouping the SpeechSC messages. 

           4.2.5. Explicit invocation of services [5.5] 
     
    T: Though it is primarily a peer-to-peer protocol, BEEP may act as 
    a traditional client server protocol. 

           4.2.6. Server Location and Load Balancing [5.6] 
     
    P+: This functionality is not provided by BEEP. This would need to 
    be added as an extension. 

           4.2.7. Simultaneous services [5.7] 
     
    T: Multiple channels providing different services is possible. Each 
    service is simply a message type which is passed to the server 
    using BEEP. 

           4.2.8. Multiple media sessions [5.8] 
     
    F: BEEP assumes a 1:1 using TCP/IP. 

         4.3. Analysis of Duplexing and Parallel Operation Requirements 

           4.3.1. Duplexing and Parallel Operation Requirements [9] 
     
    P+: Parallel operations may be obtained using multiple channels. A 
    message on one channel could potentially interrupt activity 
    happening on the second. BEEP is very flexible allowing the server 
    to implement whatever behavior is desired. 
  
  
 Wyld                    Expires û October 2003               [Page 4] 
                 SPEECHSC Protocol Evaluation Template      June 2003 
  
  
           4.3.2. Full Duplex operation [9.1.1] 
     
    T: BEEP is a peer-to-peer protocol allowing full duplex 
    communication on a single channel or parallel communication on 
    multiple channels. 

           4.3.3. Multiple services in parallel [9.1.2] 
     
    P+: Multiple services may be run on separate channels. Merging or 
    T-ing of RTP must be implemented by the server. 

           4.3.4. Combination of services 
    TBD 

         4.4. Analysis of additional considerations (non-normative) 
    TBD 

         4.5. Analysis of Security considerations 

           4.5.1. Security Considerations [11] 
     
    P+: BEEP offers a mechanism for managing security and user 
    authentication.  
    SpeechSC requires managing multiple data streams and some form of 
    unified authentication / security might be a goal. If so, BEEP 
    security should be revisited with this in mind. 
     

         4.6. Interaction Model 
    TBC : TO BE COMPLETED : Analysis of the interaction model of the 
    protocol during the ædataÆ phase (ie after session establishment) 
    and its suitability for speechsc. 
     
     
      5. Session Control : ôSIPö Complience Evaluation (Rajiv 
         Dharmadhikari) 

         5.1. Introduction 
    SIP is a protocol for initiating, modifying, and terminating 
    multimedia sessions. The protocol is considered an IETF standard 
    and its specifications can be found in [2]. The following sections 
    provide a general statement with regards to the applicability of 
    SIP as the control protocol for SPEECHSC.  
     

           5.1.1. SIP General Applicability 
    SIP is a pretty mature, well understood, and frequently used  
    session establishment protocol. It has gone through multiple 
    revisions in the IETF standard process. There are number of 
    commercial and public domain implementations of SIP that are 
    available. Because of its close resemblance to HTTP and being a 
    text based protocol, there are large number of SIP application 
    developers available.  
     



  
  
 Wyld                    Expires û October 2003               [Page 5] 
                 SPEECHSC Protocol Evaluation Template      June 2003 
  
  
           5.1.2. SIP Use in VOIP environment 
    SIP is already being used to establish and redirect RTP streams 
    from various end points. The SPEECHSC requires a protocol for 
    controlling ASR, TTS and SV resources. When these resources are 
    deployed in a VOIP network that requires them to process media 
    carried in RTP, the SIP protocol is used in lot of deployments. 
    Rather than inventing a new control protocol and introducing 
    operational aspects of the new protocol, SIP can be reused for 
    controlling SPEECHSC resources.  
     

         5.2. Analysis of General Requirements 

           5.2.1. Reuse existing protocols [5.1] 
    T: SIP is an existing, widely used, and mature protocol defined in 
    [2]. 

           5.2.2. Maintain Existing Protocol Integrity [5.2] 
    T: Existing SIP methods and header fields will not be changed when 
    SIP is used to control SPEECHSC resources. In case, if extensions 
    are required, SIP allows carriage of custom payload in the body. 
    This payload is understood only by UAs and it does not impact 
    protocol integrity. 
     

           5.2.3. Avoid Duplicating Existing Protocols [5.3] 
    T: Lot of the requirements for SPEECHSC operation can easily be 
    satisfied by SIP, e.g. establishing RTP streams or redirecting 
    them. Without SIP, new SPEECHSC protocol will have to duplicate lot 
    of session management functionality. 
     

           5.2.4. Protocol efficiency [5.4] 
    T: SIP is a very lightweight protocol when run over TCP or UDP. It 
    leverages efficiency available in TCP and UDP protocols that have 
    been around for over 20 years. 

           5.2.5. Explicit invocation of services [5.5] 
    T: SIP URI mechanism allows invocation of different services. 

           5.2.6. Server Location and Load Balancing [5.6] 
    P+: SIP employs standard DNS name resolution for locating 
    resources. SIP itself does not provide load balancing features. 
    Application level load balancers can be used to load balance SIP 
    requests. 
     

           5.2.7. Simultaneous services [5.7] 
    T: SIP allows simultaneous invocation of different services. SIP 
    allows forking or splitting the same media stream to different end 
    points as defined in [2]. 
     

           5.2.8. Multiple media sessions [5.8] 
    T: SIP uses SDP to describe RTP stream characteristics. This allows 
    the control of direction of RTP stream such as bi-directional or 

  
  
 Wyld                    Expires û October 2003               [Page 6] 
                 SPEECHSC Protocol Evaluation Template      June 2003 
  
  
    uni-directional. SIP allows a UA to establish sessions with 
    multiple UAs for the same session. 
     

         5.3. Analysis of Duplexing and Parallel Operation Requirements 

           5.3.1. Duplexing and Parallel Operation Requirements [9] 
    T: SPEECHSC resource is a SIP UA that can handle session requests 
    from different UAs. 

           5.3.2. Full Duplex operation [9.1.1] 
    T: Each SIP UA consists of a UAC and a UAS. This allows for full 
    duplex operation. 

           5.3.3. Multiple services in parallel [9.1.2] 
    T: SIP allows simultaneous invocation of different services. SIP 
    allows forking or splitting the same media stream to different end 
    points as defined in [2]. 
     

           5.3.4. Combination of services 
    T: See 5.6.3. SIP UA can invoke different services and combine the 
    results. 

         5.4. Analysis of additional considerations (non-normative) 
    TBD 

         5.5. Analysis of Security considerations 

           5.5.1. Security Considerations [11] 
    T: SIP protocol employs different authentication schemes that are 
    widely used in IP based protocols. 

         5.6. Other Criteria 
    The following criteria were also defined by the evaluator of SIP. 

           5.6.1. Ability to establish session between SPEECHSC client 
               and SPEECHSC resource 
    T: SIP User Agent can establish a session with another SIP User 
    Agent. 

           5.6.2. Ability to terminate session by either SPEECHSC 
               client or SPEECHSC resource 
    T: SIP User Agent can terminate a session with another SIP User 
    Agent. 

           5.6.3. Support reliable sequencing and delivery between 
               SPEECHSC client and SPEECHSC resource 
    P: SIP can be run over TCP or UDP. When run over TCP, this 
    requirement is easily satisfied. When run over UDP, SIP User Agent 
    is required to implement logic to ensure reliable sequencing and 
    delivery.  





  
  
 Wyld                    Expires û October 2003               [Page 7] 
                 SPEECHSC Protocol Evaluation Template      June 2003 
  
  
           5.6.4. Ability for SPEECHSC client to coordinate SPEECHSC 
               resources on different machines for a single session 
    T: SPEECHSC client can use SIP to establish SIP sessions with 
    different machines. 

           5.6.5. Ability for SPEECHSC resource to handle multiple 
               SPEECHSC clients 
    T: SPEECHSC resource is a SIP UA that can handle session requests 
    from different UAs. 

           5.6.6. The SPEECHSC resource should be able to generate 
               asynchronous events or unsolicited messages 
    T: SIP allows asynchronous events or unsolicited messages to be 
    generated using SUBSCRIBE/NOTIFY mechanism. 

           5.6.7. The SPEECHSC client and resource should have ability 
               for authenticating each other 
    T: SIP protocol employs different authentication schemes that are 
    widely used in IP based protocols. 

           5.6.8. Ability to determine success or failure from both 
               SPEECHSC client and SPEECHSC resource side 
    T: The protocol has following response codes: 200 for success, 3xx, 
    4xx, and 5xx for failure. 

           5.6.9. Support for versioning between SPEECHSC client and 
               SPEECHSC resource 
    P+: This will require an additional header or element in the    
    body of SIP message for versioning. The current version field is 
    intended for SIP protocol version.  
     

         5.7. Interaction Model 
     
    Speechsc has certain needs related to the interaction model of the 
    protocol during the ædataÆ phase (ie after session establishment). 
    Specifically, speechsc will require that the resource server can 
    send unsolicited messages/transactions to the resource client to 
    return results and indicate events. 
     
    SIP messages in the data phase can flow in both directions (client 
    to server as well as server to client). SIP INFO message can be 
    used for this purpose. The SIP INFO is intended for mid-call 
    message semantics. With this message, transactions can be 
    initiated/defined by both ends.  
     
    SIP therefore has an interaction model suited to the speechsc 
    model, which supports peer-peer messaging with a basic 
    transactional symmetrical request/response model. 
     
      6. Session Control : ôRTSPö Complience Evaluation (Brian Wyld) 

         6.1. General Introduction 
    RTSP is an existing protocol, orientated towards audio playback and 
    recording. As such, it has support for RTP session control, with 
    SDP used for session description, and a message set allowing 
    operation as a player/recorder with audio ôVCRö controls. 
     
  
  
 Wyld                    Expires û October 2003               [Page 8] 
                 SPEECHSC Protocol Evaluation Template      June 2003 
  
  
    Only the session control is evaluated here (see later section for 
    evaluation of the resource control elements) 
     
    The following sub-sections compare each individual requirement 
    against the protocol. 

         6.2. Analysis of General Requirements 

           6.2.1. Reuse existing protocols [5.1] 
    T: RTSP/RTP/SDP would be reused. 

           6.2.2. Maintain Existing Protocol Integrity [5.2] 
    T: The extensions to RTSP to allow speechsc use would be in the 
    spirit of the protocol, and would not break existing servers or 
    clients. 

           6.2.3. Avoid Duplicating Existing Protocols [5.3] 
    T: Using RTSP would not recreate it. 

           6.2.4. Protocol efficiency [5.4] 
    T: RTSP is a text based protocol, but is relatively succinct as 
    messages are specific to their operation. 

           6.2.5. Explicit invocation of services [5.5] 
    T: RTSP service invocation is sufficient. 

           6.2.6. Server Location and Load Balancing [5.6] 
    F: RTSP does not address this topic; however it can be used with 
    other IETF protocols such as SLP or UDDI to do so. 

           6.2.7. Simultaneous services [5.7] 
    T: RTSP allows simultaneous invocation of services on the same or 
    different control channel. 

           6.2.8. Multiple media sessions [5.8] 
    T: RTSP allows multiple media sessions. 

         6.3. Analysis of Duplexing and Parallel Operation Requirements 

           6.3.1. Duplexing and Parallel Operation Requirements [9] 
    T: RTSP allows session setup that should fulfill these 
    requirements. 

           6.3.2. Full Duplex operation [9.1.1] 
    T: RTSP can create a full duplex session. 

           6.3.3. Multiple services in parallel [9.1.2] 
    T: RTSP can request multiple operations of the same type on the 
    same session. 

           6.3.4. Combination of services 
    T: RTSP can request multiple operations of different types on the 
    same session. 

         6.4. Analysis of additional considerations (non-normative) 
    TBD 
  
  
 Wyld                    Expires û October 2003               [Page 9] 
                 SPEECHSC Protocol Evaluation Template      June 2003 
  
  
         6.5. Analysis of Security considerations 

           6.5.1. Security Considerations [11] 
    F: RTSP provides no specific security functionality at all, but 
    depends on other IETF security protocols (as it uses TCP) to pre-
    validate and protect the sessions. 

         6.6. Interaction Model 
    Speechsc has certain needs related to the interaction model of the 
    protocol during the ædataÆ phase (ie after session establishment). 
    Specifically, speechsc will require that the resource server can 
    send unsolicited messages/transactions to the resource client to 
    return results and indicate events. 
     
    RTSP messages in the data phase can flow in both directions (client 
    to server as well as server to client). Transactions can be 
    initiated/defined by both ends. Currently most of the defined 
    transactions are C-S; however there already exists an ANNOUNCE 
    message transaction that is used to transit general content in both 
    directions (and is in fact used by MRCP to transport its resource 
    control messages). 
     
    RTSP has therefore an interaction model suited to the speechsc 
    model, which supports peer-peer messaging with a basic 
    transactional symmetrical request/response model. 
     
      7. Session Control : ôWeb Servicesö Complience Evaluation 
         (Stephane H. Maes) 

         7.1. General Notes: 
    Speech engines (speech recognition, speaker, recognition, speech  
    synthesis, recorders and playback, NL parsers, and any other speech 
    processing engines (e.g. speech detection, barge-in detection etc)  
    etc...) as well as audio sub-systems (audio input and output  
    sub-systems) can be considered as web services that can be  
    described and asynchronously programmed via WSDL (on top of SOAP),  
    combined in a flow described via WSFL, discovered via UDDI and  
    asynchronously controlled via SOAP that also enables  
    asynchronous exchanges between the engines. 
      
    This solution presents the advantage to provide flexibility,  
    scalability and extensibility while reusing an existing framework  
    that fits the evolution of the web: web services and XML protocols 
    [WS1] 
     
    According to the web services framework, speech engines (audio  
    sub-systems, engines, speech processors) can be defined as web 
    services 
    that are characterized by an interface that consists of some of the  
    following ports: 
        - "control in" port(s): It sets the engine context, i.e. all 
    the 
        settings required for a speech engine to run. It may include  
        addresses where to get or send the streamed audio or results. 
        - "control out" port(s): It produces the non-audio engine 
    output 
        (i.e. results and events). It may also involve some session  
        control exchanges. 
        - "audio in" port(s): It receives streamed input data.  
  
  
 Wyld                    Expires û October 2003              [Page 10] 
                 SPEECHSC Protocol Evaluation Template      June 2003 
  
  
        - "audio out" port(s): It produces streamed output data.  
     
    Audio sub-systems can also be treated as web services that can  
    produce streamed data or play incoming streamed data as specified 
    by 
    the control parameters. 
     
    The "control in" or "control out" messages can be out-of-band or  
    sent or received interleaved with "audio in or out" data. This can  
    be determined in the context (setup) of the web services.  
     
    Speech engines and audio sub-systems are pre-programmed as web  
    services and composed into more advanced services. Once programmed  
    by the application / controller, audio-sub-systems and engines 
    await 
    an incoming event (established audio session, etc...) to execute 
    the 
    speech processing that they have been programmed to do and send the  
    results as programmed.  
     
    Speech engines as web services are typically programmed to handle  
    completely a particular speech processing task, including handling  
    of possible errors. For example, as speech engine is programmed to  
    perform recognition of the next incoming utterance with a 
    particular 
    grammar, to send result to a NL parser and to contact a particular  
    error recovery process if particular errors occur. 
     
    The following sub-sections compare each individual requirement 
    against the protocol. 

         7.2. Analysis of General Requirements 

           7.2.1. Reuse existing protocols [5.1] 
    T: Web services are is a class of protocols (framework) widely 
    studied and developed across numerous standard bodies like W3C, 
    OASIS, WS-I, Liberty, Parlay and adapted to numerous deployment 
    environments  issues at IETF, OMA, 3GPP, 3GPP2, JCP, etcà As an 
    entry point, we recommend consulting the work at W3C [WS1]. 
     

           7.2.2. Maintain Existing Protocol Integrity [5.2] 
    T: Web services is an XML-based framework that is by definition 
    extensible to support appropriate syntax and semantics.  
     
    Web services are bound on underlying transport protocols. Numerous 
    such binding have been specified. Others are in development. By 
    handling at SPEECHSC at the level of the  
    Web services framework, the integrity is maintained for: 
    - underlying transport protocols (to which the web service are 
    bound (e.g. SOAP) 
    - web service framework 
     
    This does not prevent introducing bindings to new protocols if 
    needed. For example, binding to SIP or BEEP could be advantageous 
    for mobile deployments. 
     


  
  
 Wyld                    Expires û October 2003              [Page 11] 
                 SPEECHSC Protocol Evaluation Template      June 2003 
  
  
           7.2.3. Avoid Duplicating Existing Protocols [5.3] 
    T: By definition, the web service framework can be specified to 
    remote control any web service. Specified syntax can be limited to 
    avoid duplicating remote control functionalities offered by other 
    protocols.  
     
    At the same time, the extensibility inherent to the framework 
    guarantees that it is possible to specify (standard) or define 
    (application specific) remote control for other entities beyond the 
    current scope of SPEECHSC.  
     
    In that context and in view of unifying the remote control 
    framework exposed to an application developer or a system 
    integrator, it may be of interest to provide remote control syntax 
    for special entities like prompt player etcà 
     

           7.2.4. Protocol efficiency [5.4] 
    P+ to P: Web services are by definition more verbose protocols. 
    Hence, at this stage this does not qualify work a T mark.  
     
    However work is in progress (e.g. OMA, JCP) to optimize the 
    exchanges to handle: 
    - Client with limited resources 
    - Constrained bandwidth 
    These rely on protocol compression and optimization, caching and 
    gateways.  
     
    As such the protocols qualify as P+. 
     
    In addition, based on the qualification of efficiency provided in 
    [WS8], the web service framework proposed for SPEECHSC and 
    described in [WS1] relies indeed on known efficient techniques: 
    - Asynchronous pre-programming of the engines as web services to 
    reduce exchanges and avoid racing conditions 
    - Possibility to piggy back on response message if transported on 
    optimized protocols like SIP or BEEP.  
    - state caching in the engines that are considered as stand-alone, 
    pre-packaged and pre-programmed engines. 
    - etcà 
     

           7.2.5. Explicit invocation of services [5.5] 
    T: Web service is typically used in a client-server environment. 
    Solutions exist for peer to peer (service to service) etcà  
     
    Web services have been deigned to support clients and servers at 
    least one of which is operating directly on behalf of the user 
    requesting the service. 
     
    In addition, work on-going at OMA and JCP addresses some of these 
    issues in mobile environment with the introduction of possible web 
    service gateways.  
     

           7.2.6. Server Location and Load Balancing [5.6] 
    T: Web services are widely developed for e-business applications. 
    Numerous tools and mechanisms have been provided for service 
    discovery ad advertisement. In addition, numerous offerings provide 
  
  
 Wyld                    Expires û October 2003              [Page 12] 
                 SPEECHSC Protocol Evaluation Template      June 2003 
  
  
    routing and load balancing capabilities as part of the web 
    application server used to deploy the web service.  
     
    Note that web services do not specify server location or load 
    balancing; but they are deployed on systems that provide such 
    functionalities. As web services are expected to be widely used in 
    the future and central to most e-business offerings, it is to 
    expect that such tools will become even more pervasive and 
    efficient. 
     

           7.2.7. Simultaneous services [5.7] 
    Web services allow control (interface) and composition of web 
    services at will (e.g. WSFL). 

           7.2.8. Multiple media sessions [5.8] 
    T: The framework proposed does not pre-supposes how many ports or 
    streams are associated to the engine. Different inbound and 
    outbound can be used at will 
     

         7.3. Analysis of Duplexing and Parallel Operation Requirements 

           7.3.1. Duplexing and Parallel Operation Requirements [9] 
    T: As explained, web services allow control (interface) and 
    composition of web services at will (e.g. WSFL).  Also, it does not 
    pre-supposes how many ports or streams are associated to the 
    engine. Different inbound and outbound can be used at will; in full 
    duplex or even between engines as supported by WSFL [WS4] and WSXl 
    [WS7]. 

           7.3.2. Full Duplex operation [9.1.1] 
    T: 

           7.3.3. Multiple services in parallel [9.1.2] 
    T: 

           7.3.4. Combination of services 
    T: As explained, web services allow control (interface) and 
    composition of web services at will (e.g. WSFL) into complex 
    parallel, serial or coordinated combinations as supported by WSFL 
    [WS4] and WSXl [WS7]. 

         7.4. Analysis of additional considerations (non-normative) 
    The framework proposed supports: 
    - Use of SDP to describe sessions and streams for the streamed 
    channels  
    - Time stamps could be transmitted as part of the control messages 
    at the web service level or in band (e.g. with dynamic payload 
    switch or within the payload). 
    - The framework is compatible with any encoding scheme. This is 
    illustrated by the work on SRF (Speech Recognition Framework) 
    driven at 3GPP that supports conventional and DSR optimized codecs 
    and possible exchange of speech meta-information (e.g. data that 
    may be required to facilitate and enhance the server-side 
    processing of the input speech and facilitate the dialog management 
    in an automated voice service. These may include keypad events 
    over-riding spoken input, notification that the UE is in hands-free 
  
  
 Wyld                    Expires û October 2003              [Page 13] 
                 SPEECHSC Protocol Evaluation Template      June 2003 
  
  
    mode, client-side collected information (speech/no-speech, barge-
    in), etcà.). 
    - SOAP over SIP or BEEP to support the framework described in 
    section 1 can also support VCR controls. 
    - real-time messaging between engine and control is supported 
    within the framework (e.g. via SOAP or XML events). The framework 
    also support exchange between engines (same process; see also WSXL 
    [WS7]). 
     
    Although non-normative, the web service framework described 
    probably deserves marks of P+ to T. 
  

         7.5. Analysis of Security considerations 

           7.5.1. Security Considerations [11] 
    Web services are evolving to provide security, authentication, 
    encryption, trust management and privacy . Details can be found for 
    example in [WS9] and explained in [WS10]. This is now an OASIS 
    activity [WS11]. 
     
    This framework would enable SPEECHSC to employ the security 
    mechanism provided bu WS-Security for the remote control aspects. 
    Exchanged media can rely on security mechanism at the transport / 
    streaming level. 
     
    The web service framework described probably deserves marks of P+ 
    to T. 

         7.6. Interaction Model 
    TBC : TO BE COMPLETED : Analysis of the interaction model of the 
    protocol during the ædataÆ phase (ie after session establishment) 
    and its suitability for speechsc. 
     
     
      8. Resource Control : ôMRCPö Complience Evaluation (Sarvi 
         Shanmugham) 

         8.1. General  

           8.1.1. MRCP Framework and General Applicability 
     
    The overall MRCP framework, the components involved and their 
    distribution and relationship to each other meet the framework 
    specified by SPEECHSC. The primary advantage of MRCP is that it is 
    a text based protocol designed to meet most of the requirements of 
    SPEECHSC pertaining to speech recognition and Text to speech. 
    Though Speaker Recognition (SR) and Speaker Verification (SV) are 
    not supported in its current form, MRCP was explicitly designed to 
    be extendable for such needs. The core MRCP definition only deals 
    with the control of the ASR or TTS resource and the commands and 
    responses needed to achieve it. 
  
    There are multiple interoperable implementations of MRCP and hence 
    is a proven technology. It leverages existing W3C XML standards for 
    exchange of data between the client and the server resource. For 
    Example, its uses the W3C XML grammar format (GRXML) along with W3C 
    semantic attachments and Natural Language Semantic Markup Language 
  
  
 Wyld                    Expires û October 2003              [Page 14] 
                 SPEECHSC Protocol Evaluation Template      June 2003 
  
  
    to exchange data with speech recognition resource. The W3C Speech 
    Markup Language is used when dealing with Text to speech engines. 
      
    It was designed to work as a tunneled protocol, over RTSP or SIP. 
    Hence it depends on the carrier protocol to establish a control and 
    a media path between the client and the ASR or TTS server resource. 
    Hence it gets most of the security and media pipe management 
    operations for free. Once these are established, MRCP commands and 
    responses are tunneled over, controlling the ASR or TTS resource on 
    the server.  

           8.1.2. MRCP can be evolved 
     
    Though MRCP directly meets many of the needs of SPEECHSC. The 
    notion that it is a tunneled protocol disallows its independent 
    operation. Further more the tunneled aspect is also a less 
    efficient protocol design.  
     
    But these can be addressed and the core MRCP messages can be 
    evolved to either become standalone protocol by itself or 
    extensions to an existing protocol such as SIP or RTSP.  To make 
    this a standalone protocol and allow MRCP to operate by itself, new 
    session and media management messages need to be defined to allow 
    it to operate independently. To evolve MRCP as extensions to SIP or 
    RTSP would also be relatively simple since it is also a text based 
    protocol with message format and headers very similar to them.  In 
    this protocol evaluation, the compliance evaluates MRCP from the 
    perspective of evolution in one of these forms. 
     
    The following sub-sections compare each individual requirement 
    relating to resource management against the protocol. 

         8.2. Analysis of TTS requirements 

           8.2.1. Requesting Text Playback [6.1] 
    T: MRCP has the SPEAK method for the client to request the TTS 
    resource to playback text as an audio stream. 

           8.2.2. Text Formats [6.2] 
    T: When the client requests the TTS resource to playback a text 
    stream it can provide the content in the following formats and 
    through the following mechanism. 
     
       1. Plain text 
       2. W3C XML based Speech Markup Language (SSML) 
       3. This content to be spoken can be provided by value directly 
          through the control path.  
       4. It also supports passing the content by reference. This is 
          achieved having an audio tag inside the SSML markup text. 
          This URL is then fetched and played on the RTP stream in 
          sequence with the rest of the text according to the SSML 
          specification. 
    When the client sends plain text, SSML or another format of speech 
    text the content is coded as a mime-type. Hence the server knows 
    what format the speech content is coded in, and does not have to 
    figure it out from the content. 



  
  
 Wyld                    Expires û October 2003              [Page 15] 
                 SPEECHSC Protocol Evaluation Template      June 2003 
  
  
           8.2.3. Plain text [6.2.1] 
    T: see above 

           8.2.4. SSML [6.2.2] 
    T: see above 

           8.2.5. Text in Control Channel [6.2.3] 
    T : see above 

           8.2.6. Document Type Indication [6.2.4] 
    T: see above 

           8.2.7. Control Channel [6.3] 
    T: In MRCP, this Reset-Audio-Channel header defined for the ASR 
    resource allows the recognizer to re-initialize the audio 
    characteristics that it has learnt till then. This allows a 
    recognizer resource to be used for multiple recognition sessions. 
    It can be used for short single utterance recognitions as well. 
    This is by applying the Reset-Audio-Channel header to every 
    recognition. I suspect the performance may not be as good, due to 
    the lack of line characteristics, but this is a recognizer issue. 

           8.2.8. Playback Controls [6.4] 
    T: MRCP supports the CONTROL method with the Jump-Target header can 
    used to achieve, jumping in time or to an exact or relative 
    location. It supports jumping in paragraphs, sentences, words and 
    to specific markers that may be embedded in the speech content. The 
    CONTROL method can be used with the Voice and Prosody parameters, 
    derived from SSML, and can address the speed of speech or 
    increasing/decreasing the volume. It also supports the PAUSE/RESUME 
    methods to pause or resume a current SPEAK request. 

           8.2.9. Session Parameters [6.5] 
    T: As mentioned the previous section, MRCP supports voice and 
    prosody parameters which are directly derived from the W3C SSML 
    specification. These headers can be sent using the SET-PARAMS 
    method and applied as a default for the entire session. They can 
    also be applied in SPEAK requests to apply per usage or in the 
    CONTROL message to change the parameters of an active SPEAK 
    request. 

           8.2.10. Speech Markers [6.6] 
    T: Specifying speech markers in the content is supported through 
    SSML. The CONTROL message can then be used to jump to specific 
    marker points in the text. Also, when the TTS resource reaches 
    specific markers in the text, the server would generate the SPEECH-
    MARKER method to the client. 

         8.3. Analysis of ASR requirements 

           8.3.1. Requesting Automatic Speech Recognition [7.1] 
    T: The client uses the RECOGNIZE method in MRCP to request the 
    recognition resource to process the audio stream in the pipe. The 
    RECOGNIZE method also specifies parameters and grammars the 
    recognizer should match against. 


  
  
 Wyld                    Expires û October 2003              [Page 16] 
                 SPEECHSC Protocol Evaluation Template      June 2003 
  
  
           8.3.2. XML [7.2] 
    T: Similar to the TTS resource in MRCP, ASR also uses XML data to 
    exchange information between the client and the recognition 
    resource. It supports the W3C GRXML to pass grammars from the 
    client to the server. When the server is done recognizing, it uses 
    the W3C Natural Language Semantic Markup Language (NLSML) to pass 
    the results back to the client. It supports other grammar formats 
    as well, as long as the server allows it. This is possible since, 
    it uses mime-types to package this data and hence the format type 
    is specified. 

           8.3.3. Grammar Specification [7.3.1] 
    P+: MRCP supports specifying the grammar both by value and by 
    reference. The RECOGNIZE method can carry with it grammar content 
    and/or a URI referring to the grammar content. Since MRCP supports 
    referring a grammar, the referred grammar could be located on the 
    server itself. With respect to sharing of grammars, the grammars 
    defined/compiled through the DEFINE-GRAMMAR primitive are not 
    sharable across sessions on the same server. This needs to be 
    addressed to meet this set of requirements in full. 

           8.3.4. Explicit Indication of Grammar Format [7.3.2] 
    P+: see above 

           8.3.5. Grammar Sharing [7.3.3] 
    TBD 

           8.3.6. Session Parameters [7.4] 
    T: This requirement as defined is already fully met since MRCP is 
    the referred standard for compliance. 

           8.3.7. Input Capture [7.5] 
    T: This is achieved by setting the Waveform-url header in the 
    RECOGNIZE method. This tells the server to record the audio of the 
    recognition and will return a URI to the client in the completion 
    event, which can be used to retrieve or play back the audio. 

         8.4. Analysis of Speaker Identification and Verification 
            Requirements 

           8.4.1. Requesting SI/SV [8.1] 
    F: not supported 

           8.4.2. Identifiers for SI/SV [8.2] 
    F: not supported 

           8.4.3. State for multiple utterances [8.3] 
    F: not supported 

           8.4.4. Input Capture [8.4] 
    F: not supported 

           8.4.5. SI/SV functional extensibility [8.5] 
    F: not supported 
     


  
  
 Wyld                    Expires û October 2003              [Page 17] 
                 SPEECHSC Protocol Evaluation Template      June 2003 
  
  
      9. Resource Control : ôRTSPö Complience Evaluation (Brian Wyld) 

         9.1. General Introduction 
    RTSP is an existing protocol, orientated towards audio playback and 
    recording. As such, it has support for RTP session control, with 
    SDP used for session description, and a message set allowing 
    operation as a player/recorder with audio ôVCRö controls. This 
    comparison only addresses the existing resource control elements 
    here and their applicability to the speechsc requirements. 
      
    The current PLAY state machine is exactly as required for TTS 
    operation. Although by analogy RECORD could initiate an ASR 
    session, with headers giving the grammer source or references, itÆs 
    state machine is not nearly as compatible, and not at all for 
    SV/SI.  

         9.2. Analysis of TTS requirements 

           9.2.1. Requesting Text Playback [6.1] 
    P+: the RTSP PLAY message semantics would require minor extensions 

           9.2.2. Text Formats [6.2] 
    P+: Text can be defined as all text types.  

           9.2.3. Plain text [6.2.1] 
    T: Plain text may be carried directly in the message payload. 

           9.2.4. SSML [6.2.2] 
    T: Text may be in any format. 

           9.2.5. Text in Control Channel [6.2.3] 
    T: Text may be attached to the control messages. 

           9.2.6. Document Type Indication [6.2.4] 
    T : Via the Content-Type header 

           9.2.7. Control Channel [6.3] 
    T: RTSP sessions may use a private or shared TCP connection. 

           9.2.8. Playback Controls [6.4] 
    T: RTSP defines playback control messages and a state machine. 

           9.2.9. Session Parameters [6.5] 
    T: RTSP defines operations for session parameter control. 

           9.2.10. Speech Markers [6.6] 
    P+: Markers may be inserted in the text, but to provide the 
    required asynchronous events when a marker is synthesized will 
    require use specific ANNOUNCE type messages for server->client 
    notification. 

         9.3. Analysis of ASR requirements 

           9.3.1. Requesting Automatic Speech Recognition [7.1] 
    P: The RECORD message and semantics could be used but would require 
    extensions (stretching the current semantic quite a lot) 
  
  
 Wyld                    Expires û October 2003              [Page 18] 
                 SPEECHSC Protocol Evaluation Template      June 2003 
  
  
           9.3.2. XML [7.2] 
    P+: Text can be defined as all text types. 

           9.3.3. Grammar Specification [7.3.1] 
    P+: Text can be defined as all text types. 

           9.3.4. Explicit Indication of Grammar Format [7.3.2] 
    T : Via the Content-Type headers 

           9.3.5. Grammar Sharing [7.3.3] 
    F: TBD 

           9.3.6. Session Parameters [7.4] 
    T: RTSP defines operations for session parameter control. 

           9.3.7. Input Capture [7.5] 
    P+: would require addition of a header to the initiation message. 

         9.4. Analysis of Speaker Identification and Verification 
            Requirements 

           9.4.1. Requesting SI/SV [8.1] 
    F: not supported 

           9.4.2. Identifiers for SI/SV [8.2] 
    F: not supported 

           9.4.3. State for multiple utterances [8.3] 
    F: not supported 

           9.4.4. Input Capture [8.4] 
    F: not supported 

           9.4.5. SI/SV functional extensibility [8.5] 
    F: not supported 
     
         
      10.  Security Considerations  
      
    Security considerations for the SPEECHSC protocol are covered by 
    the comparison against the specific Security requirements in the 
    SPEECHSC requirements document [1].  
         
      11.  References  
    [1] Oran, D., "Requirements for Distributed Control of ASR, SI/SV 
    and TTS Resources", draft-ietf-speechsc-reqts-04, June 6, 2003, 
    work in progress. 
     
    [2] J. Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne, G. Camarillo, A. Johnston, J. 
    Peterson, R. Sparks, M. Handley, E.Schooler, SIP: Session 
    Initiation Protocol, RFC3265, June 2002. (Obsoletes RFC2543) 
     
    [WS1] W3C Web Services, http://www.w3c.org/2002/ws/ 
    [WS2] Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP) 
    http://www.w3c.org/2002/ws/ 
    [WS3] Web Services Description Language (WSDL 1.1), W3C Note 15 
    March  
  
  
 Wyld                    Expires û October 2003              [Page 19] 
                 SPEECHSC Protocol Evaluation Template      June 2003 
  
  
        2001, http://www.w3.org/TR/wsdl. 
    [WS4] Leymann, F., Web Service Flow Language, WSFL 1.0, May 2001,  
         http://www-
    4.ibm.com/software/solutions/webservices/pdf/WSFL.pdf 
    [WS5] UDDI, http://www.uddi.org/specification.html  
    [WS6] W3C Voice Activity, http://www.w3c.org/Voice/  
    [WS7] WSXL - Web Service eXperience Language submitted to OASIS 
    WSIA  
          and WSRP - WSXL - Web Service eXperience Language submitted 
    to  
           OASIS WSIA and WSRP 
    [WS8] Requirements for Distributed Control of ASR, SI/SV and TTS 
    Resources,  
    draft-ietf-speechsc-reqts-01.txt 
    [WS9] Security in a Web Services World: A Proposed Architecture and 
    Roadmap,  
    April 7, 2002, Version 1.0, http://www.verisign.com/wss/wss.pdf 
    [WS10] Kapil Apshankar, WS-Security, Security for Web Services, 
    http://www.webservicesarchitect.com/content/articles/apshankar04.as
    p 
    [WS11] OASIS Web Services Security TC, http://www.oasis-
    open.org/committees/wss/ 
     
 AuthorÆs Address 
         
    Brian Wyld  
    Eloquant SA 
    ZA Malvaisin                   Phone:  +33 476 77 46 92  
    Le Versoud, France             Email:  brian.wyld@eloquant.com  
      
      
 Full Copyright Statement 
     
    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved. 
        
    This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
    others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain 
    it 
    or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
    and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
    kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
    are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, 
    this 
    document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
    the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
    Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
    developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
    copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
    followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
    English.  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and 
    will not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or 
    assigns.  This document and the information contained 
    herein is provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND 
    THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, 
    EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT 
    THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR 
    ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A 
    PARTICULAR PURPOSE." 
  
     
  
  
 Wyld                    Expires û October 2003              [Page 20] 
                 SPEECHSC Protocol Evaluation Template      June 2003 
  
  
     
     
     
     
  
     






















































  
  
 Wyld                    Expires û October 2003              [Page 21] 
