

Internet Draft                                      Mohamed-Feroze.M.R          
draft-mohamed-gp-ep-00.txt                                    Feb 1998



                    GP/E Protocol for a Wireless Network

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
   and its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet Drafts.

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months. Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
   other documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to use Internet
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as a "working
   draft" or "work in progress."

   Please check the I-D abstract listing contained in each Internet
   Draft directory to learn the current status of this or any other
   Internet Draft.

   It is intended that this document will be submitted to the IESG for
   consideration as a standards document. Distribution of this document
   is unlimited.

Abstract

   This memo defines Global Postion/Encryption Protocol (GP/EP), a 
   proposal for a universal wireless computer network. Global position 
   is defined as region in space-time. The network routes data to a 
   global position using routing information provided as part of the
   protocol data and proposes use of encryption algorithms to prevent 
   unauthorised  access.
   This protocol is proposed as an alternative for IP, the Internet 
   Protocol. The memo also describes how a network can work with no real
   network address other than its global position in the universe.
   
Acknowledgements

   Thanks are always due to the only One who taught me all that I know. 

Mohamed-Feroze.M.R.         Expires 24July98                    [Page 1]


Internet Draft            GP/EP for a Wireless Network         Feb. 1998

0. Conventions
   Throughout this document the first character/word after '-' should be 
   treated as if it is a subscript. For example N-1 implies N subscript
   One, read as N1. 

1. The Protocol
 
   Global Position/Encryption protocol(GPE) is defined by a set of 
   vectors N, where each N represents a node on the Network.
   Thus  GPE  =  {N-source, N-1, N-2,...N-n}  where n is an integer  
                                        greater than or equal to 1.
   The data on the network would travel from N-source to N-1 and then 
   from N-1 to N-2 and so on until it reaches N-n. 

1.1 Node Parameters
   Each Node vector N is a 3-tuple(GP,R,E) representing the maximum 
   parameters required for any data to be transmitted over the
   network. 
            N = (GP, R, E)  where  
                   GP  represents the global position of the Node
                   R  represents the path/route of data travesal
               and E  represents the Encryption object
   
    No attempt has been made in this document to propose a physical   
    representation for these three parameters. Instead, each one is 
    treated as an object by itself and a set of minimum required 
    characteristics are defined. Any implementation of these objects 
    should neccessarily support the all the characteristics.

2. Global Position Object (GP)
   The purpose of this object is to encapsulate all the relevant data
   required to identify a region in the space time continuum. This 
   region could be anything from a single unique point to the whole 
   universe in space time and may or may not be contiguous. 

2.1 GP Properties.
   A GP object should have the following properties. It should 
     1) provide a facility to identify the space independent values it
        represents 
     2) provide a facility to identify the time independent values it 
        represents.
     3) provide means to compare with another GP object and determine
        if the compared object shares any Global Positions with it. 


Mohamed-Feroze.M.R.         Expires 25July98                    [Page 2]

Internet Draft            GP/EP for a Wireless Network         Feb. 1998

2.2 GP Constants
   Some special instances of GP objects are defined next and are called
   GP constants. 
   GP-null  :  GP-null is a global position that exists nowhere on the
               network. Thus every point in space time outside of the 
               network is a GP-null. Also, if two GP objects share no
               Global Positions between them, then the intersection of
               those two GP objects is said to be GP-null

   GP-max   :  GP-max is defined as global position that covers the 
               entire network. Thus every point in space time covered
               by the network is a subset of GP-max. 

   GP-univ  :  GP-univ is the union of GP-max and GP-null

   GP-const :  GP-const is defined as a time independent global position
               value. 
 
3.0 Route Object (R)
    The purpose of this object is to derive a path between two Global 
    Positions. A Route object operates on two Global Positions GP-source
    and GP-dest and helps create G-route, a set of Global Position 
    {G-i's} where each G-i is a complete path from some subset of 
    GP-source to a subset of GP-dest. Thus 
         G-route =  R(GP-source, GP-dest) = {G-1, G-2,..G-i,..G-m} m>=1
    To understand how this Route object can be used to route data from
    one Node in the network to another, a new object called Router is 
    defined next.

3.1 Router
    A Router is defined as an entity that propagates network data from
    one Node on the network to another. Router objects travel in space
    time and keep themselves updated with their Global Postions at any 
    given point in time. A Router object propogates data by performing 
    three functions : Listen, Analyse, and Send.    
 
3.2 Traversal of Network data
    Listen :
        Listening is defined as the process of receiving the data to be 
    propagated and extracting GPE protocol associated with the received
    data. The entire data received is represented as Data-R. The Router
    then passes the GPE information extracted to its GPE analyser.    



Mohamed-Feroze.M.R.         Expires 25July98                    [Page 3]

Internet Draft            GP/EP for a Wireless Network         Feb. 1998
       
    Analyse :
       The Analyser operates as follow :
       1. The GPE extracted during the Receiving process is of the form
            GPE = {N-source, N-1, N-2,....N-n} where 'n' is an integer
                                                and  n >= 1
              and   N-n     = (Gp-n, R-n, E-n)
              and   N-source = (GP-source, R-source, E-source)
       
       2. The analyser then creates a G-route from GP-source to GP-1
          using the Route object R-1. Where GP-1 and R-1 belong to N-1.
          Thus  G-route = R-1(GP-source, GP-1) = {G-1,G-2,...G-m} m >=1

       3. The analyser then compares its own Global Postion GP-R with 
          each of the G-i's generated above. The comparision works as
          given below :
                   For each G-i belonging to G-route
                       If GP-R intersection G-i is GP-null
                   <======= Proceed to next G-i
                       end-if 
                       Call Send(Data-R), where Send is as defined next. 
               <====== Exit processing the G-i loop
                   Next G-i                   

    Send :
       The send process throws Data-R back into network with a minor but
    a crucial modification. It replaces the GP-source value of Data-R's 
    GPE protocol with the router's Global Position GP-R. Thus the new 
    GPE protocol will be 
       GPE = {N-source, N-1, N-2,...N-n}      n >=1     
          where  N-source = (GP-R, R-source, E-source)


4.0 Encryption Object
      The purpose of encryption object E-i is to help node N-i identify
    the decryption process required to translate the received data. A 
    node N-i on the network identifies its incomming data by comparing 
    the GP-i mentioned in the incomming data with its own GP-node and if
    the intersection of the GP-i with GP-node is GP-Null the data is 
    discarded. If not Null it checks to see if the Encryption object E-i
    is supported by the Node. A well behaved node on the network would 
    publish a set of encryption methods and would listen for only those 
    data that contains the Encryption obect that it supports.



Mohamed-Feroze.M.R.         Expires 25July98                    [Page 4]

Internet Draft            GP/EP for a Wireless Network         Feb. 1998

To understand how such a protocol could be implemented, a network with a
compromised version of the GPE protocol is proposed next.

5.0 Two-mile GPE network.

5.1 Assumptions.

    The following assumptions are made regarding the network.

    1. It is possible to design a router object by combining a GPS  
       receiver, a two mile hand held walkie-talkie transmitter, and 
       a personal computer, all of which can be found at your local 
       radio shack. Ofcourse, I do not know how to link them yet. But 
       that is a job for somebody else.

    2. The availability of Global Postioning Satellite services is
       gauranteed in GP-max whenever the network is required to be up.

    3. There are plenty of volunteers with the routers mentioned above
       and covering the entire GP-max for every mile and half on land.

    4. Software implementation of the GPE protocol will follow the rules
       mentioned next.

5.2 GPE for the Two-mile routing network
    GP defenition :
    The representation of this object can follow the notations used by 
    Global Positioning Satellite systems, for locating a point on 
    earth's surface. The time part of this object is irrelevant for this
    network. For the purpose of discussion, the earth's surface will be
    viewed as a two dimensional area spread out from end to end.

    Route Defenition :
       The route object is defined by 'theta' a value in radians. A path 
       is derived from GP-source to node N-i as follows :
     
       The path is defined as an area inside the triangle defined below :
         1. One vertex of this triangle is at GP-source.
         2. The angle at the vertex at GP-source is theta
         3. The perpendicular drawn from the vertex at GP-source to the
            base of the triangle, meets the base at GP-i, the global 
            position of Node-i.            



Mohamed-Feroze.M.R.         Expires 25July98                    [Page 5]

Internet Draft            GP/EP for a Wireless Network         Feb. 1998

   Encryption :   
       Every node on the network will publish a unique public key. 
    Everyone who sends data to a node is expected to mention the Node's
    published public key in the Encryption object and encrypt 
    the data being sent using the public key.
    
   Router Object :
       Every computer on this network is both a router and a node. The 
       router is designed as mentioned in the assumptions. The router 
       object derives a path from GP-source to another node N as 
       mentioned in the Route description. The following constraints are 
       enforced on the Router object :
        1. If GP-router intersection GP-i is not Null, where GP-router 
           is the global position of the router and GP-i is global 
           position of the Node to which the incomming data is sent to, 
           then the router will not perform the Send operation on this 
           data. 
        2. As the data nears its destination Node there will be an echo
           as the same data will be picked up by multiple routers and 
           passed back and forth. To avoid this, the Node would send a 
           message over the network informing all routers the receipt of
           a data sent by them. The routers should stop listening to 
           those data that are already received by the Node it has been
           addressed to. The actual implementation of this is not 
           discussed in this document.


6.  Security Considerations

   Security issues are not discussed in this memo.  

7.  Author's Address

   Mohamed-Feroze Mohamed-Rafi
   9619, Fontainebleau Blvd
   #105, Miami, FL-33172
   Phone: 305-485-3423
   EMail: rafi@cyberservices.com



Mohamed-Feroze.M.R.         Expires 25July98                    [Page 6]



