



Internet Engineering Task Force                                  W. Eddy
Internet-Draft                                                  G. Clark
Intended status: Informational                                 J. Dailey
Expires: January 25, 2016                                    MTI Systems
                                                           July 24, 2015


                Customer-Controlled Filtering Using SDN
                  draft-eddy-sdnrg-customer-filters-00

Abstract

   In order to reduce unwanted traffic and make efficient use of limited
   access link capacity or other network resources, it is advantageous
   if customers can filter traffic destined to them, within their
   upstream Internet Service Provider (ISP) networks.  The customer
   receiving traffic should have control over inbound filters, since
   their definition of desirable versus undesirable traffic may change
   over time (e.g. as new network services and protocols are
   introduced).  In this document, we describe an SDN-based means for
   customers to express computable logic to their ISPs in order to
   distinguish between desirable and undesirable inbound traffic.  These
   rules can be dynamically and securely updated within the running ISP
   network, with full automation One use case for this is in mitigating
   denial of service attacks.  Even if such filtering is only
   implemented in an ISP's access network, it preserves capacity on the
   customer access links for desirable traffic.  If implemented at the
   ISP's edge connections to other providers, or prior to ingress to
   their core, it can also preserve the ISP's own network capacity and
   other resources that may be threatened by attacks.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 25, 2016.




Eddy, et al.            Expires January 25, 2016                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   Customer-Controlled Filtering Using SDN       July 2015


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.  Perceived Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Architecture  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Customer Network  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   5.  ISP Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.1.  Sub-Controller Configuration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.2.  Sub-Controller Operation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   6.  Discussion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   8.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   9.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   10. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     10.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     10.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21

1.  Introduction

   At the edge of the Internet, end-network customers purchase access
   through Internet Service Providers (ISPs).  The ISPs offer a limited
   amount of access link capacity to each customer, and have their own
   capacity limitations within their access networks, core networks, and
   peering to other providers.  Traffic coming in from other networks to
   the ISP's customers is normally forwarded through the ISP's
   infrastructure and to the customer access links based only on the
   destination IP addresses within packets.

   Customers generally require reliable Internet access, and critical
   business operations functions rely on availability of the ISP's
   network resources.  However, in many cases, customers are also



Eddy, et al.            Expires January 25, 2016                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   Customer-Controlled Filtering Using SDN       July 2015


   receiving substantial amounts of undesirable traffic, including port-
   scans, intrusion attempts on vulnerable services in their networks,
   denial-of-service (DoS), and distributed DoS (DDoS) attacks.  These
   undesirable flows are able to use up network capacity and disrupt or
   interfere with desirable flows.

   A normal end-network customer only requires a limited set of traffic
   to be forwarded to them from the outside, and all other traffic can
   safely be filtered.  In fact, a common and highly recommended
   practice that many end-networks already employ is to firewall
   undesirable incoming traffic as it comes in from the ISP's access
   link.  This protects the end-network, but still leaves the access
   link itself and capacity within the ISP's network subject to abuse.
   Since customer networks already execute logic to distinguish between
   desirable and undesirable traffic, then there is benefit to both them
   and the ISPs in sharing that logic and pushing it upstream to
   increase the scope of protected resources.  This allows the ISP to
   only devote its resources to packets that have potential value to its
   customers, and to quickly disgard undesirable traffic.

   During a DoS or DDoS attack, these upstream filters can be
   implemented at points of ingress from other networks and save the
   ISP's core and access network resources from being wasted or abused
   while carrying the attack traffic.  Since a high-volume attack on one
   of its customers can have collateral impact to the ISP and its other
   customers, this filtering is beneficial to the ISP and its other
   customers, in addition to the intended victim.  For instance, in 2010
   an attack on a company attempting to shutdown the Mariposa botnet
   took down not only that company, but also several other networks
   using the same ISP, including a Canadian university and a few
   government agencies in Ottawa, according to news articles.  This
   could have been avoided with upstream defenses.

   As Software Defined Networking (SDN) technology becomes more
   prevalent in both customer and ISP networks, among many other
   capabilities, it enables the type of upstream filtering that would be
   beneficial in these cases.  An interdomain usage of SDN allows the
   filter rules to be managed by the customer themselves, dynamically,
   and to be distributed to the ISP through automation without human
   intervention.

   This document describes a usage of SDN that enables a customer to
   have all the necessary control over filtering functionality
   implemented within a service provider network.  This description
   includes:

   o  Perceived Requirements




Eddy, et al.            Expires January 25, 2016                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   Customer-Controlled Filtering Using SDN       July 2015


   o  Functional Architecture including ISP and Customer Components

   o  Configuration and Operation of ISP Components

   o  Configuration and Operation of Customer Components

   This is an informational document, and not a standard.  The intention
   of the document is to engage with the Internet community as SDN
   technology continues to transfer from research to increased
   operational use, and to discuss new ways of utilizing SDN-based
   network infrastructure to enhance defensive capabilities for DDoS
   mitigation.

   We attempt to use the SDN terminology previously defined in the IRTF
   SDNRG [RFC7426] [RFC7149].

   One of the interesting areas of SDN research is in inter-network,
   inter-domain, and inter-provider SDN concepts, use cases, and
   mechanisms.  This is a challenging area because of the differing
   requirements between cooperating networks and their separate
   administrative domains and trust relationships.  The configurations
   described in this document implement one use-case for inter-domain
   SDN based on OpenFlow signaling, and do so in a way that respects
   both customer and provider requirements on the interface.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

2.  Perceived Requirements

   The following requirements are what we perceive to be constraints on
   configuration of provider and customer network devices, in order to
   support powerful customer-controlled filtering behavior within the
   ISP network while still keeping the administrative boundary of the
   provider network intact:

   1.  The customer MUST be able to control traffic destined for their
       own prefix(es).

   2.  The customer MUST NOT be able to control any traffic destined for
       other prefixes outside their end-network.

   3.  The customer's ability to control filtering within ISP equipment
       MUST NOT change their level of access to the provider's network
       (e.g. it should not offer them additional insight into traffic



Eddy, et al.            Expires January 25, 2016                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   Customer-Controlled Filtering Using SDN       July 2015


       passing through the provider that would not be available
       otherwise, should not expose internal or sensitive details of the
       provider's network architecture and internal configuration, etc).

   4.  The customer SHOULD be able to specify logic based on packet
       contents that leads to a "drop" or "accept" decision on inbound
       traffic, but very little or no more.  An "accept" decision should
       lead to provider-defined forwarding logic to select the ultimate
       output ports, tunnels, or functions applied to traffic towards
       the customer; the customer should not have control over selecting
       these details.

   5.  The customer MUST be able to access statistics on its own traffic
       or the filtering logic it controls from the view of the
       provider's network (e.g. per-filter packet match counters).  This
       allows the customer to manage its rule set over time and remove
       or replace logic that is no longer needed or effective.

3.  Architecture

   Functionally, the entities involved in defining and implementing
   customer-specific filters can be divided into:

   Filter management application  - run by the customer to determine
      desired filtering rules at a given point in time.  The desired
      filtering rules are dynamic and change as new information becomes
      available.  For instance as attacks are detected or subside,
      filter rules may be added or deleted.  Also, as details of an
      attack become known, filters may be revised to either generate
      less false positives (desirable packets lost) or false negatives
      (undesirable packets not dropped).

   Customer switching  - SDN hardware and software switches within the
      end-network that the customer has decided to implement ingress
      filtering policies within.

   Customer controller  - SDN controller software within the end-network
      that instantiates filter rules provided by the filter management
      application.  This controller is capabile of managing switches
      within the customer end-network, at least.  This controller must
      convey relevant limitations of any managed hardware or software
      switches to the filter management application so that rules can be
      expressed at the proper granularity given the available resources
      for implementing filter logic.

   ISP switching  - SDN hardware and software switches within an ISP
      network, at least some of which are made available to the customer
      for implementation of customer-controlled filtering rules.



Eddy, et al.            Expires January 25, 2016                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   Customer-Controlled Filtering Using SDN       July 2015


   ISP controller  - SDN controller software in an ISP's network may be
      responsible for handling all switch configuration within the ISP
      network, other than the filtering rules provided by the customer.
      For instance, this controller may implement the ISP's initial
      ingress policies and actions, switching decisions within the ISP's
      network, QoS policies, and other egress functions and policies
      desired by the ISP.

   ISP sub-controller  - SDN software in an ISP's network that acts as
      an intermediary between switches below it, and instances of other
      controller software above it.  The sub-controller is responsible
      for presenting appropriate views of the underlying network to each
      controller above, and for enforcing policy rules on the types of
      actions that each controller can perform on the underlying
      network.

   These are all functional elements, and in some cases might either be
   combined together or with other concrete elemetns.  For instance, the
   customer controller and filter management application could be run on
   the same host(s) and be implemented within a single codebase.

   The ISP sub-controller is the most important element for enabling
   inter-domain SDN, and the majority of this document describes it.

   There may be additional elements that are part of a fully detailed
   real-world system.  For instance, detection and classification of
   attack traffic can be a complex task, and may involve multiple other
   systems before input is provided to the filter management
   application.  This may involve monitoring, analysis, and other
   functions provided by software or appliances in the customer network,
   coordination with cloud services and other mitigation techniques,
   operator alerting and possibly operator interaction and approval of a
   suggested response.  In a basic implementation, however, the filter
   management could be a manual, operator-driven process.  None of this
   specifically matters to this architecture, as ultimately filtering
   rules will be defined, monitored, and managed over time, no matter
   how those rules are determined or coordinated with other facets of
   system operation.













Eddy, et al.            Expires January 25, 2016                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   Customer-Controlled Filtering Using SDN       July 2015


                           ||
    Customer Network       ||            ISP Network
                           ||
      +-------------+      ||
      | Filter      |      ||                +------------+
      | Management  |      ||                |    ISP     |
      | Application |      ||                | Controller |
      +-------------+      ||                +------------+
            A   A          ||                      A
            |   |  Restricted OpenFlow             |
 Controller |   +------------------------+  +----------+
    API     |              ||            |  |          |
            V              ||            V  V          |
     +------------+        ||    +----------------+    | Normal
     |  Customer  |        ||    |     ISP        |    | OpenFlow
     | Controller |        ||    | Sub-Controller |    |
     +------------+        ||    +----------------+    |
       A                   ||              A           |
       | Normal            ||              | Normal    |
       | OpenFlow          ||              | OpenFlow  |
       V                   ||              V           V
     +-----------+      Filtered     +-------------------+  Un-Filtered
     | Customer  |      Data Flow    |        ISP        |   Data Flow
     | Switching |<------------------|     Switching     |<-------------
     +-----------+         ||        +-------------------+
                           ||

                                 Figure 1

   As illustrated in Figure 1, interfaces between elements of this
   architecture are fundamentally supported using the OpenFlow protocol.
   This is a key factor in making it possible to implement using
   existing customer and ISP switching elements, as OpenFlow has become
   commonly available.  However, OpenFlow is generally used only within
   an administrative domain, and not inter-network between different
   administrative domains.  Including the sub-controller element in this
   architecture enables OpenFlow to be utilized inter-network.  Without
   requiring SDN protocol modifications, the sub-controller defined here
   provides one method to advance from the current single-domain state-
   of-practice in SDN, towards giving SDN software a wider interdomain
   reach and scope of view and influence.  This will enable better
   global optimization of traffic flows, while continuing to respect the
   policies desired by each network's operators.

   We refer to the northbound interface of the ISP Sub-Controller as
   "Restricted OpenFlow", because the vocabulary of OpenFlow messages
   that can be passed on this interface is limited to only those that
   conform with the requirements listed previously.  Restricted OpenFlow



Eddy, et al.            Expires January 25, 2016                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   Customer-Controlled Filtering Using SDN       July 2015


   is not a new protocol or standard, but just a subset of OpenFlow that
   is safe to use for implementing customer-controlled filtering
   functionality in an interdomain scenario.  The specific subset and
   per-message restrictions are detailed later in this document.

   Within its own network, a Filter Management Application can use any
   controller API that local Customer Controllers make available in
   order to program and monitor filter rules within the Customer
   Switching elements.

   In the figure, we show "Normal OpenFlow" being used between many
   elements, but this could actually be any southbound interface
   protocol supported between controllers and switching elements in an
   SDN architecture, and does not have to be OpenFlow specifically.  It
   is simply shown here because at the present time, it is widely
   available and has been used in early implementations of this
   architecture.

   It is not illustrated in the diagram, but as an alternative, a
   Customer Controller element could interface with the ISP Sub-
   Controller using Restricted OpenFlow, instead of the Filter
   Management Application making this control connection into the ISP's
   network.  Depending on the specific design of the Filter Management
   Application, this may be desirable to simplify its codebase and
   operations.

   The following sections of this document discuss configuration and
   operation of the elements in the ISP and customer networks
   respectively.

4.  Customer Network

   End-network architectures vary widely, for instance from SOHO to
   enterprise campuses.  Some may have multiple sub-networks, be multi-
   homed to different ISPs, support multiple address families (e.g.
   IPv4 and IPv6), use VPNs and tunnels to other networks, etc.  The
   filter management application within the end-network may need to
   understand these aspects of the network configuration, but it should
   not be relevant to other entities in the architecture.

   The filter management application interfaces with both controller
   software within the customer end-network as well as the sub-
   controller within an ISP (the "upstream" inter-domain interface).

   The purpose of the filter management application is to take a series
   of rules or logic that identifies undesirable traffic (as input from
   other software or an operator) and synthesizes them into a list of
   filters for upstream implementation, and another list of filters for



Eddy, et al.            Expires January 25, 2016                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   Customer-Controlled Filtering Using SDN       July 2015


   local use within the customer network.  These lists may be the same,
   or different, based on the capabilities of the switches, such as the
   number of rules they can simultaneously support or their ability to
   match certain packet fields.

   The filter management application maintains connections with sub-
   controllers at upstream ISPs using a restricted variant of OpenFlow.
   It uses this to add, remove, and modify upstream filtering logic.

   Managing filters within both the customer and ISP network switches
   may be useful, for instance, to have coarse-grained logic that
   removes the bulk of unwanted traffic upstream, and fine-grained logic
   that further sifts traffic at ingress to the customer network.  It
   may also be possible to exploit more functionality within the end-
   network to do stateful filtering or employ other techniques that may
   not be possible or available in upstream ISP filters.  However, it is
   possible that the customer network includes legacy equipment and does
   not support SDN at all.  In this case, the filter management
   application only controls upstream filters.

   The filter management application (or SDN controller) within the
   customer network listen for restricted OpenFlow connections from the
   sub-controllers in the ISP networks.  For security reasons,
   connections should only be accepted from designated sub-controller
   addresses, otherwise an attacker might be able to extract filter
   logic and changes from the application and determine ways to
   dynamically evade filtering.  Operators will need to exchange IP
   address (and possibly port number) information to be used for these
   restricted OpenFlow connections so that they can be made securely,
   allowed through firewalls, etc.  Connecting to multiple customer
   filter management applications (e.g. with OpenFlow master/slave
   roeles) is possible in order to support redundancy and failover, and
   is not complicated, but details are not discussed in this document.

5.  ISP Network

   There are a wide range of sizes and architectures for ISP networks,
   for instance serving different types of customers (residential,
   commercial, government, etc), and with different types of access
   networks and technologies (e.g. cable, fiber, wireless/cellular,
   satellite, etc).  The specific way that an individual ISP configures,
   manages, and controls its switching elements is intended to be
   unaffected by implementation of customer-controlled filtering rules
   as described here.  We provide a generic description of how the sub-
   controller element can be introduced and coexist with other control
   structures and systems within the ISP network, either based on SDN or
   other technologies.




Eddy, et al.            Expires January 25, 2016                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft   Customer-Controlled Filtering Using SDN       July 2015


   There are many different specific ways the technology can be
   instantiated, but the same general rules apply.  For instance, an ISP
   may create virtual routers for each customer and dedicate resources
   of those customer-specific virtual routers for instantiating
   filtering rules.  In this case, there could be one sub-controller per
   customer and the sub-controller would be able to work almost directly
   with the designated virtual routers for that customer.
   Alternatively, another ISP might have a single sub-controller that
   all customers connect to, and that sub-controller could be
   responsible for limiting customer filtering rules to only occupy some
   fraction of the hardware flow table resources available within ISP
   switching elements common to all customers.  The same concepts and
   configuration rules apply in all cases, even though there is a range
   of complexity, scaling, and performance requirements for the sub-
   controller element in different ISP networks.

5.1.  Sub-Controller Configuration

   Since a sub-controller proxies for the switching elements, it needs
   to behave like them and initiate OpenFlow connections upward to
   controllers that it has been configured to connect to.

   The sub-controller has different security considerations on its
   intradomain OpenFlow connections with switches versus its connections
   to other controllers that may be interdomain.  Intradomain
   connections to switches and other intradomain controllers are likely
   to stay entirely within the ISP's infrastructure and may be on
   portions of the network engineered for isolation from all customer
   traffic and logically or physically separated from customer
   accessible resources.  In this case, subcontroller to switching
   component connections can be configured in any way that meets the
   ISP's security requirements.

   For interdomain customer controller connections, packets may traverse
   sections of the network that are shared or could be visible to other
   parties.  The OpenFlow specification [OF1.3] notes "The OpenFlow
   channel is usually encrypted using TLS, but may be run directly over
   TCP".  If an ISP permits sub-controller to use TCP without TLS when
   making connections to customer controllers, it may be exposing both
   parties to privacy risks [RFC6973] and other types of attacks.  TLS
   SHOULD be used for all interdomain sub-controller to controller
   connections.

   It is not expected that client certificates are useful for either
   switches or for the sub-controller when acting in its client role,
   however, they might be used in any cases deemed appropriate.





Eddy, et al.            Expires January 25, 2016               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft   Customer-Controlled Filtering Using SDN       July 2015


   Since updates to rule sets are latency sensitive and may happen in a
   relatively hostile setting (e.g. a customer trying to push drop rules
   to a sub-controller while suffering from a large DDoS attack), it is
   beneficial for sub-controller communications to be out-of-band from
   normal data services to customers.  For instance, this could be via a
   separately provisioned (e.g. assured forwarding) service class using
   some codepoint agreed between the provider and its customers.  If
   this the interdomain control traffic is forwarded in-band with data
   traffic, some types of attacks will be capable of disrupting the
   control flow and could prohibit mitgations from being effectively
   triggered.

   It is important to not have switches queueing packets while waiting
   for responses to new flow event notifications to a customer
   controller outside the ISP network.  The latency and potential for
   packet loss (especially under attack conditions) make this
   undesirable.  We assume instead that switches have been configured to
   suppress event notifications to customer controllers, and that events
   are handled either by the sub-controller itself or by the ISP
   controllers.  The customer-designated flow tables can be configured
   with default drop or forwarding rules, as desired so that a match is
   always found, and no "packet in" events need to be generated to
   customer controllers.

5.2.  Sub-Controller Operation

   When starting, an ISP sub-controller needs to establish OpenFlow
   connections upwards to controllers above it.  These controllers may
   belong to the ISP itself, as well as multiple customers.  The number
   of connections may be relatively large, compared to typical SDN
   usages, since an ISP may have hundreds or thousands of customers that
   it is enabling to control filtering.  A sub-controller implementation
   SHOULD include features to rate-limit outgoing connections to
   customer controllers.  This can be under operator control.
   Intradomain connections to ISP controllers may be made
   preferentially, prior to customer connections.

   An ISP sub-controller will accept OpenFlow connections from the ISP's
   switching elements.  It will maintain an internal view of the state
   of those switch resources, as directly reported to it.

   When processing events coming up from ISP switching elements, the
   sub-controller determines whether to handle the event internally, or
   route the event through to an upper ISP controller.  Events can be
   routed directly to the ISP controllers without modification by the
   sub-controller, or they may be modified in order to provided a
   simplified or virtualized view of the underlying resources to the ISP
   controllers, depending on ISP desires and configuration.



Eddy, et al.            Expires January 25, 2016               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft   Customer-Controlled Filtering Using SDN       July 2015


   Note that the sub-controller SHOULD NOT forward events to the
   customer OpenFlow connections.  This prevents switching elements in
   the ISP network from performing poorly due to waiting upon responses
   from the customer, and helps to alleviate concerns about a customer's
   controller being able to degrade performance in the ISP network or
   impact the customer's own SLAs (e.g. for latency), either
   inadvertently or on purpose.

   There are different possible implementations of a sub-controller in
   terms of the number of switches that it can manage.  A simple sub-
   controller might manage only a single switch, and in this case it
   will act only as a proxy and filter for OpenFlow messages.  It may
   even modify and relay most messages directly without performing its
   own queries, inventing its own responses, etc.  More complex sub-
   controllers will manage multiple switches, and will have more complex
   logic for processing messages, because simple manipulation and
   relaying will not be possible with multiple switches.  For instance,
   an OpenFlow echo request message expects a single reply, not multiple
   replies.

   Specific message types in the OpenFlow 1.3 specification and the
   proper responses to them on sub-controller reception either from a
   switch or a controller is described below.  These are all written for
   the more complex situation of a sub-controller that manages multiple
   switches, as the single-switch situation is trivial.

      Immutable Messages

         OFPT_HELLO (0) - This message is processed by the sub-
         controller and not relayed.

         OFPT_ERROR (1) - This message is processed by the sub-
         controller and not relayed.

         OFPT_ECHO_REQUEST (2) - This message is replied to with an echo
         reply whenever it is received, and it is never passed through.

         OFPT_ECHO_REPLY (3) - This message is processed by the sub-
         controller and not relayed.

         OFPT_EXPERIMENTER (4) - Treatment and generation of these
         messages is left to be determined by each implementation.

      Switch Configuration Messages

         OFPT_FEATURES_REQUEST (5) - This message should not be received
         from a switch.  When received from a controller, a reply is
         generated indicating the capabilities of the sub-controller,



Eddy, et al.            Expires January 25, 2016               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft   Customer-Controlled Filtering Using SDN       July 2015


         and the functionalities that it can synthesize across the set
         of switches that it manages.  The sub-controller creates its
         own datapath ID representing the sub-controller, and does not
         feed through the datapath IDs or features of the individual
         switches, but only a synthesized view of them.

         OFPT_FEATURES_REPLY (6) - This message should not be received
         from a controller.  When received from a switch, it is
         processed by the sub-controller and not relayed to other
         controllers above it.

         OFPT_GET_CONFIG_REQUEST (7) - This message should not be
         received from a customer controller, though it might be
         received from an ISP controller.  If the sub-controller
         homogenizes configuration across managed switches, then it can
         generate a proper reply to an ISP controller for this message.

         OFPT_GET_CONFIG_REPLY (8) - This message may be sent to an ISP
         controller and provide indication of a homogenous configuration
         across the managed switches below the sub-controller.

         OFPT_SET_CONFIG (9) - This message should not be received from
         a customer controller, though it might be received from an ISP
         controller.  If the sub-controller homogenizes configuration
         across managed switches, then it can take appropriate action
         and generate a proper reply to an ISP controller for this
         message.

      Asynchronous Messages

         OFPT_PACKET_IN (10) - These messages may be received from
         switches, if the sub-controller has configured the switches to
         generate them.  They can be relayed to ISP controllers, but
         should not be relayed to customer controllers (e.g. according
         to the "master", "equal", or "slave" OpenFlow controller
         roles).

         OFPT_FLOW_REMOVED (11) - These messages may be received from
         switches, if the sub-controller has configured the switches to
         generate them.  They can be relayed to ISP controllers, but
         should not be relayed to customer controllers (e.g. according
         to the "master", "equal", or "slave" OpenFlow controller
         roles).

         OFPT_PORT_STATUS (12) - These messages may be received from
         switches, if the sub-controller has configured the switches to
         generate them.  They can be relayed to ISP controllers, but
         should not be relayed to customer controllers (e.g. according



Eddy, et al.            Expires January 25, 2016               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft   Customer-Controlled Filtering Using SDN       July 2015


         to the "master", "equal", or "slave" OpenFlow controller
         roles).

      Controller Command Messages

         OFPT_PACKET_OUT (13)

         OFPT_FLOW_MOD (14) - These are the primary messages from a
         customer controller that will be validated, translated, and
         conveyed into additional messages to managed switches.  When
         received from an ISP controller, on the other hand, they may be
         passed through without change.  In either case, they may be
         passed through be replicating each message to all managed
         switches, or by conveying specific messages translating the
         contents of the message as appropriate for each individual
         switch.

         OFPT_GROUP_MOD (15) - These messages are treated in the same
         way as the OFPT_FLOW_MOD messages.

         OFPT_PORT_MOD (16) - These messages should not be received from
         a customer controller, and when received from an ISP controller
         require special processing by the sub-controller in translating
         the port view that the ISP controller has to particular ports
         across the set of managed switches.

         OFPT_TABLE_MOD (17) - This message does not seem to be
         particularly useful, and we do not exepct it to be received
         from either ISP or customer controllers.

      Multipart Messages

         OFPT_MULTIPART_REQUEST (18) - These messages might be received
         from any type of controller, and their contents should be
         processed according to the other guidelines in this list.
         These messages may be generated by the sub-controller in any
         case where a multipart request is needed to convey information
         to switches.

         OFPT_MULTIPART_REPLY (19) - These messages might be received
         from switches, and their contents should be processed according
         to the other guidelines in this list.  These messages may be
         generated by the sub-controller in any case that they're needed
         to convey information that it generates internally for
         controllers.

      Barrier Messages




Eddy, et al.            Expires January 25, 2016               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft   Customer-Controlled Filtering Using SDN       July 2015


         OFPT_BARRIER_REQUEST (20) - This can be generated for
         operations going to switches from the sub-controller.  It might
         be received from either customer or ISP controllers and applies
         to the indicated messages in either case.

         OFPT_BARRIER_REPLY (21) - This message might be received by the
         sub-controller from switches.  It can also be generated by the
         sub-controller in response to ISP or customer controllers
         barrier requests.

      Queue Configuration Messages

         OFPT_QUEUE_GET_CONFIG_REQUEST (22) - Queue configuration
         setting is outside of the OpenFlow protocol scope, and may be
         difficult to synthesize across multiple managed switches, so
         these messages might not be accepted or processed by a sub-
         controller.  They may be generated by the sub-controller itself
         in learning about the queue configuration of managed switches.

         OFPT_QUEUE_GET_CONFIG_REPLY (23) - These messages may be
         received by the sub-controller from switches, but it does not
         seem useful to create a way to generate them from the sub-
         controller to either ISP or customer controllers.

      Controller Role Change Request Messages

         OFPT_ROLE_REQUEST (24) - Role requests may be received from
         either customer or ISP controllers.  In either case, the sub-
         controller should process them normally, with the exception
         that the customer controller roles influence only their
         capabilities within the envelope of control delegated to the
         particular customer, and not a global role.  The sub-controller
         may generate role request messages to managed switches in order
         to control its role relative to other sub-controllers or ISP
         controllers accessing the same switches.  Generally, only an
         "equal" or "master" role is sensible for a sub-controller,
         since it would not be able to carry out obligations to customer
         or ISP controllers otherwise.

         OFPT_ROLE_REPLY (25) - This message is received from managed
         switches and also generated in response to role requests from
         ISP or customer controllers.

      Asynchronous Message Configuration

         OFPT_GET_ASYNC_REQUEST (26) - There does not seem to be a need
         to accept or process these messages from customer controllers,




Eddy, et al.            Expires January 25, 2016               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft   Customer-Controlled Filtering Using SDN       July 2015


         though they might be received from an ISP controller.  They can
         be generated by the sub-controller for managed switches.

         OFPT_GET_ASYNC_REPLY (27) - This message might be generated in
         response to an ISP controller's request, or received from a
         switch in response to a request from the sub-controller.

         OFPT_SET_ASYNC (28) - This message might be received from an
         ISP controller, though does not seem useful to process from
         customer controllers.  It can be generated by the sub-
         controller and sent to managed switches.

      Meters and Rate Limiters Configuration Messages

         OFPT_METER_MOD (29) - Meter control may be useful for both
         customer and ISP controllers, and the sub-controller should
         translate these into appropriate messages to the managed
         switches.  The view of meters provided to controllers from the
         sub-controller will need to be synthesized from aggregated view
         of meters on the managed switches, and this requires specific
         logic in the sub-controller.

   When validating flow table modifications from customer controllers,
   they need to first be checked against the particular flow table
   resources designated for modification by the particular customer, or
   transformed in some way to customer-specific flow table resources on
   the individual managed switches.  After this, the content of the
   modification needs to be checked in order to make sure that the
   format of the rule only supports a Drop action or a GoTo-Table action
   for a table designated by the ISP to that customer as a Stage-3 flow
   table (described below).  The sub-controller may ensure this by
   transforming the indicated GoTo-Table target into values it controls
   and tracks for the individual switches being managed by it.

   In OpenFlow, rules are organized into flow tables, and sets of rules
   across flow tables are linked via GotoTable actions

   In order to ensure that the ISP retains capabilities to control
   traffic through its network, and that the only thing being granted to
   the customer is an ability to specify a drop preference on offending
   traffic, the sub-controller views the underlying switch flow-table
   organization as three stages.

      Stage-1 (ISP Controlled): These contain the rules initially
      applied to packets ingressing the ISP's network, and is where the
      ISP implements is own ingress filtering and other actions.  At the
      end of the Stage-1 flow tables, entries based on the destination
      IP address are matched against customer-specific prefixes, and



Eddy, et al.            Expires January 25, 2016               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft   Customer-Controlled Filtering Using SDN       July 2015


      Goto-Table actions specify the Stage-2 flow tables to be checked
      for customer-specified filtering rules.

      Stage-2 (Customer Controlled): Customers have access to these flow
      tables.  They MUST contain only Drop, Forward, or Goto-
      Table actions.  The Goto-Table actions MUST indicate a Stage-3
      table selected by the ISP.  Each Stage-2 flow table corresponds to
      a particular customer and are dynamically managed by each
      customer.  These can be safely managed without interaction with
      the ISP.

      Stage-3 (ISP Controlled): These flow tables are used to implement
      the ISP's additional forwarding logic and other processing needed
      before an accepted packet is placed at an egress port.  Since
      these flow tables are not reached unless Stage-2 logic has already
      indicated the traffic is desirable, the functionality accessed
      through Stage-3 tables (e.g. tunnels, etc) is able to be protected
      from DDoS attacks once they are detected and distinguished from
      desirable traffic.

   The sub-controller permits only Stage-2 rules to be modified by the
   customer controllers, limits the flow table resources used in Stage-2
   by each customer, and limits the format of rules permitted to be be
   included in Stage-2.

6.  Discussion

   The FlowVisor architecture [SGY09] is similar to the one described in
   this document, but has some key distinctions.  FlowVisor allows for
   the partitioning of a network into a series of logical "slices" via a
   series of logical flow classification rules.  The rules are managed
   by a customized OpenFlow controller running the FlowVisor software,
   which acts as a transparent proxy for OpenFlow network traffic.  Each
   unique slice has one or more OpenFlow controllers associated with it
   (called "guests").  Messages to or from all guests are routed through
   the FlowVisor proxy, which is then responsible for examining OpenFlow
   messages it observes and rewriting (or discarding) them as necessary
   to ensure the messages only affect the pieces of the network assigned
   to be part of that slice.

   FlowVisor could potentially be used to implement the ideas defined in
   this document.  The caveats to this include:

   Scaling the Proxy  In order for the rules to be properly applied in
      the FlowVisor system, all messages must pass through a single
      proxy, and this may have scaling implications compared to the more
      specific sub-controller functions we described that can be
      distributed even to per-customer sub-controllers, because



Eddy, et al.            Expires January 25, 2016               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft   Customer-Controlled Filtering Using SDN       July 2015


      customers do not require a unified consistent view of the ISP
      switching elements, nor do their directives interact with one
      another since the "stage-2" flow tables are isolated from one
      another.

   Hierarchical Considerations  While FlowVisor supports hierarchical
      deployment through partitioning or overlap of flowspaces, applying
      rules in the presence of certain types of network designs (e.g.
      multiple layers of NAT) could be a challenge

   Generic  FlowVisor provides a superset of the functionality required
      to support upstream DDoS filtering.  The additional functionality
      may be useful in many cases, but is more heavyweight than a
      focused solution for DDoS filtering.

   Isolation  Rewritten rules need to be carefully audited to ensure the
      transformations have no adverse effects at any level of a managed
      network(s).

   When there are multiple SDN applications controlling flow table
   entries, there is a potential for conflict, as dealt with by systems
   like FortNOX [PSY12].  By creating the three-stage approach to the
   flow table composition, and only allowing customer access to
   individual stage-2 flow tables (or entries), we have largely avoided
   the types of conflicts that require more complex analysis and
   enforecement systems.

   While this document focuses on the sub-controller as a hierarchical
   SDN approach to filtering traffic, the idea could be extended to
   support other applications as well.  For example, quality of service
   or traffic-shaping applications could be requested at the upstream
   provider in the same way as (D)DoS filtering mechanisms.  This may be
   possible to extend with only moderate additional sub-controller
   complexity, following a similar three-stage design to the flow table
   configuration.

   The focus in this document is on implementation of DDoS mitigations
   between an attack target and its direct ISPs.  Pushing defenses
   further upstream, to higher tier ISPs or to ISPs closer to the attack
   traffic sources, is something we consider to be a separate problem
   that other protocol mechanisms can deal with [EDC15]

   Several position papers from the 2015 IAB CARIS workshop discuss
   inter-domain collaboration for DDoS defense and possible application
   of SDN technology towards this goal.  [BJD15] notes that standards
   are needed for threat feed exchanges, service requirement profiles,
   and dynamic negotiation with service providers.  The system described
   in this document shows that at least for immediate ISPs of an attack



Eddy, et al.            Expires January 25, 2016               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft   Customer-Controlled Filtering Using SDN       July 2015


   target, mitigations can be implemented without new protocols or
   standards.  The delegation of limited flow table entry management to
   an ISP's customers could be viewed as a simple, fast, and effective
   means of the dynamic negotiation functionality.  [XHH15] discusses
   use of "big data analysis" working in conjunction with an SDN-based
   network.  Use of any type of attack identification or
   characterization technique is fully compatible with the architecture
   descibed in this document, including high-performance traffic
   analysis appliances and other on-premises equipment.  Identification
   and characterization of an attack is performed by a functional entity
   that provides input into the filter management application that we
   describe, and the way this input is determined is orthoganal to
   whether SDN or some other mechanism is used to signal and effect a
   mitigation function.

7.  Acknowledgements

   Work on some of the material discussed in this document was sponsored
   by the United States Department of Homeland Security (contract
   HSHQDC-15-C-00017), but it does not necessarily reflect the position
   or the policy of the Government and no official endorsement should be
   inferred.  Support and feedback from Dan Massey was helpful in
   assessing and describing this usage of SDN for DDoS mitigation.

8.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.

9.  Security Considerations

   DDoS mitigation is a security functionality.  The architecture
   described in this document improves on the current ability of end-
   networks to survive attacks and of ISP networks to accurately filter
   DDoS traffic.

   Security of the system described in this document depends heavily on
   security of the OpenFlow control connections themselves, which is
   discussed in the body of the document as part of configuring the
   switches, sub-controllers, and controllers.

   Security flaws in implementations or applications of this
   architecture could be used to attack an end network by rerouting or
   dropping its traffic within its ISPs' networks, however, these would
   likely need to leverage underlying flaws in OpenFlow that would have
   other implications more serious than this.






Eddy, et al.            Expires January 25, 2016               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft   Customer-Controlled Filtering Using SDN       July 2015


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

10.2.  Informative References

   [BJD15]    Boucadair, M., Jacquenet, C., and L. Dunbar, "Integrating
              Hosted Security Functions with on Premises Security
              Functions - Joint Force to Mitigate Internet Attacks",
              2015.

              2015 IAB CARIS workshop

   [EDC15]    Eddy, W., Dailey, J., and G. Clark, "BGP Flow
              Specification Validation Using the Resource Public Key
              Infrastructure", 2015.

   [OF1.3]    Open Networking Foundation, "OpenFlow Switch Specification
              Version 1.3.0", June 2012,
              <https://www.opennetworking.org/images/stories/downloads/
              sdn-resources/onf-specifications/openflow/openflow-spec-
              v1.3.0.pdf>.

   [PSY12]    Porras, P., Shin, S., Yegneswaran, V., Fong, M., Tyson,
              M., and G. Gu, "A Security Enforcement Kernel for OpenFlow
              Networks", August 2012,
              <http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~lierranli/coms6998-
              8SDNFall2013/papers/FortNox-HotSDN2012.pdf>.

   [RFC6973]  Cooper, A., Tschofenig, H., Aboba, B., Peterson, J.,
              Morris, J., Hansen, M., and R. Smith, "Privacy
              Considerations for Internet Protocols", RFC 6973,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6973, July 2013,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6973>.

   [RFC7149]  Boucadair, M. and C. Jacquenet, "Software-Defined
              Networking: A Perspective from within a Service Provider
              Environment", RFC 7149, DOI 10.17487/RFC7149, March 2014,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7149>.







Eddy, et al.            Expires January 25, 2016               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft   Customer-Controlled Filtering Using SDN       July 2015


   [RFC7426]  Haleplidis, E., Ed., Pentikousis, K., Ed., Denazis, S.,
              Hadi Salim, J., Meyer, D., and O. Koufopavlou, "Software-
              Defined Networking (SDN): Layers and Architecture
              Terminology", RFC 7426, DOI 10.17487/RFC7426, January
              2015, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7426>.

   [SGY09]    Sherwood, R., Gibb, G., Yap, K., Appenzeller, G., Casado,
              M., McKeown, N., and G. Parulkar, "FlowVisor: A Network
              Virtualization Layer", October 2009,
              <http://archive.openflow.org/downloads/technicalreports/
              openflow-tr-2009-1-flowvisor.pdf>.

   [XHH15]    Xia, L., Fu, T., He, C., Gondrom, T., and D. He, "An
              Elastic and Adaptive Anti-DDoS Architecture Based on Big
              Data Analysis and SDN for Operators", 2015.

              2015 IAB CARIS workshop

Authors' Addresses

   Wesley Eddy
   MTI Systems

   Email: wes@mti-systems.com


   Gilbert Clark
   MTI Systems

   Email: gclark@mti-systems.com


   Justin Dailey
   MTI Systems

   Email: justin@mti-systems.com















Eddy, et al.            Expires January 25, 2016               [Page 21]
