



General                                                     L. Johansson
Internet-Draft                                                     SUNET
Intended status: Informational                               L. Nordberg
Expires: July 25, 2014                                          NORDUnet
                                                        January 21, 2014


                     Linkability Considered Harmful
                   draft-johansson-linkability-bad-01

Abstract

   Current debate on pervasive monitoring often focus on passive attacks
   on the protocol and transport layers but even if these issues were
   eliminated through the judicious use of encryption, roughly the same
   information would still be available to an attacker who is able to
   (legally or otherwise) obtain access to linked data sets which are
   being maintained by large content and service providers.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 25, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Johansson & Nordberg      Expires July 25, 2014                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Linkability Considered Harmful         January 2014


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

1.  Introduction

   This I-D is submitted as a position paper for the joint IAB/W3C
   STRINT workshop 2014.  The authors wishes to call attention to the
   fact that linked data sets are a source of information, sometimes
   every bit as useful as anything that can be gleaned from passive
   monitoring of Internet traffic.  Such data sets are routinely
   generated and maintained by service and content providers and are
   often a source of secondary (or even primary) income for those that
   own and generate them.

   In the current discussion on pervasive monitoring we often overlook
   the fact that even as more encryption is used, making passive attacks
   harder, focus may simply shift to attacks on owners of linked data
   sets.  We should strike at the root of this problem by making it less
   appealing to maintain these data sets and by offering users a measure
   of control over how their information is used and shared.

   Linkability is by no means a new concept and the authors do not
   propose to (re)define the concept in this draft.  Instead our intent
   is to show, using some simple examples, how linkability occurs in
   practice and what effect linkability has on privacy on the Internet.

2.  A Simple Example

   Service providers (we use this term in a general sense, and not with
   a view to any particular protocols etc) typically manage users and
   billing records.  This leads to a data set being created for every
   user of that service.  Most services employ a simple pattern for user
   enrollment which relies on an email address as a means of
   (supposedly) uniquely identifying the user.  The email address has
   become the defacto user identifier on the Internet.

   When a user pays for the service a pair of linked data sets is
   created: the user data at the service provider is associated (via the
   credit card information) to the user data held by the credit card
   company.  The value of the linked data, as well as the risk to the
   user, is higher than the value/risk involved in the two data sets
   taken as separate entities.  For instance the linked data says
   something about the buying habits of the user (based on the use of
   the particular credit card) which in itself is valuable information.







Johansson & Nordberg      Expires July 25, 2014                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Linkability Considered Harmful         January 2014


   Linking increases the risk to the user as well.  With every service
   that stores the users credit card the risk of exposure to active
   attacks increase as events in recent years have made it painfully
   clear.

   If this example seems overly simplified or even naive to bring up,
   consider the simple observation that when we visit a store in the
   physical world we have the ability to "browse", i.e to view and
   select among the offered goods without having to identify ourselves
   or prove our ability to pay for any of the goods in the store.  This
   aspect of the real world has not been translated into the online
   world where prospective customers are routinely fingerprinted and our
   behaviour tracked even when we have shown no intention of engaging in
   a business transaction with the store owner.

   Naturally there must be ways to "conduct business on the Internet",
   but there are ways to enable business without the need for linkable
   attributes.  In fact there are ways to enable business using non-
   linkable attributes in such a way that the risk to business owners
   are reduced.

3.  Avoiding Linkable Attributes

   The way to avoid linking is simple (and yet so hard in practice):
   avoid the use of linkable attributes.  In our e-commerce example
   above, the credit card number is a linkable attribute.  However in
   this case the credit card is strictly speaking not needed at the
   service provider.  When the user provides her credit card information
   to the service provider she is actually providing an authorization to
   the service giving the service provider the right to obtain payment
   from the credit card company.

   Instead of using the credit card number as an implicit grant (of a
   right to obtain payment), a token that isn't linkable across
   identifier domains could be used to represent an explicit grant
   issued on behalf of the user by the credit card company to the
   service provider.  This is a simple example of a general pattern:
   instead of using a linkable user identifier, provide access to an
   attribute representing some property of the user that used to grant
   specific access.











Johansson & Nordberg      Expires July 25, 2014                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Linkability Considered Harmful         January 2014


   Some credit card companies have actually taken first steps towards
   this by involving the user directly in a second factor authentication
   (typically to reduce the risk of fraud).  This practice follows a
   model for 3:rd party authentication services (aka identity providers)
   commonly used in the enterprise and R&E community.  Experience from
   the R&E identity federation community shows that access control using
   identity providers and non-linkable pseudonymous identifiers is by no
   means problem free, but can be made to work in many situations.

4.  Linkability and Probability

   Links between data sets do not necessarily have to have be uniquely
   linkable in order to blur the line between private and public actions
   on the Internet.  Linkability is really about probability and often
   absolute certainty (demonstrated in the example above) is not needed
   for an adversary to conclude that two actions were likely performed
   by the same client.

   Web browsers are typically fingerprintable even when the user tries
   to avoid sticking out when compared to other users of a given web
   site.  Regardless of encryption, the operator of a web site can more
   often than not tell one user from another by looking at information
   sent by the browser without the users knowledge.

   Some examples of sources for fingerprintability in web browsers are
   information about browser window and desktop resolution, browser
   toolbar presence, title bar font size and window manager settings
   [TORBUTTON-DESIGN].  This has been confirmed by empirical studies
   like the [PANOPTICLICK] study done by the EFF.

5.  Incentives for Collecting Data

   There are strong incentives for service providers to enrich the value
   of their data set using attribute linking.  The value of the
   attribute naturally increase with the inverse of the size of the set
   of users who share that attribute: the more specific the attribute
   the more valuable it is, because it can be used to profile a user
   with a higher degree of certainty.

   Unfortunately there seem to be few costs associated with keeping
   large linked data sets around - stolen user credentials in the 10s of
   thousands rarely result in more than a brief notice in the news
   anymore.  To date the IETF community have focused on how to avoid the
   use of long-term credentials (passwords) to reduce the effects of
   such attacks.  We need to broaden our scope to find ways to
   disincentivize the (over)use of linkable attributes.





Johansson & Nordberg      Expires July 25, 2014                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Linkability Considered Harmful         January 2014


6.  The Least common Denominator of Privacy

   Out of all the transactions that a given user performs over the time
   her traffic is being observed by an adversary, the most linkable one
   will define her level of privacy towards that adversary.  In other
   words, linkability is the least common denominator of privacy and
   must be treated as the privacy killer that it is.  When we allow for
   too much linkability in protocols we must acknowledge the fact that
   we're building something that can't provide privacy.

   Part of the Internet economy seems to be based on linked data sets
   and linkable attributes.  Changing this will require creating
   negative incentives for service providers, making it less attractive
   to keep data around as well as establishing technical mechanisms that
   allow service providers access to the attributes they do need in
   order to conduct their business without having to rely on linkable
   attributes.  Success will depend on carefully engineering the
   negative incentives to match the technical mechanisms in order to
   promote good behaviour.

   The authors believe that the IETF community should attempt to design
   technical controls into existing and future protocols that make it
   possible for users of Internet technology to have a choice when to
   provide linkable data to services and eavesdroppers and when not to.

7.  Acknowledgements

   Many thanks to Nick Mathewson for important contributions on the
   topic of linkability.  Many thanks also to Lucy Lynch who is the
   source of much wisdom, the "I'm just browsing" response to
   identification on the web in particular.

8.  Informative References

   [TORBUTTON-DESIGN]
              Perry, M., "Torbutton Design Documentation", n.d., <https:
              //www.torproject.org/torbutton/en/design/>.

   [PANOPTICLICK]
              Eckersley, P., "How Unique Is Your Web Browser?", n.d.,
              <https://panopticlick.eff.org/browser-uniqueness.pdf>.

Authors' Addresses

   Leif Johansson
   SUNET

   Email: leifj@sunet.se



Johansson & Nordberg      Expires July 25, 2014                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Linkability Considered Harmful         January 2014


   Linus Nordberg
   NORDUnet

   Email: linus@nordu.net















































Johansson & Nordberg      Expires July 25, 2014                 [Page 6]
