   Network Working Group                           
   INTERNET-DRAFT                                  
   Expires in: April 2004                       	   
                                                Scott Poretsky
                                                Quarry Technologies

						   		Shankar Rao
						   		Qwest Communications		

						   		Ray Piatt
						   		Cable and Wireless

                                                October 2003

             	
			Framework for Accelerated Stress Benchmarking
              	<draft-ietf-bmwg-acc-bench-framework-00.txt>


   Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force  (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


   Abstract
   This document provides a framework for executing the Accelerated
   Stress Benchmarking.  It is intended that this framework be applied
   with the Terminology document when using the Methodology document.
   Discussion to specify and apply Startup Conditions, Configuration 
   Sets, and Instability Conditions is provided with examples.  The 
   motivation and benefits of stress testing are also discussed.	






Poretsky, Rao, Piatt					        		[Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT Framework for Accelerated Stress Benchmarking  October 2003

Table of Contents
     1. Introduction ................................................ 2
     2. Existing definitions ........................................ 2
     3. Motivation for Accelerated Stress Benchmarking............... 2    
     4. Application of Configuration Sets............................ 3
     5. Application of Startup Conditions............................ 5
     6. Application of Instability Conditions........................ 6
     7. Service Provider Application of Accelerated Stress Testing... 6
     8. Security Considerations...................................... 6
     9. References................................................... 6
     10. Author's Address............................................ 6
     11. Full Copyright Statement.................................... 7


   1. Introduction
   This document provides the motivation and framework to perform 
   Accelerated Stress Benchmarking.  The terminology to be used 
   for Accelerated Stress Benchmarking is defined in [1] and the 
   methodology is provided in [2].  This document discusses how to
   apply the terminology to the benchmarking for producing effective
   reproducible tests.  Configuration Sets, Startup Conditions, and 
   Instability Conditions are defined [1] and examples are provided
   in this document. 
 
   2.  Existing definitions
   RFC 1242 "Benchmarking Terminology for Network Interconnect 
   Devices" and RFC 2285 "Benchmarking Terminology for LAN Switching 
   Devices" should be consulted before attempting to make use of this 
   document.

   For the sake of clarity and continuity this RFC adopts the template
   for definitions set out in Section 2 of RFC 1242.  Definitions are
   indexed and grouped together in sections for ease of reference.
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

   3. Motivation for Accelerated Stress Benchmarking

   Router testing benchmarks have consistently been made in a 
   monolithic fashion in which a single protocol or behavior is 
   measured in an isolated environment.  It is important to know the 
   limits for a router/switch's (hereby referred to as Router) behavior 
   for each protocol, however this does not produce a reliable benchmark 
   of the router's behavior in a deployed network.  Routers in an 
   operational network are simultaneously configured with multiple 
   protocols and security policies while forwarding traffic and being 
   managed.  

   To accurately benchmark a router for deployment it is necessary to 
   test that router in operational conditions by simultaneously 
   configuring the network protocols and security  policies, sourcing 
   traffic, and managing the router.  The benchmarks are externally 

Poretsky, Rao, Piatt					        		[Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT Framework for Accelerated Stress Benchmarking  October 2003

   observable as control plane or data plane errors at the DUT.  It is 
   helpful to accelerate these network operational conditions so that 
   the DUT can be benchmarked with faster test duration.   Accelerated 
   Stress Testing of routers provides the following benefits:

   	1. Evaluation of multiple protocols enabled simultaneously as 
      	configured in deployed networks
   	2. Evaluation of System and Software Stability
   	3. Evaluation of Manageability under stressful conditions	
   	4. Identification of Software Coding bugs such as:
		a. Memory Leaks
		b. Suboptimal CPU Utilization
		c. Coding Logic	

   These benefits produce three advantages for netowrk operations:
	1.  Increased stability of routers and protocols
	2.  Hardened routers to DoS attacks
	3.  Verified manageability under stress

   4. Application of Configuration Sets

   Configuration Sets are defined in [1] for the Control Plane, Data 
   Plane, Management Plane, and Security Plane.  It is intended that 
   the user of these documents specify the specific parameters of the
   Configuration Set based upon applicability to the device and 
   network.  Example Configuration Sets are provided below.

   4.1 Control Plane Configuration Sets

   Key protocols for the Control Plane are Routing Protocols, MPLS 
   Signaling Protocols, and Multicast Protocols.  Examples for these
   are as follow:

   Example Routing Protocol Configuration Set-

	   PARAMETER				UNITS
  	   BGP					Enabled/Disabled
	   Number of EBGP Peers			Peers
	   Number of IBGP Peers			Peers
	   Number of BGP Route Instances	Routes
	   Number of BGP Installed Routes	Routes

 	   MBGP					Enabled/Disabled
	   Number of MBGP Route Instances	Routes
	   Number of MBGP Installed Routes	Routes

	   ISIS					Enabled/Disabled
	   ISIS-TE					Enabled/Disabled
	   Number of ISIS Adjacencies		Adjacencies
	   Number of ISIS Routes		Routes
	   Number of Nodes per Area		Nodes


Poretsky, Rao, Piatt					        		[Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT Framework for Accelerated Stress Benchmarking  October 2003

   	   OSPF					Enabled/Disabled
	   OSPF-TE					Enabled/Disabled
	   Number of OSPF Adjacencies		Adjacencies
	   Number of OSPF Routes		Routes
	   Number of Nodes per Area		Nodes
		   	   
   Example MPLS Protocol Configuration Set-

	   PARAMETER				UNITS
	   MPLS-TE
	   Number of Ingress Tunnels		Tunnels
	   Number of Mid-Point Tunnels	Tunnels
	   Number of Egress Tunnels		Tunnels

	   LDP
	   Number of Sessions			Sessions
	   Number of FECs				FECs

  


 Example Multicast Protocol Configuration Set-
   
	   PARAMETER				UNITS
	   PIM-SM					Enabled/Disabled
	   RP						Enabled/Disabled
	   Number of Multicast Groups		Groups	
	   MSDP					Enabled/Disabled

   4.2 Data Plane Configuration Set

   The Data Plane Configuration Set includes the Traffic Profile 
   as defined in [1].  The example configuration set is as follows:

   Example Data Plane Configuration Set- 

	PARAMETER				UNITS
	Traffic Forwarding		Enabled/Disabled
	Aggregate Offered Load		bps (or pps)
	Number of Ingress Interfaces	number
	Number of Ingress Interfaces	number 
	
	TRAFFIC PROFILE
	Packet Size(s)			bytes
	Packet Rate(interface)		array of packets per second	
	Number of Flows			number
	Encapsulation(flow)		array of encapsulation type






Poretsky, Rao, Piatt					        		[Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT Framework for Accelerated Stress Benchmarking  October 2003

   4.3 Management Configuration Set

   The Management Configuration Set can include SNMP, Logging, Debug, 
   Telnet, FTP, SSH, and RADIUS parameters.  An example is as follows:

   Example Management Configuration Set-

	PARAMETER					UNITS
	SNMP GET Rate				SNMP Gets/minute				
	Logging					Enabled/Disabled
	Protocol Debug				Enabled/Disabled
	Telnet Rate					Sessions/Hour
	FTP Rate					Sessions/Hour
	Concurrent Telnet Sessions		Sessions
	Concurrent FTP Session			Sessions
	Packet Statistics Collector		Enabled/Disabled
	Statistics Sampling Rate		X:1 packets

   4.4 Security Configuration Set

   The Security Configuration Set can include Packet Filters and
   Access session restrictions.  An example is as follows:

   Example Security Configuration Set - 

	PARAMETER						UNITS
	Packet Filters					Enabled/Disabled
	Number of Filters For-Me			number
	Number of Filter Rules For-Me			number
	Number of Traffic Filters 			number
	Number of Traffic Filter Rules		number
	SSH							Enabled/Disabled
	Number of simultaneous SSH sessions		number
	RADIUS						Enabled/Disabled
	TACACS						Enabled/Disabled

   5. Application of Startup Conditions

	Startup conditions are the conditions that must be met in order 
	for Accelerated Stress benchmarking to begin. Startup Conditions 
	specify how a particular Configuration Set should be obtained. 
	Example Startup Conditions include:

	PARAMETER						UNITS
	Routing Session Establishment Rate		sessions per minute
	User Config Session Establishment Rate	number per minute
	Security Session Establishment Rate		number per minute
	Routes Learned Rate				routes per minute
	MPLS LSPs Establishment Rate			number per minute




Poretsky, Rao, Piatt					        		[Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT Framework for Accelerated Stress Benchmarking  October 2003

   6. Application of Instability Conditions

	Test conditions that occur during the Accelerated Stress Test 
	should simulate instability in an operational network.  
	Repeating these conditions should stress the SUT.  Example 
	Instability Conditions are provided below:

	PARAMETER						UNITS 
	Interface Shutdown Cycling Rate		interfaces per minute
	BGP Session Loss Rate				sessions per minute
	BGP Route Flap Rate				routes per minutes
	IGP Route Flap Rate				routes per minutes 
	Route Convergence from Better Next-Hop  	routes per minutes 
	LSP Reroute Rate					LSP per minute
	Overloaded Links					number
	Amount Links Overloaded 			% of bandwidth
	FTP Rate						Mb/minute
	IPsec Session Loss				sessions per minute
	Filter Policy Changes				policies per minute
	SSH Session	Re-Start				SSH sessions per minute

   7.  Accelerated Stress Benchmarking Application 
	The Accelerated Stress Benchmarking test can be applied in 
	service provider test environments to benchmark DUTs under 
	stress in an environment that is reflective of an operational 
	network.  A particular Configuration Set is defined and the 
	DUT is benchmarked using this and the Instability Conditions.  
        Varying ConfigurationSets and/or Instability Conditions for 
        repeated iterations can provide a characterization of the DUT 
        to help determine future network deployments.   

   8. Security Considerations
        Documents of this type do not directly effect the security of
        the Internet or of corporate networks as long as benchmarking
        is not performed on devices or systems connected to operating
        networks.

   9. References

   [1]  Poretsky, Scott, Rao, Shankar, and Piatt, Ray, "Terminology for 	
        Accelerated Stress Benchmarking, draft-ietf-bmwg-acc-bench-term-
        01, work in progress, October 2003.

   10. Author's Address

     	Scott Poretsky
   	Quarry Technologies
  	8 New England Executive Park
   	Burlington, MA 01803
    	USA
    	Phone: + 1 781 395 5090
   	EMail: sporetsky@quarrytech.com

Poretsky, Rao, Piatt					        		[Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT Framework for Accelerated Stress Benchmarking  October 2003

	Shankar Rao
	950 17th Street
	Suite 1900
	Qwest Communications
	Denver, CO 80210
	USA
	Phone: + 1 303 437 6643
	Email: srao@qwest.net

	Ray Piatt
	Cable and Wireless
	11700 Plaza America Drive
	Reston, VA 20190
	USA
	Phone: + 1 703 292 2113	
	Email: rpiatt@cw.net

   11.  Full Copyright Statement

        Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1998).  All Rights
        Reserved.

        This document and translations of it may be copied and
        furnished to others, and derivative works that comment on or
        otherwise explain it or assist in its implementation may be
        prepared, copied, published and distributed, in whole or in
        part, without restriction of any kind, provided that the above
        copyright notice and this paragraph are included on all such
        copies and derivative works.  However, this document itself may
        not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright
        notice or references to the Internet Society or other Internet
        organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing
        Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights
        defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or
        as required to translate it into languages other than English.

        The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will
        not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or
        assigns.  This document and the information contained herein is
        provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE
        INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES,
        EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY
        THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY
        RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
        FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.








Poretsky, Rao, Piatt							[Page 7]
