



Network Working Group                                          L. Eggert
Internet-Draft                                                    NetApp
Obsoletes: 3005 (if approved)                              29 March 2021
Intended status: Best Current Practice                                  
Expires: 30 September 2021


                      IETF Discussion List Charter
                        draft-eggert-bcp45bis-00

Abstract

   The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) discussion mailing list
   furthers the development and specification of Internet technology
   through discussion of technical issues, and hosts discussions of IETF
   direction, policy, meetings, and procedures.  As this is the most
   general IETF mailing list, considerable latitude is allowed.
   Advertising, whether to solicit business or promote employment
   opportunities, falls well outside the range of acceptable topics, as
   do discussions of a personal nature.

Discussion Venues

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the mailing list (), which
   is archived at .

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/larseggert/bcp45bis.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 30 September 2021.




Eggert                  Expires 30 September 2021               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        IETF Discussion List Charter            March 2021


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

Table of Contents

   1.  Charter for the IETF Discussion List  . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3

1.  Charter for the IETF Discussion List

   The IETF discussion list, ietf@ietf.org, serves two purposes.  It
   furthers the development and specification of Internet technology
   through discussion of technical issues.  It also hosts discussions of
   IETF direction, policy, meetings, and procedures.  As this is the
   most general IETF mailing list, considerable latitude is allowed.
   Advertising, whether to solicit business or promote employment
   opportunities, falls well outside the range of acceptable topics, as
   do discussions of a personal nature.

   This list is meant for initial discussion only.  Discussions that
   fall within the area of any working group or well established list
   should be moved to such more specific forum as soon as this is
   pointed out, unless the issue is one for which the working group
   needs wider input or direction.




Eggert                  Expires 30 September 2021               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        IETF Discussion List Charter            March 2021


   In addition to the topics noted above, appropriate postings include:

   *  Last Call discussions of proposed protocol actions

   *  Discussion of technical issues that are candidates for IETF work,
      but do not yet have an appropriate e-mail venue

   *  Discussion of IETF administrative policies

   *  Questions and clarifications concerning IETF meetings

   *  Announcements of conferences, events, or activities that are
      sponsored or endorsed by the Internet Society or IETF.

   Inappropriate postings include:

   *  Unsolicited bulk e-mail

   *  Discussion of subjects unrelated to IETF policy, meetings,
      activities, or technical concerns

   *  Unprofessional commentary, regardless of the general subject

   *  Announcements of conferences, events, or activities that are not
      sponsored or endorsed by the Internet Society or IETF.

   The IETF Chair, the IETF Executive Director, or a sergeant-at-arms
   appointed by the Chair is empowered to restrict posting by a person,
   or of a thread, when the content is inappropriate and represents a
   pattern of abuse.  They are encouraged to take into account the
   overall nature of the postings by an individual and whether
   particular postings are an aberration or typical.  Complaints
   regarding their decisions should be referred to the IAB.

Author's Address

   Lars Eggert
   NetApp
   Stenbergintie 12 B
   FI-02700 Kauniainen
   Finland

   Email: lars@eggert.org
   URI:   https://eggert.org/







Eggert                  Expires 30 September 2021               [Page 3]
