

Transport Working Group                               Ghassem Koleyni 
Internet Draft                                        Nortel Networks 
Expiration Date: September 2002                         Matthew Bocci 
                                                              Alcatel 
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                          April 2002 
 
 
 Applicability Statement for ATM Cell Encapsulation over PSN (the basic 
                                 mode) 
     
        <draft-koleyni-pwe3-app-cell-over-psn-00.txt> 
 
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
    
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at  any  time.  It  is  inappropriate  to  use  Internet-  Drafts  as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
    
   The  list  of  current  Internet-Drafts  can  be  accessed  at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
1. Abstract 
    
   This document discusses the applicability of ATM Cell encapsulation 
   over PNS (Packet Switched Networks, e.g., MPLS). It discusses 
   possible network applications. This document is a prerequisite for 
   advancing ATM-MPLS Cell interworking on the standards track. 
    
   The PSN (e.g., MPLS) is used to transport ATM layer services such as 
   those defined by ITU-T as ATM transfer capabilities [2] and ATM Forum 
   as ATM service categories [3]. The basic requirement is to 
   transparently transport the ATM VCC or VPC service related 
   information (e.g., traffic parameters, QoS, OAM, etc.) over the 
  
Koleyni, et al.         Expires  September 2002               [Page 1] 


 Internet Draft  draft-koleyni-pwe3-app-cell-over-PSN-00.txt  April 2002 
 
 
   interworking LSP, also called Pseudo Wire (PW), over the packet 
   network. 
    
   Table of contents 
    
   1. Abstract  1 
   2. Introduction      2 
   3. Terminology       2 
   4. Applicability     2 
   5. Implementation and deployment considerations      3 
   6. Limitations       3 
   7. Security Considerations   3 
   8. References        4 
   9. Acknowledgement   4 
   10. Author's Addresses       4 
    
2. Introduction 
    
   Many  service  providers  have  multiple  service  networks  and  the 
   Operational Support System capabilities needed to support these 
   existing service offerings. Packet Switched Networks (PSNs) have the 
   potential  to  reduce  the  complexity  of  a  service  provider's 
   infrastructure by allowing virtually any existing digital service to 
   be supported over a single networking infrastructure. 
    
3. Terminology 
    
    
   CTD    Cell Transfer Delay 
   MTU    Maximum Transfer Unit  
   OAM    Operations, Administration, and Maintenance. 
   PVC    Permanent Virtual Connection. An ATM connection that is 
          provisioning via a network management interface.  The 
          connection is not signalled. 
   VCC    Virtual Circuit Connection.  An ATM connection that is 
          switched based on the cell header's VCI. 
   VPC    Virtual Path Connection.  An ATM connection that is switched 
          based on the cell header's VPI. 
    
4. Applicability 
    
   The primary application supported by ATM cell encapsulation over MPLS 
   is to enable the seamless transport of the currently defined ATM 
   layer services (i.e., those identified as transfer capabilities by 
   ITU-T [2] and those identified as service category by ATM Forum [3]) 
   over an MPLS network. To provide this, the basic requirement of the 
   ATM-MPLS interworking function is to map the ATM cells belonging to 
   either VCC or VPC, together with any related OAM and protocol control 
   information into, an interworking LSP that is set up over the MPLS 
   network. 
    
 Koleyni, et al.        Expires September 2002               [Page 2] 
 

 Internet Draft  draft-koleyni-pwe3-app-cell-over-PSN-00.txt  April 2002 
 
 
   The interworking LSPs corresponding to any VCC or VPC may be 
   multiplexed into a transport LSP using conventional MPLS label 
   stacking to achieve multiplexing gain and bandwidth efficiency. 
    
   To provide support for ATM-MPLS interworking, the interworking 
   function can multiplex multiple ATM connections (i.e. VPCs and/or 
   VCCs) into a single MPLS LSP.  
    
   The encapsulation method provides end users with the same quality of 
   service on any given VPC or VCC as per corresponding SLA, traffic 
   contracts and the QoS commitments for that connection. 
    
   One important consideration to make when interworking is to allow 
   OAM information to be treated as in the original network. The 
   interworking function allows this transparency while performing cell 
   encapsulation. 
    
   Resource management cells are used extensively in certain service 
   categories like ABR. Encapsulating ATM cells to MPLS packets allows 
   this capability to be kept.  
    
   Cell Loss priority (CLP) is used to provide discard information and 
   Payload Type Indicator (PTI) provides information regarding the 
   payload being transported. Information on both of these is obtained 
   from the ATM cell header. CLP and PTI are both part of the service 
   specific information fields. 
    
   Concatenation of ATM cells belonging to a VCC or a VPC provides 
   added bandwidth efficiency while preserving discard eligibility of 
   each cell. 
    
5. Implementation and deployment considerations 
    
   Although the Single ATM cell encapsulation provides the simplest way 
   for encapsulating ATM cells within a single MPLS packet, it lacks 
   bandwidth efficiency. This can be improved substantially if the 
   procedures enabling cells from any given VCC or VPC to be 
   concatenated within the interworking LSP.   
 
6. Limitations 
 
   Cell encapsulation only supports point-to-point LSPs.  Multi- point-
   to-point and point-to-multi-point are for further study (FFS). 
    
   To have bi-directional connectivity, as required in ATM, two LSPs 
   should be configured, one for each direction (ATM-to-MPLS and MPLS-
   to-ATM) of the ATM connection. 
    
   Number of concatenated ATM cells is limited by the MTU (Maximum 
   Transfer Unit) size and the cell transfer delay (CTD)objectives. 
    
7. Security Considerations 
 Koleyni, et al.        Expires September 2002               [Page 3] 


 Internet Draft  draft-koleyni-pwe3-app-cell-over-PSN-00.txt  April 2002 
 
 
 
   No additional security issues are introduced in this document.  As 
   ATM encapsulation to MPLS packet is related to MPLS, Cell 
   encapsulation shares the security concerns associated with MPLS. 
 
8. References 
    
   [1}  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP  
        9, RFC 2026, October 1996.       
    
   [2]  ITU-T Recommendation I.371 (2000), Traffic control and 
        congestion control in B-ISDN. 
    
   [3]  ATM Forum Specification af-tm-0121.000 (1999), Traffic 
        Management Specification Version 4.1. 
 
9. Acknowledgement 
 
The authors like to acknowledge the contribution to this work by: TBD  
    
10. Author's Addresses 
    
   Ghassem Koleyni   
   Nortel Networks 
   P O Box 3511, Station C Ottawa, Ontario, 
   K1Y 4H7 Canada 
   Email: ghassem@nortelnetworks.com 
    
   Matthew Bocci  
   Alcatel Telecom Ltd. 
   Voyager Place, Shoppenhangers Rd 
   Maidenhead, Berks,  
   UK  SL6 2PJ 
   Email: Matthew.bocci@alcatel.com 
 Koleyni, et al.        Expires September 2002               [Page 4] 
 

 Internet Draft  draft-koleyni-pwe3-app-cell-over-PSN-00.txt  April 2002 
 
 
    
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet  organizations,  except  as  needed  for  the  purpose  of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights  defined  in  the  Internet  Standards  process  must  be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into 
 

 Koleyni, et al.        Expires September 2002               [Page 5] 
 
