

Network Working Group                                           R. Reddy
Internet-Draft                                  National Security Agency
Intended status: Informational                                C. Wallace
Expires: March 15, 2008                               Cygnacom Solutions
                                                      September 12, 2007


               Trust Anchor Management Problem Statement
               draft-wallace-ta-mgmt-problem-statement-02

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 15, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).













Reddy & Wallace          Expires March 15, 2008                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Trust Anchor Management          September 2007


Abstract

   This document provides a problem statement for the Trust Anchor
   Management Birds of a Feather (BOF).  A trust anchor represents an
   authoritative entity via a public key and associated data.  The
   public key is used to verify digital signatures and the associated
   data is used to constrain the types of information for which the
   trust anchor is authoritative.  Relying parties use trust anchors to
   determine if digitally signed objects are valid by verifying digital
   signatures using the trust anchor's public key and by enforcing the
   constraints expressed in the associated data.  This document
   describes some of the problems associated with the lack of a standard
   trust anchor management mechanism as well as problems that must be
   addressed by such a mechanism.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Functional Properties  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     6.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     6.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 14






















Reddy & Wallace          Expires March 15, 2008                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Trust Anchor Management          September 2007


1.  Introduction

   Digital signatures are used in many applications.  For digital
   signatures to provide integrity and authentication, the public key
   used to verify the digital signature must be trusted.  A public key
   used to verify a signature must be configured as a trust anchor or
   contained in a certificate that can be transitively verified by a
   certification path terminating at a trust anchor.  Directly trusted
   public keys are known as trust anchors.  A Trust Anchor is a public
   key and associated data used by a relying party (RP) to validate a
   signature on a signed object where the object is either:

   o  a public key certificate that begins a certification path
      terminated by a signature certificate or encryption certificate

   o  a non-public key certificate object that cannot be validated via
      use of a certification path

   Trust anchors have local significance, i.e., each RP is configured
   with a set of trust anchors, either by the RP or by an entity that
   manages TAs in the context in which the RP operates.  The associated
   data often is used to define the scope of a trust anchor, by imposing
   constraints on the signatures it may be used to verify.  For example,
   if a trust anchor is used to verify signatures on X.509 certificates,
   these constraints may include a combination of name spaces,
   certificate policies, or application/usage types.  Whenever a
   signature is verified, a trust anchor must be used, either by
   verifying the signature directly or by validating a certification
   path.

   One particular use of digital signatures is the verification of
   signatures on firmware packages loaded into hardware modules, such as
   cryptographic modules, cable boxes, routers, etc.  Since such devices
   are often managed remotely, the devices must be able to authenticate
   the source of management interactions and can use trust anchors to
   perform this authentication.  However, trust anchors require
   management as well.

   All applications that rely upon digital signatures must have some
   means of managing one or more sets of trust anchors.  These sets of
   trust anchors are referred to in this document as trust anchor
   stores.  Often, the means of managing trust anchor stores are
   application-specific and rely upon out-of-band means to establish and
   maintain trustworthiness.  Applications may use multiple trust anchor
   stores and a given trust anchor store may be used by multiple
   applications.  Trust anchor stores are managed by trust anchor
   managers.




Reddy & Wallace          Expires March 15, 2008                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Trust Anchor Management          September 2007


   In some cases, a hardware device may have a single trust anchor that
   is hard-wired or managed only through physical access to the device.
   However, to support the ability to delegate different functions to
   different authorities, the device may require multiple trust anchors.
   It is desirable to manage those trust anchors using similar means as
   software updates, certificate requests, etc. to enable code reuse.

1.1.  Terminology

   The following terms are defined in order to provide a vocabulary for
   describing requirements for trust anchor management.

   Trust Anchor:   A trust anchor represents an authoritative entity via
      a public key and associated data.  The public key is used to
      verify digital signatures and the associated data is used to
      constrain the types of information for which the trust anchor is
      authoritative.  Relying parties use trust anchors to determine if
      digitally signed objects are valid by verifying digital signatures
      using the trust anchor's public key and by enforcing the
      constraints expressed in the associated data.

   Trust Anchor Manager:   A trust anchor manager is responsible for
      managing the contents of a trust anchor store.

   Trust Anchor Store:   A trust anchor store is a set of one or more
      trust anchors.

























Reddy & Wallace          Expires March 15, 2008                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Trust Anchor Management          September 2007


2.  Problem Statement

   Trust anchors are used to support many application scenarios.  Most
   Internet browsers and email clients use trust anchors to authenticate
   TLS sessions, to verify signed email and to generate encrypted email.
   Many software distributions are digitally signed to enable
   authentication of the originator to be performed prior to
   installation.  Trust anchors that support these applications are
   typically installed as part of the operating system or application,
   installed using an enterprise configuration management system or
   installed directly by the application user.

   In some devices, trust anchors are initially installed in the device
   in a secure manner with no means of managing the trust anchor store
   in a non-secure environment.

   Trust anchors are typically stored in application- or operating
   system- specific trust anchor stores.  Often, a single machine may
   have a number of different trust anchor stores that may or may not be
   synchronized (or need to be synchronized).  Reviewing the contents of
   a particular trust anchor store typically involves the use of a
   proprietary tool that interacts with a particular type of trust
   store.

   The mere presence of a trust anchor in a particular store often
   conveys implicit authorization to validate signatures for any
   contexts from which the store is accessed.  For example, the public
   key of a timestamp authority (TSA) may be installed in a trust anchor
   store to validate signatures on timestamps.  However, if the trust
   anchor store is used by multiple applications that serve different
   purposes, the same key may be used to validate other types of objects
   such as certificates or OCSP responses.  There is currently no
   standard means of limiting the applicability (scope) of a trust
   anchor.

   Trust relationships between PKIs are negotiated by policy
   authorities.  Negotiations frequently require significant time to
   ensure all participating parties' requirements are satisfied.  These
   requirements are expressed, to some extent, in public key
   certificates.  In order for these requirements to be enforced, trust
   anchor stores must be managed in accord with policy authority
   intentions.

   Trust anchors are often represented as self-signed certificates,
   which provide no useful means of establishing the validity of the
   information contained in the certificate.  Confidence in the
   integrity of a trust anchor is typically established through out-of-
   band means, often by checking the "fingerprint" of the self-signed



Reddy & Wallace          Expires March 15, 2008                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Trust Anchor Management          September 2007


   certificate with an authoritative source.  Routine trust anchor re-
   key operations typically require similar out-of-band checks.
   Ideally, only the initial set of trust anchors installed in a
   particular trust anchor store should require out-of-band
   verification, particularly when the costs of performing out-of-band
   checks commensurate with the security requirements of applications
   using the trust anchor store are high.

   Despite the prevalent use of trust anchors, there is neither a
   standard means for reporting which trust anchors installed in a
   particular trust anchor store nor a standard means of managing those
   trust anchors.  The remainder of this document describes some of the
   functional characteristics a solution to this problem should exhibit
   along with some security considerations.





































Reddy & Wallace          Expires March 15, 2008                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Trust Anchor Management          September 2007


3.  Functional Properties

   A general-purpose solution for the management of trust anchors must
   be transport independent in order to apply to a range of device
   communications environments.  It should also be applicable in both
   session-oriented and store-and-forward contexts.  At a minimum, it
   must enable a trust anchor manager to add trust anchors to, remove
   trust anchors from and determine which trust anchors are installed in
   a particular trust anchor store.

   Trust anchor configurations may be uniform across an enterprise, or
   they may be unique to a single application or small set of
   applications.  Management transactions, therefore, may be generic,
   targeted to groups of trust anchor stores, or targeted to individual
   trust anchor stores.

   Once installed into a trust anchor store, a trust anchor represents
   an entity with authority recognized by applications that use that
   store.  It is important to be able to define the scope of authority
   assigned to each trust anchor, which may be very specific (e.g., a
   trust anchor public key may be limited to verification of firmware
   updates only), or more general (such as to validate certification
   paths for certificates issued to users or devices).  It should be
   possible to authorize a trust anchor to delegate authority and to
   prevent delegation.

   Trust anchor managers have significant control over a device or
   application due to the ability to control what other authorities are
   recognized.  As such, trust anchor managers are likely to be
   associated with the legal owner of the device or application in an
   enterprise setting or an agency authority for government devices.
   The trust anchor manager may be static over the life of a device, or
   it may change as legal ownership or other factors change.  A trust
   anchor management protocol should enable secure transfer of a device
   from one trust anchor manager to another as well as delegation over
   specific aspects of the device without delegation of the overall
   trust anchor management capability itself.  Trust anchor re-key is
   one type of transfer that must be supported.

   A trust anchor management protocol must be capable of managing trust
   anchors that can be used to validate certification paths in
   accordance with [RFC3280].  Minimally, the definition of a trust
   anchor must include a public key, a public key algorithm and, if
   necessary, public key parameters.  When the public key is used to
   validate certification paths, a distinguished name also must be
   included.  A public key identifier should be included to enable other
   applications of the trust anchor, for example, verification of data
   signed using the Cryptographic Message Syntax SignedData structure



Reddy & Wallace          Expires March 15, 2008                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Trust Anchor Management          September 2007


   [RFC3852].

   In some scenarios, a public key may be explicitly trusted for some
   purposes, but not trusted for use in validating certification paths.
   A trust anchor management protocol must enable the management of
   trust anchors that do not serve as trust anchors for certification
   path validation.  For example, a public key may be used only for
   verification of signed firmware packages [RFC4108].

   Connections between PKIs can be accomplished using different means.
   Unilateral or bilateral cross-certification can be performed, or a
   community may simply elect to explicitly trust the trust anchor from
   another community.  Typically, these decisions occur at the
   enterprise level.  In some scenarios, it can be useful to establish
   these connections for a small community within an enterprise.
   Enterprise-wide mechanisms such as cross-certificates are ill-suited
   for this purpose since certificate revocation or expiration affects
   the entire enterprise.  A trust anchor management protocol can
   address this issue by supporting managed installation of trust
   anchors, or more tightly controlled trust list management
   capabilities within the enterprise.  Managed installation requires
   the ability to identify the members of the community that are
   authorized to rely upon a particular trust anchor, as well as the
   ability to query and report on the contents of trust anchor stores.

   There is no common format for trust anchors.  A trust anchor
   management protocol should support various representations of trust
   anchors to simplify management across a range of application
   scenarios.  Examples of trust anchor formats include self-signed
   X.509 certificates, Open PGP certificates [RFC2440] or DNSSEC trust
   anchors.  [RFC3280] does not mandate a particular trust anchor
   representation, and requires only that a trust anchor public key
   information and a distinguished name be available during
   certification path validation.

   A trust anchor manager must be able to authenticate which device
   produced a report listing the trust anchors that comprise a trust
   anchor store and be able to confirm the contents of the report have
   not been subsequently altered.  Undetectable replay of old reports
   must not be possible.

   A trust anchor definition should enable the representation of
   constraints that influence certification path validation or otherwise
   establish the scope of usage of the trust anchor public key.
   Examples of such constraints are name constraints, certificate
   policies and key usage.  Trust anchor managers must be able to
   establish the constraints associated with any particular trust
   anchor.



Reddy & Wallace          Expires March 15, 2008                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Trust Anchor Management          September 2007


4.  Security Considerations

   The integrity of trust anchor management transactions must be assured
   and it must be possible to authenticate the originator of a
   transactions and confirm the originator is authorized for that
   transaction.

   Traditionally, trust anchors are distributed out-of-band with
   integrity mechanisms checked manually prior to installing a trust
   anchor.  Installation is performed by anyone with sufficient
   administrative privilege on the system receiving the trust anchor.  A
   trust anchor management protocol should enable integrity to be
   checked automatically by relying upon a public key that is resident
   on the client system participating in the protocol.  The ability to
   manage the trust anchor store can be transformed into the ability to
   engage in the trust anchor management protocol with remote control of
   the trust anchor store contents being possible.

   The public key used to authenticate the trust anchor management
   transactions may have been placed on the client as the result of an
   earlier transaction or during an initial bootstrap configuration
   operation.  In most scenarios, at least one public key authorized for
   trust anchor management must be placed in each trust store to be
   managed during the initial configuration of the trust store.  This
   public key may be transported and checked using traditional out-of-
   band means.  In all scenarios, regardless of the authentication
   mechanism, at least one trust anchor manager must be established for
   each trust store during the initial configuration of the trust store.

   An entity receiving trust anchor information must be able to
   authenticate the party providing the information and be able to
   confirm the party is authorized to provide trust anchor information.
   A trust anchor may be authorized to participate in trust anchor
   management protocol exchanges but limited to managing trust anchors
   within a particular scope.  Alternatively, a trust anchor may be
   authorized to participate in trust anchor management protocol
   exchanges without any constraints on the types of trust anchors that
   may be managed.  Clear subordination rules must be defined.

   Some devices that utilize trust anchors have no access to a reliable
   source of time.  Trust anchor management transactions should enable
   such devices to obtain trust anchor information without being subject
   to replay attacks that could add old or no-longer-trusted trust
   anchors to a trust anchor store.

   Compromise of a private key corresponding to a trust anchor can have
   significant negative consequences.  A trust anchor management
   protocol must include strategies to enable recovery from the



Reddy & Wallace          Expires March 15, 2008                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           Trust Anchor Management          September 2007


   compromise of a trust anchor private key, including the private key
   authorized to serve as a source of trust anchor information.

   Reliance on unauthorized trust anchors is the primary threat that
   must be countered by a trust anchor management protocol.














































Reddy & Wallace          Expires March 15, 2008                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           Trust Anchor Management          September 2007


5.  IANA Considerations

   None.  Please remove this section prior to publication as an RFC.
















































Reddy & Wallace          Expires March 15, 2008                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           Trust Anchor Management          September 2007


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC3280]  Housley, R., Polk, W., Ford, W., and D. Solo, "Internet
              X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate and
              Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile", RFC 3280,
              April 2002.

6.2.  Informative References

   [RFC2440]  Callas, J., Donnerhacke, L., Finney, H., and R. Thayer,
              "OpenPGP Message Format", RFC 2440, November 1998.

   [RFC3852]  Housley, R., "Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS)",
              RFC 3852, July 2004.

   [RFC4108]  Housley, R., "Using Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS) to
              Protect Firmware Packages", RFC 4108, August 2005.
































Reddy & Wallace          Expires March 15, 2008                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           Trust Anchor Management          September 2007


Authors' Addresses

   Raksha Reddy
   National Security Agency

   Email: r (dot) reddy (at) radium (dot) ncsc (dot) mil


   Carl Wallace
   Cygnacom Solutions
   Suite 5200
   7925 Jones Branch Drive
   McLean, VA  22102

   Email: cwallace@cygnacom.com




































Reddy & Wallace          Expires March 15, 2008                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           Trust Anchor Management          September 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Reddy & Wallace          Expires March 15, 2008                [Page 14]

