


Internet Draft    draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-01.txt    November 2002 
                
CCAMP Working Group                                                  
Internet Draft                                            Young Hwa Kim 
Document: draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-01.txt             Sun Hee Yang 
                                                                   ETRI 
                                                          Jun Kyun Choi 
                                                                    ICU 
                                                         Jae Cheol Ryou 
                                                                    CNU 
Expires: May 2003                                         November 2002 
                   
                   
                   
    Requirements of Control Channels Protection Protocol in GMPLS 
                   
                   
                   
Status of this Memo 
                   
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with  
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  
                   
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering  
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that  
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
                   
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months  
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any  
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference  
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
                   
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
                
                
Abstract 
                   
   This document proposes a protocol used to protect control channels 
   between adjacent nodes in GMPLS. Control channels are used to carry 
   several control packets that include signaling related, routing  
   related, or link management related information. The protocol may 
   be used not in in-fiber(or in-band) network configurations but in  
   out-of-fiber(or out-of-band) network configurations. 
                   
   Because this proposal is a first document for specifying the protocol 
   used to protect control channels, it has no full contents for the 
   specification to be proposed. Instead, this document focuses on basic 
                
                
Kim, et. al.                                                     [Page 1] 

Internet Draft     draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-00.txt    November 2002 
                
   concepts, necessity and requirements to be analyzed for protecting  
   control channels. If we agree to this proposal including necessity  
   and requirements for protecting control channels, we may proceed  
   further works for the protection of control channels. 
                   
                   
                   
Conventions used in this document 
                   
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",  
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this  
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119. 
                   
                   
                   
Table of Contents 
                   
   1. Introduction.....................................................2 
      1.1 Basic concepts for this proposal.............................3 
          1.1.1 Signaling transport configurations.....................3 
          1.1.2 Signaling types........................................3 
          1.1.3 C-path and C-channel...................................4 
          1.1.4 Protection group.......................................4 
      1.2 Necessity for protecting control channels....................5 
      1.3 Requirements in protecting control channels..................6 
   2. Future works for this proposal...................................8 
   Security Considerations.............................................8 
   References..........................................................9 
   Author's Addresses..................................................9 
                   
                   
                   
1. Introduction 
                   
   A control channel is a pair of mutually reachable interfaces that are 
   used to enable communication between nodes for routing, signaling and 
   link management, see [LMP]. 
                   
   In traditional MPLS, there is an implicit one-to-one association of 
   a control channel to a data channel. Under the one-to-one association 
   between control and data channels, the protection of control channels 
   may be resolved using the protection scheme of data channels. There 
   is no need of using the scheme to protect control channels. 
                   
   However, as indicated in [GMPLS-ARCH], the control channels between 
   two adjacent nodes are no longer required to use the same physical  
   medium as the data-bearing links between those nodes. A consequence  
   of allowing the control channels between adjacent nodes to be  
                
                
Kim, et. al.                                                    [Page 2] 

Internet Draft     draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-00.txt    November 2002 
                
   physically diverse from the associated data-bearing links is that the 
   configuration of a control channel does not necessarily correlate to 
   the one of the data-bearing links, and vice-versa.  
                
                   
                   
1.1 Basic concepts for this proposal 
                   
   The following concepts are basic contents needed for this proposal. 
                   
1.1.1 Signaling transport configurations 
                   
   As indicated in [O-UNI], types of signaling transport configurations 
   to transport signaling messages are as follows: 
                   
   - In-fiber: Signaling messages are carried over a communication  
   channel embedded in the data-carrying optical link between network 
   elements; 
                   
   - Out-of-fiber: Signaling messages are carried over a dedicated  
   communication link between adjacent nodes, separate from the  
   data-bearing optical links. 
                   
   Here, we would like to comment only a point about these signaling  
   configurations. In case of in-fiber signaling, the control scope of  
   control channel is limited to a single fiber bearing the control  
   channel. However, out-of-fiber signaling does not mean only the  
   configuration that the control channel has to be different from the 
   fiber bearing data channels. That is, the signaling also includes  
   that the control channel within the fiber bearing data channels may  
   also control data channels within other fibers, in addition to the 
   configuration physically separated from the fiber bearing data  
   channels.
                   
                   
                   
1.1.2 Signaling types 
                   
   As indicated in [G.807], a signaling network supports the control 
   plane by the act of transferring service-related information between 
   the user and the network and also between network entities. The 
   signaling network shall be based upon common channel signaling, 
   thereby allowing a network operator the capability of developing a 
   separate signaling network. Common channel signaling links are   
   associated with user channels in the following ways: 
                   
   - Associated: Signaling messages related to traffic between two 
                
                
Kim, et. al.                                                    [Page 3] 

Internet Draft     draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-00.txt    November 2002 
                
   network elements are transferred over signaling links that directly 
   connect the two network elements; 
                   
   - Non-associated: Signaling messages between two network elements 
   A and B are routed over several signaling links, whilst traffic  
   signals are routed directly between A and B. The signaling links  
   used may vary with time and network conditions; 
                   
   - Quasi-associated: Signaling messages between nodes A and B follow 
   a predetermined routing path over several signaling links whilst the 
   traffic channels are routed directly between A and B. 
                   
                   
1.1.3 C-path and C-channel 
                   
   [G.965] implicitly defines the C-path as "a layer 2 data link type 
   to carry any one of several control information such as Control 
   protocol, Link control protocol, PSTN Signaling protocol, Protection 
   protocol, BCC protocol, etc". In addition, [G.965] defines the C- 
   channel as "a 64 kbit/s time slot or communication channel on a V5.2  
   interface provisioned to carry communication paths".  
                   
   In this proposal, similar concepts with those of C-path and  
   C-channel in [G.965] are applied except for the protocols applied  
   and the 64 kbit/s time slot. GMPLS also includes several protocols for  
   routing, signaling, and link management. This proposal includes  
   these GMPLS protocols as the protocols applied for the C-path, and  
   uses the concept of control channel for the C-channel without  
   modification. For the C-path, additionally, the protection protocol  
   proposed should be added. Consequently, we may define the terminology 
   of C-path and C-channel as the following: 
                   
   - C-path: A path used to carry any one of several control information  
   such as routing, signaling, link management, and protection  
   protocols; 
                   
   - C-channel: A pair of mutually reachable interfaces that are used  
   to enable communication between nodes for routing, signaling, and  
   link management. 
                   
                   
1.1.4 Protection group 
                   
   A concept called the protection group may be needed for the  
   protection of control channels. This concept is similar to that of   
   [G.965], however, we have to consider the GMPLS environment being  
   capable of supporting several signaling types of control channels. 
                
                
Kim, et. al.                                                    [Page 4] 

Internet Draft     draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-00.txt    November 2002 
                
   Switchover within a protection group can be performed using automatic  
   operation. Switchover between protection groups can be performed  
   using operator intervention. For a example, we may define the  
   protection group as the following: 
                   
   - Protection group(PG): A group of control channels using the same  
   type of signaling transport configuration. 
                   
                   
1.2 Necessity for protecting control channels 
                   
   Before considering the necessity for the protection of control  
   channels, we would like to address the following advantages of  
   out-of-fiber signaling over in-fiber signaling: 
                   
   - Resource usage: Basically, In-fiber signaling requires more  
   resources such as HDLC controllers, whereas out-of-fiber signaling 
   may reduce the number of these resources; 
                   
   - Protection scheme: In case of in-fiber signaling it looks that  
   there is no room for protecting control channels. However, out-of- 
   fiber signaling may apply the various and effective S/W based  
   protection schemes according to the protection methodology; 
                   
   - Separation from transport plane: In-fiber signaling is difficult 
   to separate control plane from transport plane, whereas out-of-fiber  
   signaling is easy to separate control plane. This may be a starting  
   point of separation of call and connection; 
                   
   - Provision of GMPLS features: In-fiber signaling may provide only  
   GMPLS features within a single fiber, and not provide the extended 
   features such as connection control beyond a single fiber, whereas  
   out-of-fiber signaling may provide these features easily. 
                   
   We think that out-of-fiber signaling has more advantages than 
   in-fiber signaling. Then, when out-of-fiber signaling is used,  
   control channels may be shared to control several fibers. If there  
   is no protection of control channel on that situation using out-of-
   fiber signaling, failures of control channel may cause the problem 
   like temporary suspension of control entities. If the repair of the 
   failed control channel takes long time, the failure will result in 
   the out-of-service of the control plane. In particular, in case of 
   RSVP variant protocols, the failure of control channels may result in 
   the effects such as unwanted connection teardown. In order to provide 
   the stable and responsible communication environment of control plane 
   in out-of-fiber signaling, we have to consider the physical and 
   logical protection mechanisms of control channels. We may get the 
   simple protection effect using the proposed protection protocol under 
                
                
Kim, et. al.                                                    [Page 5] 

Internet Draft     draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-00.txt    November 2002 
                
   the current network configurations without addition of H/W based 
   facilities. 
                   
   For the support of concepts such as link bundling, explicit data 
   channel identification, and non-impact between failures of control  
   and data channels, the separation between control channels and data  
   ones has been introduced in MPLS and GMPLS, see [GMPLS-ARCH] and  
   [GMPLS-SIG]. This situation means that failure of control channels  
   does not cause failure of data channels. However, if there is no  
   recovery even beyond the time limits in RSVP or LMP, it may result   
   in the deletion of previously established connections, or invoke  
   operator intervention to manually treat the failure of control 
   channels. In the end, it may degrade the quality of service from the 
   view-point of connection control and recovery. 
                   
   In addition, as indicated in [LMP], there may not be any active  
   control channels available while the data links are still in use. 
   For many applications, it is unacceptable to tear down a link that 
   is carrying user traffic simply because the control channel is no 
   longer available. However, the traffic that is using the data links 
   may no longer be guaranteed to the same level of service. In [LMP], it 
   is said that the TE link is in a Degraded state. We think that we had 
   better avoid this situation as possible as we can. 
                   
   We think that control channels are also very important as much as 
   data channels. If there is no active control channel between adjacent 
   nodes, although the fault handling procedures of protocols such as 
   [GMPLS-RSVP] are supported, these special procedures are of no use 
   until the failed control channels are recovered. In that there is no 
   path to exchange any control messages between adjacent nodes, control 
   plane entities that are running well may not provide potential and 
   eminent services of control plane any more. We think that any kind of 
   the protection mechanism of control channels may be useful in order 
   to reduce at a maximum the possibility of full failure of control 
   channel. 
                   
                   
1.3 Requirements in protecting control channels 
                   
   We think that first of all the design of protection protocol for  
   control channels depends upon the identification of appropriate  
   requirements. The following items may be the requirements to be  
   preferentially handled; 
                   
   - Types of protection group: At a glance, we may think a protection 
   group per a signaling type. Also, we may consider several protection  
   groups within the associated signaling type. In any case if we can  
   define valid protection groups, they will be a cornerstone for  
                
                
Kim, et. al.                                                    [Page 6] 

Internet Draft     draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-00.txt    November 2002 
                
   protecting control channels. Our proposal is that the associated  
   signaling type is designated to PG-1, then, non- and quasi-  
   associated signaling types are designated to PG-2 within only  
   optical transport networks. In addition, because there may be a  
   possibility of being capable of external IP networks to exchange IP  
   control packets, we may designate the scenario using external IP  
   networks as PG-3; 
                   
   - Support of non- and quasi- associated signaling types in GMPLS: In  
   present, we may not assert that non- and quasi- associated signaling  
   types are supported in GMPLS as well. However, we may consider these  
   types if reliable transport networks are more important than waste  
   of network resources. In all optical environment to support these  
   signaling types, we may have to resolve the routing problem for  
   signaling packets. For more thorough protection of control channels, 
   it is appropriate to keep in mind the possibility using these 
   signaling types; 
                   
   - Support of concepts such as variant, logical C-channels, and etc  
   used in V5: Dependent upon the methodology for protecting control
   channels, we may apply these concepts to the specification of 
   protection protocol. Or, because appliance of these concepts makes the 
   network operation and administration more complex, we may exclude these  
   concepts. However, as a side effect due to the exclusion, the  
   specification for protecting control channels may become more complex  
   because automatic signaling processing is needed to resolve several 
   provisioning rules. Our proposal is that to reduce the overhead of  
   operation and administration it is to exclude to these concepts in  
   the protection of control channels; 
                   
   - Relationship with LMP: The one among the functions supported in  
   LMP is the neighbor discovery. Using this function, the configuration 
   of control channels is resolved. In case of in-fiber signaling, 
   automatic configuration of control channels is possible. However, In 
   case of out-of-fiber signaling, we still have no automatic  
   configuration mechanism of control channels, and the work for the  
   automatic configuration is in progressing in IETF. In any case, we  
   think that LMP has very close relation to the protection of control  
   channels due to its neighbor discovery of control channels 
   configuration and hello operations. If the automatic configuration of  
   control channels for out-of-fiber signaling supports several  
   signaling types using LMP, we may provide more natural mechanisms in 
   the specification for protecting control channels. Here, there may be 
   a discussion whether LMP is performed first, or the protection 
   protocol proposed is performed first. Our proposal is that the 
   protection protocol proposed is performed after LMP in order to use 
   the features of LMP such as automatic configuration of control 
   channels and Hello operations; 
                   
                
                
Kim, et. al.                                                    [Page 7] 

Internet Draft     draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-00.txt    November 2002 
                
   - Low protocols for protecting control channels: The protection 
   protocol proposed may operate over UDP or raw IP. Our proposal is for 
   the protection protocol to be performed over UDP by the same reason 
   with LMP; 
                   
   - Reverting or non-reverting on recovery: The reverting mode on 
   recovery may cause the unnecessary protection operation. Although the 
   priority of control channel is lower than that of control channel 
   recovered from failure, it is appropriate to keep the current status 
   as it is for more simple protection operation. 
                   
                   
2. Future works for this proposal 
                   
   If this proposal is agreed, we may think the following items as  
   future works for the creation of specification about the control  
   channel protection protocol(CCPP): 
                   
   - Requirements: First of all the requirements above have to be  
   analyzed in detail, if needed, other requirements may be reviewed; 
                   
   - Functions supported: After identifying the requirements, we have to  
   define the overall functions to switchover an active control channel  
   to a standby control channel; 
                   
   - Procedures definition: After determining the functions to be  
   supported, we have to define normal and abnormal procedures for the 
   functions; 
                   
   - Messages and objects definition: Because this is a new protocol, we   
   have to take care of the definition of messages and objects. If   
   functions and procedures are not valid, the definition of messages and 
   objects may be also useless. For the creation of the specification of 
   protecting control channels, the important works may be requirements 
   identification, functions and procedures definition. If we do these 
   works systematically, the work of messages and objects definition may 
   be trivial. 
                   
   In the next meeting, we are scheduled to contribute the draft 
   specification including functions, procedures, and object definitions 
   for protecting control channels based on requirements above. 
                   
                   
Security Considerations 
                   
   Security issues are not considered in this proposal. However, It  
   looks that the security considerations mentioned in [LMP] may be  
   also applied in this protocol. 
                   
                
                
Kim, et. al.                                                    [Page 8] 

Internet Draft     draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-00.txt    November 2002 
                
                   
References 
                   
                   
   [G.807]       ITU-T Recommendation G.807, "Requirements for Automatic  
                 Switched Transport Networks (ASTN)", Jul. 2001. 
                   
   [G.965]       ITU-T Recommendation G.965, "V-Interfaces at the  
                 digital local exchange (LE) ? V5.2 interface (Based on  
                 2048 kbit/s) for the support of access network (AN)",  
                 Mar. 2001. 
                   
   [O-UNI]       OIF, OIF2000.125.7, "User Network Interface (UNI) 1.0  
                 Signaling Specification", Oct. 2001. 
                   
   [GMPLS-ARCH]  Eric Mannie,  
                 "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS)  
                 Architecture", Internet Draft,  
                 draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-03.txt, Aug. 2002. 
                   
   [LMP]         J. Lang, et al, "Link Management Protocol", 
                 Internet Draft, draft-ietf-ccamp-lmp-06.txt, Sep. 2002. 
                   
   [GMPLS-SIG]   Lou Berger, et al, "Generalized MPLS - Signaling  
                 Functional Description", Internet Draft, 
                 draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-signaling-09.txt, Aug. 2002. 
                   
   [GMPLS-RSVP]  Lou Berger, et al, "Generalized MPLS Signaling - RSVP-  
                 TE Extensions", Internet Draft, 
                 draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-rsvp-te-09.txt, Aug. 2002. 
                   
                   
Author's Addresses 
                   
   Young Hwa Kim 
   ETRI 
   61 Gajeong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-350 
   Phone: +82 42 860 5819 
   E-mail: yhwkim.etri.re.kr 
                   
   Sun Hee Yang 
   ETRI 
   161 Gajeong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-350 
   Phone: +82 42 860 5231 
   E-mail: shyang.etri.re.kr 
                   
   Jun Kyun Choi  
   Information and Communications University (ICU)  
                
                
Kim, et. al.                                                    [Page 9] 
                
Internet Draft     draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-00.txt    November 2002 
                
   58-4 Hwa Ahm Dong, Yuseong, Daejeon, 305-732  
   Phone: +82-42-866-6122  
   Email: jkchoi@icu.ac.kr  
                   
   Jae Cheol Ryou 
   Dept. of Computer Science, Chungnam National University (CNU) 
   220 Gung-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-764 
   Phone: +82 42 821 7443 
   E-mail: jcryou@home.cnu.ac.kr 
                   






































                
                
Kim, et. al.                                                   [Page 10] 
