


   MIP4 Working Group                                    N. A. Fikouras 
   INTERNET DRAFT                                        K. Kuladinithi 
   Expires: August 2004                                        C. Goerg 
                                              ComNets-ikom, Uni. Bremen 
                                                             C. Bormann 
                                                       TZI, Uni. Bremen 
                                                               May 2004 
                                      
                                      
               Mobile IPv4 Flow Mobility Problem Statement 
                 draft-nomad-mip4-flow-mobility-pb-00.txt 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance 
with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
 
 
Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task 
Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      other 
groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts 
Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
and may be updated, replaced, or obsolete by other documents at any 
time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material 
or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
 
The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
Abstract 
 
Internet capable mobile or portable devices are already a modern 
commodity while it is becoming all the more common that such devices are 
hosts to more then one wireless interface. The aim of this document is 
to show that a mobile user may make best use of this property by using 
multiple wireless interfaces in parallel. This would incline that the 
mobile user can distribute active flows across the available wireless 
interfaces and is able to seamlessly transfer them between the wireless 
interfaces in mid-session without interruption. 
 
    
Table of Contents 
 
   1. Introduction....................................................2 
   3. Scenarios for multiple interface management and flow mobility...3 
 3.1 Scenario 1......................................................3 
 3.2 Scenario 2......................................................3 
 3.3 Scenario 3......................................................4 
   4. Related Work....................................................4 
 4.1 Mobile IP.......................................................4 
 4.2 Stream Control Transmission Protocol............................5 
 4.3 Resource reservation Protocol...................................5 
 4.4 Filters for Mobile IP...........................................6 
   References.........................................................6 
   Authors' Addresses.................................................7 
   Intellectual Property Statement....................................7 
    
   MIP4 Flow Mobility PB Expires August 2004                        1 
   Internet Draft           MIP4 Flow Mobility PB         February 2004 
    
1. Introduction 
 
   It is forecasted that by 2005 an increasing portion of Internet users 
   will be using wireless devices such as web-enabled cell phones and 
   PDAs to go online as the number of worldwide Internet users will 
   nearly triple to 1.17 billion [1]. As a response to the explosive 
   growth of mobile Internet users, operators have urged for the 
   deployment of packet services in wide-area cellular networks. This 
   was accompanied by a rollout of standards for license free personal 
   and local area communication networks. The increasing availability of 
   a range of heterogeneous wireless technologies is a strong indication 
   that future mobile Internet communication systems will be built upon 
   wireless overlay networks [2]. It is understood that in order to make 
   best use of this property one must be able to selectively and 
   intelligently utilise in parallel any number of wireless networks in 
   his/her vicinity while dynamically distributing active flows across 
   the available wireless network links. The benefits of taking 
   advantage of this property can be grouped in three main areas, 
   namely: 
    
   o The aggregation of network resources available over a selection of  
     the wireless networks. 
   o The matching of individual flows and wireless network links with  
     respect to attributes such as cost, quality of service parameters  
     or a specific service. 
   o Achieving loss-less handoffs with minimal effect to active  
     communications. 
    
   The purpose of this draft is to: 
    
   o Raise awareness on the opportunities aroused by the increasing  
     availability of multi-interfaced mobile nodes. 
   o Articulate the problems of simultaneously using multiple wireless  
     network links with existing protocols. 
   o Argument that a solution can best be provided with an extension of  
     the Mobile IP protocol. 
 
2 Problem Overview 
 
   In homogeneous networks, a hand-off is initiated only when a mobile 
   unit eludes the boundaries of an administered domain and enters 
   another. However, in heterogeneous networks, a mobile unit does not 
   need to move in order to initiate a hand-off. Algorithms for hand-
   offs between heterogeneous networks are different from those for 
   homogeneous networks. Any hand-off decision is bound to affect a 
   range of active communications with different attributes and 
   requirements, benefiting some while degrading the performance of 
   others. The simultaneous use of multiple wireless network links 
   reduces the effect of this problem by a factor equivalent to the 
   number of network connections. To that end, the mobile node should be 
   able to move individual flows between network links with respect to 
   the requirements of the flow and the user’s preferences. The 
   management of flows should require minimal interaction with 
   communication peers while the differentiation of flows should take 
   place as close to the mobile node as possible. This will allow for 
   fast reaction times while restricting the amount of signaling that 
   traverses the core network fabric. 
    
   The requirements for any proposed solution aim at providing support 
   for multiple wireless interface management and flow mobility include: 
    
   o solution should operate in a transparent fashion to higher layer  
   MIP4 Flow Mobility PB     Expires August 2004                      2 
   Internet Draft           MIP4 Flow Mobility PB         February 2004 
     protocols and applications. 
   o solution should involve a minimum amount of signaling that should  
     be restricted to the mobile nodes vicinity and not communicated to 
     the Internet. 
   o solution should dictate a minimum amount of alterations to nodes  
     other than the mobile node and the mobility management support  
     infrastructure. 
   o solution should not compromise the security of involved nodes. 
   o solution should be backwards compatible, i.e. remain functional  
     even in environments where their operational requirements are not  
     supported. 
 
3. Scenarios for multiple interface management and flow mobility 
    
   The following scenarios describe a tactical application and two 
   everyday life situations aimed at highlighting the need for 
   simultaneous use of multiple wireless links and flow mobility. 
    
3.1 Scenario 1 
    
   An ambulance is called at the scene of a car accident. A paramedic 
   initiates a communication to a hospital via a wide area cellular link 
   for the relay of low bit-rate live video from the site of the crash 
   to assess the severity of the accident. It is identified that one of 
   the passengers has suffered a severe head injury. The paramedic 
   decides to consult a specialist via video conferencing. This session 
   is initiated from the specialist via the same wide area cellular 
   link. Meanwhile, the paramedic requests for the download of the 
   patient’s medical records from the hospital’s servers. The paramedic 
   decides in mid-session that the wide area cellular link is too slow 
   for this download and transfers the download to the ambulance 
   satellite link. Even though this link provides a significantly faster 
   bit rate it has a longer traversal delay and only down-link is 
   available. For this, only the down-stream of the download is 
   transferred while up-stream proceeds over the wide area cellular 
   link. Connectivity with the ambulance is managed over a wireless 
   local area link between the paramedic and the ambulance. Even though 
   the paramedic has performed a partial hand-off for the transfer of 
   the download down-stream to the satellite link, the upstream and the 
   video conferencing session remains on the wide area cellular link. 
   This serves best the time constraint requirements of the real time 
   communication. 
    
3.2 Scenario 2 
    
   Mr. Smith is on his way to work waiting at a train station. He uses 
   this opportunity and the presence of a wireless LAN hot-spot to 
   download the news from his favorite on-line news channel. His train 
   is announced and Mr. Smith decides to buy a ticket. However, the 
   ticket reservation service is only available via a wide area cellular 
   link of a specific provider. While Mr. Smith is downloading the news 
   and accessing the train ticket reservation service he receives a 
   phone call. This connection is receives over a separate wide area 
   cellular link. Mr. Smith answers the call to be informed that a 
   colleague is also at the train station and would like to travel with 
   him. Mr. Smith decides he wishes to initiate a video flow for this 
   communication. The bandwidth and traversal delay of the wide area 
   cellular link is not adequate for the video conference, so both flows 
   (video/audio) are transferred to a wireless local area link via a 
   hot-spot. This transfer occurs transparently and without affecting 
   any other active flows. 
    
   MIP4 Flow Mobility PB     Expires August 2004                      3 
   Internet Draft           MIP4 Flow Mobility PB         February 2004 
   In order to cater for the communication means of the modern man, 
   communication devices should be equipped with a range of 
   heterogeneous wireless interfaces providing with several points of 
   attachment to the global Internet. 
    
3.3 Scenario 3 
    
   Alice is at the airport waiting to board the plane. She receives a 
   call by her husband. This audio communication is received via a 
   wireless local area link realized over one of the available hot-
   spots. She knows this is going to be a long flight and wishes to 
   catch up on some work. Alice uses a wireless LAN connection to 
   download the necessary data. However, there is not enough time and 
   Alice decides to accelerate the download. Her notebook is equipped 
   with an additional wireless local area network interface. Alice 
   decides to distribute the different download flows between the 
   multiple interfaces to accelerate the download. 
    
   This scenario illustrates the capacity of mobile nodes with multiple 
   points of attachment not just to distribute and transfer whole flows 
   between the wireless links. 
    
   The scenarios illustrate several requirements of day-to-day as well 
   as tactical applications, namely: 
    
   1) The seamless interoperability of heterogeneous wireless networks 
   that allows for vertical mobility across the various layers of the 
   wireless overlay network. These will include wide area cellular 
   networks for the connectivity of units on the move as well as local 
   area wireless networks for connectivity either via hot-spots or 
   mobile ad-hoc networks. 
    
   2) Access for all mobile users to resources on the global Internet 
   and more importantly reachability on a globally unique, permanent 
   identity. 
    
   3) Policy based selection of the type of communication network for 
   different types of communications. The high correlation between type 
   of mobility, position, reposition and type of communication/service 
   that a mobile user may request or receive must be reflected in this 
   policy. 
    
   4) Simultaneous use of multiple wireless networks. Without this 
   feature these scenarios would not be feasible as mobile units would 
   be required to switch between available wireless networks in order to 
   more efficiently communicate with others or to access specific 
   services. As awareness is raised for the opportunities made possible 
   by multi-interfaced mobile nodes, policy based routing will gain 
   importance. 
    
   The following section gives a discussion of existing solutions to the 
   problem of mobility, flow and multiple interface management and 
   explains the shortcoming of each such solution. 
 
4. Related Work 
 
4.1 Mobile IP 
 
   The Mobile IP [3] is currently the dominant solution for the 
   provision of Internet mobility management. However, Mobile IP has 
   been designed with a focus on mobile nodes with a single wireless 
   link to the Internet. Mobile IP introduces the notion of Internet 
   layer hand-offs that are initiated every time that a mobile node 
   MIP4 Flow Mobility PB     Expires August 2004                      4 
   Internet Draft           MIP4 Flow Mobility PB         February 2004 
   moves across Internet administrative domains. Mobile IP Mobility 
   Agents are unable to distinguish between individual flows and with 
   every subsequent Mobile IP hand-off all active flows are redirected 
   to the most recently registered location. This behavior restricts 
   mobile nodes with multiple access interfaces that in order to take 
   advantage of that property should be able to determine on a per flow 
   basis how to have them distributed across the available wireless 
   links. 
    
   A solution to the problem of simultaneous multiple access interface 
   management can be provided with the combination of multi-homing and 
   Mobile IP route optimization. By sharing acquired care-of addresses 
   and home IP addresses between the available access interfaces, it is 
   possible with route optimization to distribute flows from different 
   communication peers between the access interfaces. However, such a 
   solution would require that for every change of state signaling 
   information would have to be relayed to the corresponding 
   communication peer. In addition, it would be impossible to 
   differentiate between incoming flows from the same source and 
   addressed to the same home IP address. Furthermore, multi-homing is 
   based on the high availability of Internet addresses, several of 
   which would be allocated to each mobile node, globally. Even though 
   this might be feasible for IPv6 it is not possible for IPv4 where 
   Internet addresses are scarce. It is considered that capability to 
   simultaneously use multiple access interfaces and to move flows 
   between them should be available to IPv4 and IPv6 mobile nodes alike. 
   [4] highlights the goals and benefits of multi-homing in IPv6. 
    
4.2 Stream Control Transmission Protocol 
    
   The same problem could be resolved with the help of transport layer 
   protocols such as the SCTP [5]. The SCTP is like TCP a reliable 
   transport service. Similar to TCP, SCTP is a session-oriented 
   mechanism, meaning that a relationship between the endpoints of an 
   SCTP communication is negotiated prior to data transmission. SCTP 
   includes native support for multi-homing but only for redundancy 
   purposes. This means that, SCTP endpoints exchange lists of addresses 
   during initiation of the association while a single one is chosen for 
   the SCTP data transmission. Should that IP address become unavailable 
   or when demonstrating high packet loss, the communication will fall-
   back to another home IP address until the first becomes again 
   available. In combination with Mobile IP, SCTP could guarantee the 
   reachability of the mobile node on any one of those home IP 
   addresses. This behavior resembles the requirement for flow mobility 
   but is only initiated for redundancy purposes and not otherwise 
   controlled by the mobile node. Even if renegotiation of communication 
   parameters was possible in mid-session it would involve exchanging 
   signaling information between communication peers that would 
   propagate through the Internet fabric. A final argument against the 
   use of SCTP for the realization of multiple access interface 
   management and flow mobility is that the support of SCTP in the 
   existing Internet infrastructure is minimal. 
    
4.3 Resource reservation Protocol 
    
   A key issue in flow mobility is the capacity to differentiate between 
   individual flows destined for a particular mobile node. The RSVP [6] 
   has been designed specifically for hosts to request specific 
   qualities of service from the network for particular flows. However, 
   RSVP does not perform its own routing; instead it uses underlying 
   routing protocols to determine where it should carry reservation 
   requests and subsequently flows. Consequently, a mobile node that 
   wishes to move a flow between two access interfaces would be able to 
   MIP4 Flow Mobility PB     Expires August 2004                      5 
   Internet Draft           MIP4 Flow Mobility PB         February 2004 
   use RSVP to identify a flow but would not be able to alter routing in 
   order to have the flow delivered to selected access interface. 
    
4.4 Filters for Mobile IP 
    
   Filters for Mobile IPv4 bindings [7] enables mobile nodes to 
   associate one or more Filters with mobility bindings during 
   registration. Flows that match a Filter will be processed as defined 
   by the Filter. In this manner, it is possible for a mobile node to 
   distribute flows among available wireless links, or to request that 
   such flows are dropped before reaching the mobile node.  
    
   Filters for Mobile IP does not introduce any additional signaling, it 
   dictates that filters and filtering management extensions should be 
   piggybacked by registration signaling. This protocol extension to 
   Mobile IP does not introduce any security requirements as existing 
   security considerations are adequate. Filters for Mobile IP is 
   compatible with hierarchical Mobile IP organizations that enables the 
   localized management of flow mobility and restricts signaling from 
   reaching communication peers. Even in this absence of hierarchical 
   Mobile IP considerations, filtering information is terminated at the 
   Home Agent and is not propagated further. This extension inherits the 
   property of the basic Mobile IP to operate transparently to active 
   communications. As such filtering occurs in a manner transparent to 
   transport layer protocols and applications. For the deployment of 
   Filters for Mobile IP no changes are required to Correspondent Nodes 
   while any alterations affect only the mobile node requesting for 
   filtering services and the Mobile IP infrastructure that wishes to 
   provide this service. Filters for Mobile IP is backwards compatible 
   with standard Mobile IP and can be deployed in conjunction with 
   multi-homing; for every home IP address separately. There are 
   currently several proposals aimed at introducing filters in Mobile IP 
   [7-10]. [7] has been successfully implemented and experimentally 
   evaluated [11] proving the feasibility of this approach. 
    
    
References 
    
   MIP4 Flow Mobility PB     Expires August 2004                      6 
   Internet Draft           MIP4 Flow Mobility PB         February 2004 
[1]  eTForecasts, "Internet Users Will Surpass 1 Billion in 2005," 
     http://www.etforecasts.com/pr/pr201.htm. 
[2]  R. H. Katz and E. A. Brewer, "The Case for Wireless Overlay 
     Networks," in Mobile Computing, T. Imielinski and H. F. Korth, 
     Eds.: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1996, pp. 621-650. 
[3]  C. E. Perkins, "IP Mobility Support for IPv4," IETF RFC3344, August 
     2002. 
[4]  T. Ernst, N. Montavont, R. Wakikawa, C. Ng, T. Noel, E. Paik, and 
     K. Kuladinithi, "Goals and Benefits of Multihoming," IETF 
     http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ernst-generic-
     multihoming-pb-statement-00.txt, February 2004. 
[5]  L. Ong and J. Yoakum, "An Introduction to the Stream Control 
     Transmission Protocol (SCTP)," IETF RFC3286, May 2002. 
[6]  R. Braden, L. Zhang, S. Berson, S. Herzog, and S. Jamin, "Resource 
     ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) - Version 1 Functional Specification," 
     IETF RFC2205, September 1997. 
[7]  N. A. Fikouras, A. Udugama, K. Kuladinithi, C. Görg, and W. Zirwas, 
     "Filters for Mobile IP Bindings (NOMAD)," IETF 
     http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-nomad-mobileip-filters-
     05.txt, October 2003. 
[8]  K. Kuladinithi, N. A. Fikouras, and C. Görg, "Filters for Mobile 
     IPv6 Bindings (NOMADv6)," IETF http://www.ietf.org/internet-
     drafts/draft-nomadv6-mobileip-filters-01.txt, October 2003. 
[9]  N. Montavont and T. Noel, "Home Agent Filtering for Mobile IPv6," 
     IETF http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-montavont-mobileip-
     ha-filtering-v6-00.txt, 1/2004 2004. 
[10] H. Soliman, K. Malki, and C. Castelluccia, "Per-flow movement in 
     MIPv6," IETF http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-soliman-
     mobileip-flow-move-03.txt, 7/2003 2003. 
[11] N. A. Fikouras, A. Udugama, C. Görg, W. Zirwas, and J. M. 
     Eichinger, "Experimental Evaluation of Load Balancing for Mobile 
     Internet Real-Time Communications," presented at Proceedings of the 
     Sixth International Symposium on Wireless Personal Multimedia 
     Communications (WPMC), Yokosuka, Kanagawa, Japan, 2003. 
Authors' Addresses 
    
   Niko A. Fikouras 
   Departmnt of Communication Networks (ComNets) 
   Center for Information and Communication Technology (ikom) 
   University of Bremen         Phone:  +49-421-218-3339 
   D-28219 Bremen, Germany      Email:  niko@comnets.uni-bremen.de 
    
   Koojana Kuladinithi 
   Department of Communication Networks (ComNets) 
   Center for Information and Communication Technology (ikom) 
   University of Bremen         Phone:  +49-421-218-8264 
   D-28219 Bremen, Germany      Email:  koo@comnets.uni-bremen.de 
    
   Carmelita Goerg 
   Department of Communication Networks (ComNets) 
   Center for Information and Communication Technology (ikom) 
   University of Bremen         Phone:  +49-421-218-2277 
   D-28219, Bremen, Germany     Email:  cg@comnets.uni-bremen.de 
    
   Carsten Bormann 
   Technologie-Zentrum Informatik (TZI) 
   University of Bremen         Phone:  +49-421-218-7024 
   D-28219, Bremen, Germany     Email:  cabo@informatik.uni-bremen.de 
    
    
Intellectual Property Statement 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   MIP4 Flow Mobility PB     Expires August 2004                      7 
   Internet Draft           MIP4 Flow Mobility PB         February 2004 
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it 
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the 
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and 
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of 
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of 
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to 
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such 
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can 
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice 
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
   Director. 
    
    
   Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved. 
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
   MIP4 Flow Mobility PB     Expires August 2004                      8 
   Internet Draft           MIP4 Flow Mobility PB         February 2004 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
   MIP4 Flow Mobility PB     Expires August 2004                      9 