Network Working Group                                          R. Penno
Internet-Draft                                           A. Albuquerque 
Expires: October, 2001                                  Nortel Networks
                                                            April, 2001 

                                                            
                                                                                                                            
                                                          
                                                          


                 ISP Selection in Open Access Networks                 
                    draft-penno-isp-selection-00.txt                   

Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum 
   of six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as 'work in 
   progress.' The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved.


Abstract

   The most common challenge of Open Access networks is the choice of
   the most appropriate ISP Selection method. This document intends to
   explain the current ISP Seletion models, its pros and cons, and make
   people better understand the existing scenarios.
   


Specification of Requirements

   The keywords MUST, MUST NOT, REQUIRED, SHALL, SHALL NOT, SHOULD,
   SHOULD NOT, RECOMMENDED, MAY, and OPTIONAL, when they appear in this
   document, are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].

 

Penno, et al.                                                  [Page 1]


Internet-Draft               ISP Selection                   March,2001

Table of Contents

   1.      Definitions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.      Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3
   3.      High Speed Access Deployment Models. . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   4.      DHCP login. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4
   5.      PPPoE login. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.      PPPoA login. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7.      Layer 2 or 3 Network Technology and Web Page Login. . . . .8
   8.      L2TP. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   9.      IPSec. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   10.     References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
   11.     Security Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12
   12.     Acknowledgments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12
           Author's Addresses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 
           Full Copyright Statement. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13




































Penno, et al.                                                  [Page 2]


Internet-Draft               ISP Selection                   March,2001

1. Definitions

   User: A unique person that has access to the Internet or some other
   IP network. One or more person can be treated as a single
   subscriber.  

   Subscriber: A logical unit to which services are be applied. It can
   be (but not limited to) a ATM VC, a IP address or a PPP session. A
   subscriber can composed of one of more users.  

2. Introduction

   One of the most common problems encountered is, herein referred to 
   by the author as, ISP selection. Essentially, the problem to be 
   solved is to simplify the ISP selection by the user.

   However some premises have to be respected so as not to restrict the  
   scope of the discussion provided, these are:

      o Several users subscribed to different ISPs may share the same 
        PC connected to a access network (usually in a residential 
        environment).
      o Several PCs belonging to different users can share the same 
        device (for instance, cable or xDsl modem) that provides
        connectivity to the infrastructure provider (for instance, in a
        condominium).
      o One user can have accounts with different ISPs.
      o The IP address used by the subscriber at a given moment may be
        supplied by the ISP or the access provider.

3. High Speed Access Deployment Models

   The following discussion applies for deployment models for Open 
   Access. This is the scenario where a subscriber subscribes to a high 
   speed Internet service but can select the ISP of their choice as 
   opposed to using the ISP associated with the access provider.  
   
   There are 3 common access models used in enable Open Access  
   networks, these are:

      o DHCP login 
      o PPPoE login
      o PPPoA login
      o Web Page login

   There are two extra models suitable for telecommuter's access to 
   their VPNs:

      o L2TP login
      o IPSec login


Penno, et al.                                                  [Page 3]


Internet-Draft               ISP Selection                   March,2001

4. DHCP login

   In this model there is no layer 2 end-to-end session established 
   between the user's personal computer and the IPServices router as in
   the PPPoX model. So, the access network between the user's personal
   computer and the DHCP server or IPServices Router maybe be bridged 
   or routed. 

   A premise here is that when the subscriber changes from ISP-A to 
   ISP-B, the IP address of the personal computer must change, and 
   either come from ISP-B or from a pool of the access provider's IP 
   block specially reserved for ISP-B subscribers. We can see then that 
   a drawback of this model is that users that share the same PC must 
   subscribe to the same ISP, because the ISP<->Subscriber association 
   is made through to the PC's MAC address or the Relay Agent 
   Information, and not through a specific user authentication 
   mechanism. 

   The concept above can be further undesrtood by saying that in access 
   provider's point of view the subscriber is the PC and not a specific 
   user using it.

   There is a possibility that users sharing the same PC be able to
   subscribe to different ISPs, but this calls for DHCP Server dynamic 
   provisioning. 

   The following are the steps for ISP selection: 

      o User-A powers on the PC which gets a IP address through DHCP.
        This IP address is associated to ISP-A. 
      o When it's time for User-B to access the Internet through the 
        same PC, the IP address of the PC must be changed since User-B 
        is subscribed to ISP-B.
      o User-B then accesses a web form where he can change the
        Subscriber<->ISP association. User-B then submits this form to
        the web server, which through the use of scripts or other 
        mechanism, reprovisions the DHCP server with a new 
        (MAC address or Relay Agent)<->IP address address mapping.
 
   When the PC sends another DHCP request due to IP address leased
   time expiration, a reboot, some manual intervention, it will 
   receive an IP address assciated to ISP-B.

4.1 DHCP Reconfigure Extension

   There is work being done within the IETF to  allow  dynamic 
   reconfiguration  of a single host triggered by the DHCP server (eg. 
   a  new IP address). This is  achieved  by  introducing  a  unicast  
   DHCP FORCERENEW message which forces the client to the RENEW state. 



Penno, et al.                                                  [Page 4]


Internet-Draft               ISP Selection                   March,2001


   This would allow a much more cleaner ISP Selection without requiring 
   the user to peform some manual intervention on his PC or a reboot. 

4.1.1 Force renew procedures

   The DHCP server sends a force renew message to the client. The 
   client will change its state to the RENEW state. The client will 
   then try to renew its lease according to normal DHCP procedures.  If  
   the  server wants  to assign a new IP address to the client, it will 
   reply to the DHCP REQUEST with a DHCP NAK. The client will then  go  
   back  to  the  init  state and broadcast a DHCP DISCOVER message. 
   The server can now assign a new IP address to the client by replying 
   with a DHCP  OFFER. If  the force renew message is lost, the DHCP 
   server will not receive a DHCP REQUEST from the client and  it  
   should  retransmit  the  DHCP FORCERENEW  message using an 
   exponential backoff algorithm. Depending  on the bandwidth of the 
   network between server and client, the server should choose a   
   delay. This delay  grows  exponentially as retransmissions fail.  
   The amount of  retransmissions should be limited.

4.1.2 Rationale

   This  approach  has  a  number of advantages. It does not require 
   new states to be added to the DHCP client implementation. This  
   minimizes the  amount of code to be changed. It also allows lease 
   RENEWAL to be driven by the server, which can be used to optimize 
   network usage  or DHCP server load.  For the open access model, the 
   greatest advantege is the ability to change the IP address of the 
   client without a reboot or any type of intervention by the user.  
   For example, the user can go to a web page and click on a button to 
   change the ISP  (and consequently the IP address) that he is 
   subscribed at that moment.

5. PPPoE login

   In this model the access network must pass the packets transparently
   between the DSL modem and the edge device, since a layer 2 
   end-to-end session must be established between the user's personal 
   computer and the edge device.  Layer 2 PPPoE [RFC2516] access via 
   xDSL networks is quite similar to dial-up access, where in the 
   dial-up model, the Remote Access Server (RAS) plays the part of 
   physical access concentrator that the DSL Access Multiplexer (DSLAM) 
   plays in xDSL Networks. In either case an end-to-end PPP session is 
   established, followed by authentication, user validation and IP 
   address allocation for the duration of the call. 

   The fundamental difference is that instead of using a traditional 
   POTS dial-up mechanism, the user executes a PPPoE client on his 
   machine, fills in the user and passwords fields and opens a session 
   with his provider much faster.

Penno, et al.                                                  [Page 5]


Internet-Draft               ISP Selection                   March,2001


   The PPPoE protocol is relatively new, but its basic function is to 
   encapsulate PPP packets into Ethernet frames that will be de-
   encapsulated by the tunnel termination device.

   The PPPoE protocol has two stages; session and discovering. PPP 
   session packets are encapsulated in the Ethernet frame with the 
   Ethertype equal to 0x 88 64. The Ethertype (0x 88 63) is used during 
   the discovering stage, where the user's PPPoE client tries to 
   identify the device that will terminate the PPPoE session. To obtain 
   further and more in depth information on the PPPoE protocol refer to 
   recommendation [RFC2516]. 

   One of the disadvantages of this model is the need to install 
   software on the user's PC. However software distribution can be 
   done via a provisioning page and the user can perform the 
   installation, since existing PPPoE clients on the market are easy to 
   install and operate. Notwithstanding, this model offers important 
   advantages when compared to others.

     o Subscriber IP address can be easily assigned by the ISP. 
     o The user has some control over some of the connection variables. 
     o It is possible to use standards already established for PPP 
       protocols. 
     o User differentiation for those sharing a PC is easy and 
       immediate.

   The ISP selection steps for this model are the 
following:

   The user executes the PPPoE client, enters username and password, 
   presses the connect button, and is now ready to navigate the 
   internet. 

   In the step above, the value added provider knows, by the realm or
   domain used in the username (eg. user1@isp1.com) or the PPPoE 0x0101 
   Service-Name TAG_TYPE, to which ISP the user belongs  to, in which 
   Radius server it should perform the authentication and which service 
   package should be used with that particular user. For example, if 
   the user's name is reinaldo@silver.isp2.com.br, the provider knows 
   that it must use one of the ISP2 Radius servers to perform the 
   authentication and the user's has the silver service package. Since 
   each user has a different username and password, ISP Selection even 
   for users that share the same PC is straightforward 

   There is still a possibility that the session characteristics will 
   be transferred, during the authentication step, by the Radius to the 
   value added provider, instead of remaining stored in it. 
    
   In this case the user may connect Simply as reinaldo@isp2.com.br, 
   since there will be attributed-value pairs (AV-pair) that describes 
   the behavior (service package) that the user has purchased. 

Penno, et al.                                                  [Page 6]


Internet-Draft               ISP Selection                   March,2001

   Altough the process of disconnecting and reconnecting to change ISPs 
   is quick and uncomplicated, some services providers prefer that this 
   process occur without any user intervention on the PPPoE 
   client running on the PC in order to provide a better experience and 
   easier access to on-demand services.

   To accomplish this automatic service switch, the ISP Selection web 
   page could signal the IP Services router, which would use a PPPoE 
   Active Service Change (PADC) [PPPoE-Ext] packet to change the ISP or 
   Service of the user seamlessly.

6. PPPoA Login

   In this model the  access network must pass the packets 
   transparently between the DSL modem and the edge device, since a 
   layer 2 end-to-end session must be established between the user and 
   the edge device. Layer 2 PPPoA access [RFC2364] via xDSL networks is 
   similar to the PPPoE model mentioned above. The main difference is 
   that PPPoA does not use the Ethernet as transport, ATM is used 
   instead of Ethernet. From a xDSL standpoint, where ATM is used by 
   definition, it means less overhead.

   The PPPoA session, in the PPPoA model, is established from the PPPoA
   modem to the Edge Device. If the user's personal computer has a 
   internal modem, there is no difference between this model and the
   PPPoE modem in terms of ISP Selection. The user will use a client
   to perform the connection and will supply a username and password to
   do that.

   On the other hand, if the user has an external PPPoA modem, the ISP
   Selection isn't so straightforward. The username and password is
   usually stored into the modem's flash memory. The user has to 
   connect to the modem to perform the change of username and realms in 
   order to connect to another ISP. Some vendors implements a mini web 
   server in the modem in order to facilitate this interaction. Some 
   others makes it available through command line interface (telnet 
   session). There is some which implements a dummy modem driver which 
   can interact with the modem, the user creates an dial-up connection 
   just like the old days and can perform the ISP selection in the same 
   way as the PPPoE model.
 











Penno, et al.                                                  [Page 7]


Internet-Draft               ISP Selection                   March,2001

7. Layer 2 or 3 Network Technology and Web Page Login

   This method is one of the most controversial, because its advantages
   and disadvantages are so polarized. To understand this better we 
   shall divide the user login into two stages, the first is performed 
   by the DHCP, where the user's PC obtains an IP address associated to
   the user's MAC address, and second, where the user name and password
   are entered in a web form and is authenticated against a Radius 
   server or some external database. 
   
   It must be highlighted that the IP address supplied to the user in 
   the first stage must belong to the same ISP's address block that 
   will supply the service parameters, via the Radius server, during 
   the second stage. However both stages must be synchronized, that is, 
   the user that received the IP address block from a particular ISP, 
   must not, at the second stage, be authenticated and consequently 
   receive service parameters from another ISP.

   If a user has more than one ISP or a PC is shared by users which 
   use different ISPs, in order to guarantee that both stages be 
   synchronized, it is necessary that the DHCP be provisioned whenever 
   there is an ISP switch to be used in the second stage.

   Also, knowing that no session is established between the user and 
   the provider, some problems should be discussed:
 

   The user name and password are sent in clear text through the 
   network, unless a secure web server is used.
   
   The user must explicitly inform the provider, via a web form or 
   Similar, when it no longer is using his network IP address. 
   Otherwise, the user's profile will remain stored at the provider 
   until it is removed because of inactivity.
   
   If many users use the same web page to validate their data, it must 
   be ensured that the Radius client used for requesting is scalable.

   On the other hand, the network can optionally, transmit or not the 
   packets transparently between the user and the provider, and there 
   is no need to install a client on the user's PC, since the login is 
   performed via a web page.  In addition to this, the absence of 
   client software on the user PC means there is no need for 
   installation kits and associated software support.

   The ISP selection steps for this model are the following:

     o The user powers on the PC and an IP address request is sent to 
       the DHCP.
   
 


Penno, et al.                                                  [Page 8]


Internet-Draft               ISP Selection                   March,2001

    o Since the user's network card MAC address is not associated to 
       any ISP,  the DHCP will attribute a temporary private address 
       [RFC1918] so the user can do the auto-provisioning.
   
     o The user then accesses a web form where he can select the ISP 
       service package (QoS, VPN, etc) of his choice. 
   
     o The user then submits this form to the system where this data is 
       used to provision, via scripts or other method, a Radius server 
       and the value added provider.
   
     o At the next login (after rebooting) or when the PC sends another 
       DHCP request when the original (reserved) IP address expires, 
       the user will receive an IP address from the ISP block, selected 
       previously.

     o The user then accesses or is directed to the provisioning page, 
       to enter the user name and password to be authenticated in a 
       Radius server. In this case the Radius server supplies the 
       provider with the user's data and services to be provided to the 
       user.

  If the PC is shared by several subscribers, everytime a new 
  subscriber wants to use the PC he has to go to the ISP Selection web 
  page and enter his own username and password. Optionally the DHCP is 
  reprovisioned and consequently the client PC has to change his IP 
  address
   
7.1  Network Address Translation (NAT)

   There are some variations of the previous model, based on the use of 
   NAT [RFC1631]. In essence, during the first stage the user receives 
   a reserved address [RFC1918] or from the designated access provider
   block, and after authentication in the second stage, the provider 
  (or an external device) performs the NAT between the address provided 
   by the Radius server and the initial server. At first glance, these 
   variations may have a certain appeal, but when appropriately 
   analyzed, it is clear that these must be used very carefully due to 
   the problems arising from the use of NAT. Amongst these problems we 
   can highlight the following:

   Inverse consultations to DNS servers do not function correctly, 
   which causes several security related problems and serial reuse of 
   addresses.
   
   Users cannot use IPsec client on their PCs, since by definition 
   address translation, is seen as a man-in the-middle-attack by the 
   IPsec protocol. This means that, for example, employees which use 
   these clients to connect to their companies and establish a virtual 
   private network, will not be able to accomplish this via the CATV 
   carrier's network.
   
Penno, et al.                                                  [Page 9]


Internet-Draft               ISP Selection                   March,2001

   H.323 [H.323] (Internetphone, Netmeeting, etc) based applications 
   will not work adequately. H.323 is a complex protocol, which uses 
   dynamic ports and includes several UDP flows. The addresses and 
   ports negotiated between the participants in a multimedia session, 
   are transmitted within the highest level data flow (payload) 
   connection.

   For example, the H.245 connection address and port are negotiated 
   within the data flow of protocol Q.931. This makes NAT particularly 
   difficult, since it requires address modification within the data 
   flow. Even worse, it is possible in the Q.931 protocol, for example,
   to request that an H.245 connection be encrypted, which makes the 
   use of NAT unviable. The issues raised for the H.323 protocol are
   also trrue for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP).
   
   The use of NAT requires an intense processing power, even with the 
   help of an optimized checksum algorithm adjustment, since each data 
   packet is subject to a search in the translation and modification 
   table.

   In addition to the above mentioned problems, there also exist others
   related to QoS, routing tables trading, Secure DNS [RFC2535] as well
   as other popular applications, such as ICQ [ICQ]. Therefore NAT must
   only be considered very carefully.

8. L2TP Login

   In this model, there is a layer 2 session established between the 
   L2TP Access Concentrator (LAC) and the L2TP Network Server (LNS). 
   There is a PPP session carried within a layer 3 infrastructure, 
   between the LAC and the LNS. In this case, a software running in the
   user's personal computer may act as a LAC and the IP Services Router
   can be the LNS.

   When a user wants to change from an ISP-A to an ISP-B, he only needs
   to close the L2TP session and reconnect to the LNS. This is quite 
   similar to the PPP model, the user disconnects, closing the tunnel,
   and provide a different username and password, possibly changing the
   realms to perform the ISP selection (eg. user@isp-a.com would 
   connect the user to the ISP-A and user@isp-b.com would connect the 
   user to the ISP-B).

   This model permits users sharing the same PC to connect to different
   ISPs by reestablishing the L2TP tunnel, and providing different
   usernames and realms.
   
   This approach has the advantage to maintain the session concept when
   the only access network available is a layer 3 access network. The
   natural way of recognizing subscribers in layer 3 networks is
   through the source IP address. 


Penno, et al.                                                 [Page 10]


Internet-Draft               ISP Selection                   March,2001

   Since the IP protocol is not session oriented, there are some 
   inherent dificulties in determining the begining and the end of a 
   session. The main disadvantage of L2TP, one may argue, is the 
   overhead of carrying a layer 2 protocol over layer 3. It should be 
   taken in consideration when choosing the network access method to 
   the ISPs.

   Just like with PPPoE the ISP Selection could be accomplished 
   through a web page that downloads a executable to the subscribers 
   PC that terminated the current L2TP connection and initiates a 
   new one with a new username and password to a different ISP. 

   The PPTP model works just the same as the L2TP model just described.

9. IPSec

   The IPSec protocol does not have inherent methods of authentication
   based on username and password, but there is some proposed 
   extensions, which set new authentication methods to be used in Phase
   1 of the Internet Key Exchange (IKE), that allows the use of an 
   username and password in order to establish the initial Security 
   Association (SA) of the IPSec tunnel. One of the most known 
   extensions is called "A Hybrid Authentication Mode for IKE" [1] and 
   currently has the status of "work in progress" (draft).

   The dynamic of the IPSec has the concept of a session. The 
   maintenance of Security Associations (SAs) requires continuous 
   exchanges between the IPSec Hosts or Gateways (i.e. between the
   IPSec Client Software, running in the user's PC, and the IPSec Edge
   Device, the IPServices router), and the communication failure 
   between devices denies any possibility of renewing SAs, dropping the
   tunnel. 
   
   The username and password schema allows to perform ISP Selection
   based on realms or domains. The IPSec Client is very similar to
   the standard dial-up clients, the user can actually disconnect a
   session and establish another session, connecting to another ISP,
   if he wants to.

   The main objective of the IPSec authentication extension is to
   provide the option of having a secure tunnel through IP Networks to
   Telecommuters. The confidentiality requirement demands strong
   overhead and intense processing capabilities. The IPSec protocol is
   suitable for telecommuters, not for bulk use.
  

10. References

   [H.323] ITU-T Recommendation H.323 (02/98) - Packet-based multimedia
   communications systems


Penno, et al.                                                 [Page 11]


Internet-Draft               ISP Selection                   March,2001

   [ICQ] http://www.mirabilis.com

   [RFC1631] Egevang, K. and  P. Francis, "The IP Network Address 
   Translator (NAT)", RFC 1631, May 1994.

   [RFC2131] Droms, R. "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol", RFC 2131,
   March 1997.

   [RFC2535] Eastlake, D., "Domain Name System Security Extensions", 
   RFC 2535, March 1999.

   [RFC2661] A. Valencia, W. M. Townsley, W. Palter, et. al. "Layer Two
   Tunneling Protocol",  RFC2661, August 1999.

   [DHCP-RECONF] P. De Schrijver, et al. "Dynamic host configuration: 
   DHCP reconfigure extension ", draft-ietf-dhc-pv4-reconfigure-02.txt,
   November 2000, Work in progress. 

   [NTS] http://www.nts.com

   [RFC1661] Simpson, W., "The Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP)", STD 51, 
   RFC 1661, July 1994

   [RFC2364] G. Gross et al, "PPP over AAL5", RFC 2364, July 1998

   [RFC2516] Mamakos, et. al., "A Method for Transmitting PPP Over 
   Ethernet (PPPoE)", RFC 2516, February 1999

   [Litvin] M. Litvin, R. Shamir, T. Zegman, "A Hybrid Authentication 
   Mode for IKE", draft-ietf-ipsec-isakmp-hybrid-auth-05.txt, work in
   progress.
  
   [PPPoE-Ext] R.Penno, "PPPoE Extensions For Seamless Service 
   Selection", draft-penno-pppoe-ext-service-01.txt, work in progress.

11. Security Considerations

   All security to be considered in this document regards the access 
   security, defined in other RFCs, and with the way the users handles
   their usernames and passwords. The Web Login method lies in the 
   browser security too, improper cache handling, cookies and so forth
   could be used by malicious hackers in order to gain unauthorized 
   access to the network.

12. Acknowledgments 
    
   To be provided. 
 




Penno, et al.                                                 [Page 12]


Internet-Draft               ISP Selection                   March,2001

   Author's Addresses 
    
   Reinaldo Penno
   Nortel Networks, Inc. 
   2305 Mission College Boulevard
   Building SC9  
   Santa Clara, CA 95134
   Email: rpenno@nortelnetworks.com 

   Andre Gustavo de Albuquerque
   Nortel Networks, Inc.
   Av. Lauro Muller, 116 
   Torre do Rio Sul - Room 605
   Rio de Janeiro, Brazil  22290-160
   EMail: gustavoa@nortelnetworks.com

Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.

