

                                                             M. Brunner 
   Internet Draft                                                   NEC 
   Document: draft-brunner-nsis-ntlp-func-00.txt                        
   Expires: June 2003                                     December 2002 
    
    
            NSIS Transport Layer Protocol (NTLP) Functionality 
                   <draft-brunner-nsis-ntlp-func-00.txt> 
                                      
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This memo is a first step towards the design of a NSIS Transport 
   Layer Protocol (NTLP). It lists protocol requirements, protocol 
   design principles, and functional issues on the protocol level coming 
   out of the NSIS requirements document[NSIS-REQ], the NSIS framework 
   document [NSIS-FW], and several analysis documents. This list might 
   be very near to implementation or solution already. The draft has 
   been motivated by recommendations to list protocol requirements 
   instead of higher level NSIS requirements as done in the NSIS 
   requirements draft [NSIS-REQ]. 
 
1. Introduction 
    
   We assume that a two layer approach has been agreed upon. This 
   document only deals with the general signaling layer also called the 
   NSIS Transport Layer Protocol (NTLP) in [NSIS-FW]. 
    
   Its functionality should be general enough such that higher layer 
   signaling applications or several different NSIS Signaling Layer 
   Protocols (NSLP) can run on top of NTLP. 
    

     
   Brunner               - Expires March 2003                        1 

                        Towards RSVP Version 2           December 2002 
                                    
    
2. Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119. 
    
3. Requirements List 
    
3.1. NTLP MUST Co-exist with RSVP Version 1 
    
   We assume that RSVP Version 1 still will exist and can be used for 
   several applications it has been designed for (IntServ, Multicast, 
   ...) 
    
   In the ideal case, NTLP SHOULD run dual-stack together with RSVP 
   version 1. 
    
3.2. NTLP MUST primarily work for Unicast 
    
   We consider multicast an important feature of a signaling protocol, 
   however for simplicity reasons unicast is of primarily interest. For 
   multicasting RSVP Version 1 does a god job. We think that multicast 
   support for homogeneous reservations and small groups can be regarded 
   as an extension to be added to the protocol in a late step.  
 
3.3. NTLP MUST use Soft State for State Management 
    
   RSVP version 1 is a Soft State protocol, which means that information 
   about the flows, reservations etc. is temporary saved along the path. 
   Soft state gives adaptivity to route changes during the lifetime of a 
   reservation and increases the protocol robustness to loss of 
   messages. Besides, unexpected loss of connectivity from an end-point 
   will simply lead to timeout states after some time along the path. 
   These characteristics seem to be very important in many scenarios 
   where a signaling protocol is used. 
    
   NTLP MUST use Soft State. This implies it MUST have a refresh message 
   type. However the information stored and refreshed is an issue for 
   NSLP. 
 
3.4. NTLS MUST signal Reservation Acceptance and Non-acceptance 
    
   After sending a NTLP reservation request, the initiator MUST receive 
   a positive or negative answer (acknowledgement or error 
   notification). 
    
3.5. NTLP MUST allow for optimistic behavior 
    
   We refer to optimistic behavior in sender-oriented modes. Basically, 
   after sending a reservation request the data sender can immediately 
   state sending hoping that the reservation has been successful. 
    

     
   Brunner                Expires March 2003                         2 

                        Towards RSVP Version 2           December 2002 
                                    
    
3.6. NTLP MUST signal error conditions 
    
   NTLP MUST signal error conditions within the network to its NSIS 
   initiator. And it MAY also send it to the NSIS Responders 
    
3.7. NTLP MUST be service-independent 
    
   Various NSLPs MUST run using the same base protocol. 
     
3.8. NTLP MUST be optimized for "speed" 
 
    
3.9. NTLP MUST be able to run over IP 
    
   NTLP MUST run over IP only. This is the same as RSVP Version 1 does. 
   It MAY run also over other transport protocols. A candidate for the 
   transport protocol could be UDP. 
 
3.10. Flow Identifier SHOULD be included in NTLP 
    
   From the NSLP perspective, flow identification might be part of NSLP 
   since it is also service-dependent. 
    
   However, a flow identifier might be changed or looked at from other 
   network boxes than routers. E.g., NAT need to change the flow 
   identification if NTLP should work in these environments. Firewall 
   function might use the flow identification for their blocking or 
   passing decision. 
    
3.11. A Reservation Identifier MUST be included in NTLP 
    
   Each RSVP message MUST carry a Reservation Identifier to address the 
   reservation it acts on. 
 
3.12. Refreshing Intervals MUST be configurable 
    
   Different environments need different types of refreshing, so the 
   refreshing interval MUST be configurable. The granularity of 
   configuration is open. In some cases, it MUST be configurable on a 
   per reservation basis in other per NSIS entity is enough. 
    
3.13. NTLP MUST avoid per-reservation timers in core nodes 
    
   The protocol specification of NTLP MUST NOT force the implementation 
   of per-reservation timers. 
 
3.14. NTLP MUST have a message for explicit teardown  
    
   NTLP MUST have a message for explicit end (teardown) of a 
   reservation; this feature can be useful to avoid keeping resources 
   allocated when they are not needed any longer. 
    

     
   Brunner                Expires March 2003                         3 

                        Towards RSVP Version 2           December 2002 
                                    
    
3.15. NTLP MUST work without any state maintained on NSIS forwarders  
    
   NTLP MUST be able to run without any state maintained in NSIS 
   forwarders for the NTLP itself. If NSLP maintains state for its own 
   purpose, NTLP MUST provides the mechanisms for it. 
    
3.16. NTLP MUST use routing information also used for the data. 
 
3.17. NTLP MUST support Sender- and Receiver Initiated 
    
   Find definitions in of Sender- and Receiver Initiated Signaling in 
   [NSIS-FW] 
    
3.18. NTLP MUST support Uni-Directional and Bi-Directional Reservations 
    
   Bi-Directional reservations MUST NOT follow the same path. 
 
3.19. NTLP SHOULD support two-pass reservations 
    
   NTLP MUST perform complex function in NSIS Initiator and/or NSIS 
   Responders not in NSIS Forwarders 
 
4. References 
    
   [NSIS-REQ] M. Brunner et al. (Editor) "Requirements for Signaling 
   Protocols", draft-ietf-nsis-req-05.txt, 2002. 
    
   [NSIS-FW] R. Hancock et al. (Editor), "Next Steps in Signaling: 
   Framework, draft-nsis-fw-01.txt, 2002. 
    
5. Author's Addresses 
    
   Marcus Brunner 
   NEC Europe Ltd. 
   Network Laboratories 
   Kurfuersten-Anlage 34 
   D-69115 Heidelberg 
   Germany 
   E-Mail: brunner@ccrle.nec.de 
    
    












     
   Brunner                Expires March 2003                         4 

