

     Network Working Group                                    Bernard Aboba
     INTERNET-DRAFT                                   Microsoft Corporation
     <draft-zorn-dial-roam-req-01.txt>                            Glen Zorn
     30 June 1996                                     Microsoft Corporation



                          Dialup Roaming Requirements



     1.  Status of this Memo

     This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working docu-
     ments of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF),  its  areas,  and
     its  working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute work-
     ing documents as Internet-Drafts.

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six  months
     and  may  be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
     time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as  reference  mate-
     rial or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

     To  learn  the  current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
     ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-Drafts  Shadow
     Directories   on   ds.internic.net   (US  East  Coast),  nic.nordu.net
     (Europe), ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast), or munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim).

     The  distribution  of  this memo is unlimited.  It is filed as <draft-
     zorn-dial-roam-req-01.txt>, and  expires January 4, 1997.  Please send
     comments to the authors.


     2.  Abstract

     This  document  describes  the  features required for the provision of
     "roaming capability" for dialup Internet users, as  well  as  offering
     some  suggestions  for future protocol standardization work.  "Roaming
     capability" may be loosely defined as the ability to use  any  one  of
     multiple  Internet  service providers (ISPs), while maintaining a for-
     mal, customer-vendor relationship with only one.   Examples  of  cases
     where  roaming  capability  might  be required include ISP "confedera-
     tions" and ISP-provided coporate network access support.


     3.  Introduction

     Considerable interest has arisen recently in a set  of  features  that
     fit  within  the  general  category of "roaming capability" for dialup
     Internet users.  Interested parties have included:

          Regional Internet Service Providers  (ISPs)  operating  within  a
          particular  state  or  province, looking to combine their efforts
          with those of other regional providers to  offer  dialup  service



     Aboba & Zorn                                                  [Page 1]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                            30 June 1996


          over a wider area.

          National  ISPs  wishing to combine their operations with those of
          one or more ISPs in another nation to  offer  more  comprehensive
          dialup service in a group of countries or on a continent.

          Businesses  desiring  to  offer  their  employees a comprehensive
          package of dialup services on a global basis.  Those services may
          include  Internet  access  as  well as secure access to corporate
          intranets via a Virtual Private Network (VPN), enabled by tunnel-
          ing protocols such as PPTP or L2F.

     What  is  required to provide roaming capability to dialup users?  The
     following list is a first cut at defining the  requirements  for  suc-
     cessful roaming among an arbitrary set of ISPs:

          Phone number presentation
          Phone number exchange
          Phone book compilation
          Phone book update
          Connection management
          Authentication
          NAS Configuration/Authorization
          Security
          Accounting

     These topics are discussed further in following sections.


     3.1.  Terminology

     This document frequently uses the following terms:

     phone book
               This is a database or document containing data pertaining to
               dialup access, including phone numbers  and  any  associated
               attributes.


     4.  Requirements for Dialup Roaming

     Suppose  we  have  a  customer,  Fred,  who has signed up for Internet
     access with ISP A in his local area, through his company, BIGCO.   ISP
     A  has  joined  an  association of other ISPs (which we will call ISP-
     GROUP) in order to offer service outside the  local  area.   Now  Fred
     travels  to another part of the world, and wishes to dial into a phone
     number offered by ISP B (also a member of ISPGROUP).  What is involved
     in allowing this to occur?


     Phone number presentation
          Fred  must be able to find and select the phone number offered by
          ISP B.




     Aboba & Zorn                                                  [Page 2]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                            30 June 1996


     Phone number exchange
          When there is a change in the status of phone numbers  (additions
          or  deletions) from individual providers, there must be a way for
          providers in ISPGROUP to notify  each  other  and  propagate  the
          changes.

     Phone book compilation
          When  these  updates  occur, there must be a way to compile a new
          phone book for ISP A, based on the changes submitted by the indi-
          vidual ISPs in ISPGROUP.

     Phone book update
          Once  a new phone book is compiled, there must be a way to update
          the phone books of customers such as Fred, so  that  the  changes
          are reflected in the user phone books.

     Connection management
          Fred's  machine  must  be able to dial the phone number, success-
          fully connect, and interoperate with the  Network  Access  Server
          (NAS) on the other end of the line.

     Authentication
          Fred must be able to secure access to the network.

     NAS configuration/authorization
          The Network Access Server (NAS) must receive configuration param-
          eters in order to set up Fred's session.

     Security
          If desired by BIGCO, additional security measures should be  sup-
          ported for Fred's session.  These could include supporting use of
          token cards, or setting up Fred's account so that he is automati-
          cally  tunneled to the corporate PPTP or L2F server for access to
          the corporate intranet.

     Accounting
          ISP B must keep track of what resources Fred used during the ses-
          sion.   Relevant information might include how long Fred used the
          service, what speed he connected at,  whether  he  connected  via
          ISDN or modem, etc.

     Note  that  some of these requirements may not require standardization
     or lie outside the scope of the IETF; they are  all  listed  for  com-
     pleteness' sake.


     4.1.  Phone Number Presentation

     Phone number presentation involves the display of available phone num-
     bers to the user, and culminates in the choosing of a  number.   Since
     the  user  interface  and  sequence of events involved in phone number
     presentation is a function of the connection management software  that
     Fred  is using, it is likely that individual vendors will take differ-
     ent  approaches  to  the  problem.   These  differences  may   include



     Aboba & Zorn                                                  [Page 3]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                            30 June 1996


     variances  in the format of the client phone books, varying approaches
     to presentation, etc.  There is no inherent problem with this, as long
     as  the  mechanisms by which phone number information is exchanged are
     standardized and interoperable.  The demands of phone number presenta-
     tion  have effects upon the phone book entries themselves, however, as
     is illustrated below.

     What information about individual numbers is  needed  to  support  the
     presentation  process?   We can think of this information as including
     various qualities associated with a given number (e.g.,  maximum  sup-
     ported speed, analog vs. ISDN, multicast capability, etc.), as well as
     additional information specific to a given ISP such as  their  company
     name, technical support number or icon.


     4.1.1.  Phone Number Presentation Issues

     Issues relating to phone number presentation include:

     Representation
         How are the phone numbers represented within the phone book?  What
         information relating to the numbers is presented to the user?

     Area grouping
         We assume that, for convenience sake, it would be a good thing  to
         display  to  Fred  only  those  phone numbers that are useful; the
         phone numbers of access points in Northern Africa,  for  instance,
         are  of little use in Los Angeles.  If this is true, how can it be
         accomplished, given that users move around?

     Number preference
         What determines what numbers appear first in the list?

     Primary and secondary numbers
         Does the user select only a single number to call, or is  there  a
         backup number?

     Representation of external numbers
         If  the  geographical coverage areas of two ISPs in the same group
         overlap, how should they be differentiated, if at all?  For  exam-
         ple, suppose that ISP C, another member of ISPGROUP, has some num-
         bers in the same area as ISP A.  Should  ISP  A  be  given  better
         "billing"  than  ISP  C  in the phone book, since Fred is A's cus-
         tomer?  If so, how should this be accomplished?

     Cost
         How are costs to be displayed to users?  Is it necessary to propa-
         gate information on the costs of individual numbers along with the
         numbers themselves, or would something like a help file suffice?

     Metrics
         What information about individual numbers do users  want  to  see?
         As  additional  characteristics  are  added, how do we ensure that
         this information can also be displayed?



     Aboba & Zorn                                                  [Page 4]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                            30 June 1996


     4.2.  Phone Number Exchange

     Phone number exchange involves propagation  of  phone  number  changes
     between  providers.  In order for the providers in ISPGROUP to be able
     to exchange phone book entries with each other, it essential that they
     be  able  to interoperate.  As a result, we believe there is a need to
     standardize the phone number exchange protocol.  What will  the  phone
     number  exchange protocol look like between an ISP's phone book server
     and the Designated Server?  The  update  messages  are  likely  to  be
     fairly  simple,  consisting  of  ADD  or  DELETE  messages  along with
     attribute/value pairs.  These pairs will describe  characteristics  of
     the phone number in question, such as its maximum speed, whether it is
     ISDN or modem, whether it is multicast capable, etc.


     4.2.1.  Protocol Design Issues

     Issues involved in the design of the phone  number  exchange  protocol
     include:

     Phone book server discovery
         How  do  the  phone book servers of the roaming partners find each
         other?  While manual configuration will probably work fine as long
         as  ISPGROUP  remains  small,  if ISPGROUP grows large, this could
         rapidly become unwieldy.

     Selection of the Designated and Backup Designated Servers
         Rather than asking each provider  in  ISPGROUP  to  contact  every
         other  provider,  it  makes  sense to have the providers contact a
         Designated  Server  in  order  to  transmit  their  updates.   The
         Designed  Server would then propagate the changes out to the indi-
         vidual ISP phone book servers, in much the same  way  as  this  is
         handled  in  OSPF.  If the Designated Server became unavailable, a
         Backup Designated Server would be used; the two servers would need
         to stay synchronized.

     Versioning
         How  do  different  versions  of  the phone book exchange protocol
         interoperate?

     Security
         How do the interacting phone book servers prove  their  identities
         to each other and secure the conversation?

     Conversation turnaround
         How  do  the interacting phone book servers decide who will be the
         master of the conversation, and how do they then turn the  conver-
         sation  around  so  each  side  can  transmit their updates to the
         other?

     Duplicate elimination
         How are the phone  number  entries  uniquely  identified  so  that
         duplicate  entries  are  eliminated?  It  may not be sufficient to
         automatically  kill  identical  phone   numbers,   since   it   is



     Aboba & Zorn                                                  [Page 5]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                            30 June 1996


         conceivable  that two identical numbers may have different scripts
         associated with them.   Mechanisms  for  ensuring  elimination  of
         duplicates  might  include  generation of a unique phonebook entry
         ID, and inclusion of a path attribute.

     Synchronization
         How often do phone book servers transmit their updates, and how do
         we  guard  against  excessively  frequent  updates  (phone  number
         flaps)?

     Failure recovery
         If a phone number exchange fails  part  way  through,  how  should
         recovery be managed?


     4.2.2.  Phone Number Attributes

     Since vendors may differ in what information is presented to the user,
     it is probably  a  good  idea  to  distinguish  between  required  and
     optional attributes for each phone number, and provide a mechanism for
     registering optional (and possibly vendor specific) attributes.   That
     way  vendors can extend the protocol (for example, to indicate whether
     a given number supports multicast).  Clients encountering unrecognized
     optional  attributes  should  ignore them; however, it is important to
     ensure that the mandatory attribute set is sufficiently rich  to  sup-
     port  subsequent phone book preparation and phone number presentation.


     4.2.2.1.  Attribute Specification Issues

     Issues involved with attribute specification include:

     Phone number characteristics
         What information is to be propagated relating to each  phone  num-
         ber,  in order to assist the user in choosing the "best" one?  How
         do we allow for addition of optional attributes?

     Scripting
         Is support for a script attribute required, since  some  ISPs  may
         require execution of a login script?

     Origin attribute
         The origin attribute distinguishes between numbers provided by the
         "home" ISP (in Fred's case,  ISP  A)  and  numbers  obtained  from
         external  sources,  such as other ISPs in the confederation.  This
         would be useful in providing the ability to differentiate  between
         numbers based on source in the client software.

     Cost attribute
         Since  prices  may  be expressed in different currencies and rates
         are likely to change frequently, it  is  probably  undesirable  to
         propagate  a  cost  attribute along with other metrics. Will users
         find the absence of this information acceptable?




     Aboba & Zorn                                                  [Page 6]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                            30 June 1996


     4.3.  Phone Book Compilation

     Once an ISP's phone book server has received it updates from the  Des-
     ignated Server it needs to compile a new phone book and propagate this
     phone book to all the phone book servers operated by that ISP.  In the
     case  of  ISPs  whose service areas are not geographically overlapped,
     this process can be quite simple.  In this case the  phone  book  will
     typically  consist of a list of all the numbers obtained in the update
     process.  Therefore, the compiled phone book will be the same for each
     ISP in the ISPGROUP and the same phone book can be used by every phone
     book server operated by the ISPs in ISPGROUP.  This greatly simplifies
     the process, since it implies that only the Designated and Backup Des-
     ignated Phone Book Servers need to do the compilation,  and  can  then
     replicate the result to all other servers in ISPGROUP.  As a result, a
     user would be able to access any of the phone book servers from any of
     the ISPs in ISPGROUP when updating their phone book.


     4.3.1.  Policy-based Phone Books

     If  the  ISPs  overlap  in geography, however, things are more compli-
     cated.  In this case, an individual ISP may wish to implement  policy-
     based phonebooks.

     Examples of phonebook policies include:

          Excluding all phone numbers from a given ISP

          Including  only  those  external phone numbers not overlapping in
          calling area with internal phone numbers

          Excluding   external   phone   numbers   from   a   given   city,
          state/province, or country

          Giving  preferential  listings to internal phone numbers, then to
          phone numbers from ISP B, then to phone numbers from other exter-
          nal sources.

     Implementation  of  policy-based phone books will require considerable
     additional work in order to define the possible policy rules and their
     implementation  during the compilation process.  Please also note that
     if the policies of the providers in ISPGROUP differ from one  another,
     then  the  phone  books  compiled  by the providers will differ.  This
     introduces considerable complexity into the compilation  and  propaga-
     tion process.


     4.3.2.  Standardization Requirements

     The  compilation  process  probably  does not need to be standardized,
     except as it impacts on the phone number exchange protocol.  For exam-
     ple,  there  may be a need to specify how tags imported from the phone
     number exchange process should be stored during compilation, and  sub-
     sequently exported.



     Aboba & Zorn                                                  [Page 7]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                            30 June 1996


     4.4.  Phone Book Update

     Once the phone book is compiled, it needs to be propagated out to cus-
     tomers.  The phone book update process is  considerably  simpler  than
     that for phone book exchange.  This is because the clients can receive
     the addresses of their default and backup phone  book  servers  during
     the  process  of registering for service; thus there is less of a need
     for autodiscovery.  Also, data transfer is  one-way,  from  the  Phone
     Book server to the client, so a simple version numbering scheme should
     be adequate  to  ensure  that  the  client  has  the  latest  version.
     Finally,  there  is  little  need  to  authenticate  the client to the
     server, only for the server to  prove  its  identity  to  the  client.
     These simplifying attributes allow the Phone Book update process to be
     handled using existing protocols such as HTTP,  with  security  issues
     being handled via SSL, PCT or S/HTTP.  Since the client machine may in
     many cases be a very small PC, it is important to keep the update pro-
     tocol as lightweight as possible.


     4.4.1.  Standardization Requirements

     It is probably desirable to standardize some aspects of the phone book
     update process, so as to allow providers to update  user  phone  books
     regardless  of  what  client software the customer has installed.  The
     level of standardization desirable is an open question.


     4.5.  Connection Management

     Once Fred has chosen a number from his phone book,  he  will  need  to
     connect to ISP B via ISDN or modem, and bring up a dialup network con-
     nection.  In the case of a PPP session, this will include CHAP or  PAP
     authentication.   Although  it  may also be possible (depending on the
     phone number and ISP chosen) to gain access to the network  via  SLIP,
     we  feel  SLIP is not practical for use in roaming situations since it
     does not support negotiation of connection parameters and  lacks  sup-
     port for protocols other than IP.  Support for non-IP protocols (e.g.,
     IPX) may be necessary for the provision of corporate  intranet  access
     via  the  Internet.   As a result, we feel that PPP is the only viable
     dialup protocol for use in roaming situations.


     4.5.1.  Standardization Requirements

     All necessary standards activity in this area is being  undertaken  by
     the IETF PPP Extensions Working Group.


     4.6.  Authentication

     Authentication  may  be  seen as consisting of two parts: the claim of
     identity (or identification) and the proof of the claim (or  verifica-
     tion).




     Aboba & Zorn                                                  [Page 8]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                            30 June 1996


     4.6.1.  Identification

     As  part  of  the authentication process, users identify themselves to
     the Network Access Server (NAS).  This  identification  may  be  name-
     based  (as  in the classic user ID/password scheme) or it may be based
     on the telephone number from which the call is made.


     4.6.1.1.  Name-based Identification

     If the NAS in question is dedicated to the use of the customers of the
     ISP  which  operates  it,  this identification might be as simple as a
     flat user ID (e.g., "aboba" or  "zorn").   If,  however,  the  NAS  is
     expected to be able to authenticate users from other ISPs (such as the
     members of ISPGROUP), some means must be provided to  correctly  route
     authentication requests to the appropriate authentication server.


     4.6.1.1.1.  Authentication Request Routing

     ISPs offering their networks for resale (or shared use, as in the case
     of ISPGROUP) today frequently implement user IDs  including  a  prefix
     ("MS/aboba")  or  suffix  "aboba@isbu.microsoft.com")  specifying  the
     user's customer affiliation in order to allow authentication to  occur
     against  foreign  authentication  servers  or account databases.  This
     method provides simple routing of  both  authentication  requests  and
     accounting  data.   Note  that, although the following discussion uses
     RADIUS as the authentication protocol, other protocols should work  as
     well.   In order for Fred to obtain network access from ISP B, he must
     have been assigned a user ID which identifies him as a customer  of  a
     member  of  ISPGROUP  (in  this  case, ISP A).  If a user ID suffix is
     used, Fred might identify himself as "fred@ispa.com".  Note that  some
     NAS  vendors  may  need  to  modify their devices so as to support the
     longer user IDs resulting  from  addition  of  prefixes  or  suffixes.
     After  obtaining Fred's user ID and other authentication data, the NAS
     device will then forward a RADIUS request packet to  a  RADIUS  proxy.
     The  proxy  in turn will examine the user ID suffix, check whether the
     given suffix represents a authorized authentication domain  for  roam-
     ing,  and  then  pass the request on to the appropriate RADIUS server.
     The mapping between the user's domain and their RADIUS server  can  be
     accomplished  through  either a configuration file on the proxy or DNS
     resolution.  For example, RADIUS requests going to ispa.com  might  be
     directed to the server auth.ispa.com.  Note that in order to authorize
     Fred, the RADIUS server receiving the request from the proxy needs  to
     check both the user ID and the domain represented by the suffix.  This
     is to guard against possible misconfiguration of the proxy.   Requests
     coming  in with incorrect suffices should probably result in a message
     sent to the technical representative of the proxy's domain.


     4.6.1.2.  Telephone Number-based Identification

     Today there exist ISPs that do not require a network layer authentica-
     tion,  instead  handling  authorization  and  accounting  based on the



     Aboba & Zorn                                                  [Page 9]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                            30 June 1996


     calling phone number.  For the case of a user roaming to an  ISP  that
     implements telephone-number based billing, if an existing relationship
     occurs between the phone number owner (say, a hotel) and the ISP, then
     network  access, accounting, and billing can often be simplified.  Via
     the hotel, the user is charged for the resulting 900 number call,  and
     the  hotel  in turn reimburses the ISP.  For the case of a user with a
     telephone-based billing account roaming to an ISP that requires a net-
     work  layer  authentication, the issues are more complex, particularly
     if the user's software is not set up to handle a network layer authen-
     tication.   At  this  point,  the  importance of this issue is an open
     question.


     4.6.2.  Verification of Identity

     CHAP and PAP are the two authentication protocols used within the  PPP
     framework  today.   Some groups of users are requiring different forms
     of proof of identity (e.g., token or  smart  cards,  Kerberos  creden-
     tials,  etc.) for special purposes (such as acquiring access to corpo-
     rate intranets).  It is outside the scope of this document to describe
     all  the  authentication  protocols  extent,  but  we believe that the
     widest possible range of authentication technologies  should  be  sup-
     ported for roaming to be successful.


     4.6.3.  Standardization Requirements

     Other  than  the shared secrets issue discussed below, the authentica-
     tion issue is being adequately addressed by  the  efforts  of  various
     IETF Working Groups.


     4.7.  NAS Configuration/Authorization

     In  order  for Fred to be able to log in to ISP B, it is necessary for
     ISP A's RADIUS server to return the proper  configuration  information
     to  ISP  B's  NAS.  However, it is possible that ISP A and ISP B's NAS
     devices are from different vendors; even if they  are  from  the  same
     vendor,  ISP  A  and ISP B may use different NAS configurations.  As a
     result, the NASs may each require different  parameters  in  order  to
     properly  configure  them.  In the case of RADIUS, this problem can be
     solved through the use of a proxy which  adds  ISP-  and  NAS-specific
     attributes to the response returned by ISP A's RADIUS server, with the
     result being that ISP B's RADIUS proxy  will  provide  the  attributes
     necessary to configure ISP B's NAS device, while ISP A's RADIUS server
     will perform the actual user authentication.


     4.7.1.  Standardization Requirements

     Since the NAS configuration function is provided  by  the  RADIUS  and
     TACACS+  protocols,  we  do not believe there is a need for additional
     standardization efforts in this area.




     Aboba & Zorn                                                 [Page 10]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                            30 June 1996


     4.8.  Security

     Although network security is a very broad subject, in  this  paper  we
     will  limit  our attention to a few topics which seem most relevant to
     the problem of dialup roaming.  These  issues  include  trust,  secure
     tunneling and scalability.


     4.8.1.  Trust

     One of the problems which arises from the dependency on a proxied sys-
     tem of authorization is how to guarantee that the proxy will  properly
     forward  the security-related parameters returned by the remote server
     and that the NAS will enforce them.  For example, it would probably be
     unacceptable  for  the  NAS to allow a user to authenticate using only
     CHAP or PAP if the remote authorization server had returned attributes
     indicating  a  requirement for token card use.  Unfortunately, we have
     no idea how (or if it is possible, in the general case)  to  guarantee
     this  compliance.   Probably the best that can be done at this time is
     to specify that proxies must not  remove  security-related  parameters
     from  responses  and require that NAS devices refuse access if they do
     not support an attribute which is required for a given user.


     4.8.2.  Secure Tunneling

     Several tunneling protocols (notably PPTP and L2F) have been  proposed
     for  use in dialup environments.  The protocols hold great promise for
     the implementation of Virtual Private Networks as a means for inexpen-
     sive access to remote networks.


     4.8.2.1.  Standardization Requirements

     Both  PPTP  and  L2F are documented in Internet-Drafts.  While we feel
     that there is a need for standardization in this area, and perhaps for
     convergence  between these two approaches, we do not feel any new tun-
     neling protocol development is needed  for  solution  of  the  roaming
     problem.   However, it does appear that there is a need for specifica-
     tion of how these tunneling protocols will be integrated with advanced
     authentication  methods  (such  as  smart  cards)  and NAS authentica-
     tion/authorization protocols, particularly with respect to authentica-
     tion request routing (see above).


     4.8.3.  Scalability

     Another  issue  relating  to  security  is  the  management  of shared
     secrets.  This is probably the issue that most limits  scalability  of
     roaming.   In order for ISPGROUP to grow beyond a small number of ISPs
     (say, 5-10) something will have to be done about the  existing  RADIUS
     shared secret mechanism.  The RADIUS protocol requires a shared secret
     between the NAS and the RADIUS server.   In  a  proxy  implementation,
     this  translates  to  shared  secrets  between the NAS devices and the



     Aboba & Zorn                                                 [Page 11]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                            30 June 1996


     proxy, and another set of shared secrets between  the  proxy  and  the
     RADIUS  servers.   In  a  roaming  situation, this means that we could
     potentially have a shared secret for each proxy/server pair.  Assuming
     that  each ISP runs a proxy as well as a server, this translates to n2
     shared secrets, where n is the number of ISPs in ISPGROUP.  This is in
     addition  to  m shared secrets for the NAS/proxy combinations, where m
     is the total number of NAS devices  operated by all the ISPs  in  ISP-
     GROUP.   Given  this,  it  is fairly easy to see how the shared secret
     management problem could easily get out of hand. One  way  to  address
     this  issue  would be to require assignment of public key pairs to the
     NAS devices, RADIUS proxies and RADIUS servers.  However,  this  would
     require  implementation  of a key distribution mechanism, which is not
     expected to arrive until the implementation of secure DNS.  Also,  the
     use  of  public-key  cryptography  is likely to impose an unacceptable
     computational burden on the NAS.  This  is  really  a  key  management
     issue,  though,  rather than a cryptographic one.  By simply requiring
     that all proxies share the same key with any given server, the  number
     of  keys in use can be drastically reduced, albeit at the cost of some
     security.


     4.9.  Accounting

     Given that Fred identifies himself  as  "fred@ispa.com"  in  order  to
     login  to  ISP  B,  and assuming that ISP B's NAS devices implement an
     accounting protocol (RADIUS, TACACS+, SNMP, syslog, etc.), an account-
     ing record will then be generated which will summarize Fred's resource
     consumption during the session.  This record should be provided  in  a
     standardized  format,  and transmitted to an appropriate location.  In
     order to allow the ISPs in ISPGROUP to  exchange  accounting  informa-
     tion,  it  is clear that there is a need to standardize the accounting
     record format, as well as the manner in which these records are trans-
     mitted among providers.  However, as long as the NAS devices only need
     to communicate with accounting servers within their own  organization,
     it  is  not as clear that the accounting protocol must itself be stan-
     dardized.  This is because the accounting protocol will only  be  used
     as  a means of communicating accounting information within an individ-
     ual  ISP's  organization.   To   standardize   communication   between
     providers it will suffice to generate  accounting records in a defined
     format and transmit them in a standardized way.  Thus,  it  would  not
     matter  what  protocol  the NAS uses to provide accounting information
     (i.e. RADIUS accounting, TACACS+, SNMP, syslog, etc.), as long as  the
     required records are generated and transmitted in a secure fashion.


     5.  Acknowledgements

     Thanks  to  Dr.  Thomas Pfenning and Don Dumitru of Microsoft for many
     useful discussions of this problem space.








     Aboba & Zorn                                                 [Page 12]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                            30 June 1996


     6.  Authors' Addresses

     Bernard Aboba
     Microsoft Corporation
     One Microsoft Way
     Redmond, WA 98052

     Phone: 206-936-6605
     EMail: bernarda@microsoft.com


     Glen Zorn
     Microsoft Corporation
     One Microsoft Way
     Redmond, WA 98052

     Phone: 206-703-1559
     EMail: glennz@microsoft.com







































     Aboba & Zorn                                                 [Page 13]


