
Network Working Group                                         C. Deleuze
Internet-Draft                                                L. Gautier
Expires: May 21, 2001                                   ActiVia Networks
                                                             M. Hallgren
                                                        Teleglobe France
                                                       November 20, 2000


          A DNS Based Mapping Peering System for Peering CDNs
                 draft-deleuze-cdnp-dnsmap-peer-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 21, 2001.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved.

Discussion List & Archives

   This document and related documents are discussed on the cdn mailing
   list. To join the list, send mail to cdn-request@ops.ietf.org. To
   contribute to the discussion, send mail to cdn@ops.ietf.org. The
   archives are at ftp://ops.ietf.org/pub/lists/cdn.*. 

Abstract

   There is an increasing interest in interconnecting Content Delivery
   Networks (CDNs) via peering systems.  This memo proposes a DNS-based
   solution for peering request mapping systems.  This solution uses


Deleuze, et. al.          Expires May 21, 2001                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              CDNP DNS mapping               November 2000


   delivery-aware domain names under the current DNS.  It describes an
   architecture for peering delivery-aware CDNs.  This affects the
   methods used to interconnect multiple CDNs. 

Table of Contents

   1.      Conventions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.      Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.      Mapping System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.      Mapping Peering System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.1     Basic Peering Mechanism  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.2     Delivery-Aware Peering Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.3     External Naming Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.      Delivery Awareness Criteria  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.1     Criteria Examples  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.1.1   Publisher criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.1.1.1 Delivery Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.1.1.2 Delivery Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.1.1.3 Delivery Delay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.1.1.4 Delivery Footprint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.1.2   Delivery Criteria  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.2     Default Delivery Names . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.2.1   Delivery Name Key  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   5.2.2   Delivery Name Example  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   5.2.2.1 Publisher Delivery Name  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   6.      Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   7.      Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
           References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
           Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
           Full Copyright Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19





















Deleuze, et. al.          Expires May 21, 2001                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              CDNP DNS mapping               November 2000


1. Conventions

   This memo assumes that the reader is familiar with DNS concepts [1]
   and specifications [2].  Following practice in the CDNP mailing
   list, we use the term "DNS name" rather than "domain name".  "tld"
   stands for "top level domain".

   "Delivery-aware" is used here to indicate that there are multiple
   possibilities to deliver content depending on a variety of criteria.
   For example, consider the footprint criteria, the content must be
   delivered only to a subset of peered CDN surrogates.

   "DNS-MS" stands for DNS-based Mapping System.

   "PMT" stands for "Peering Mapping Table", i.e. the set of DNS
   records involved in the DNS-MS peering process.

   "PMT Manager" stands for the peering mechanism that builds the PMT
   (either an administrator or a protocol).
































Deleuze, et. al.          Expires May 21, 2001                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              CDNP DNS mapping               November 2000


2. Introduction

   The Domain Name System (DNS) was designed primarily to identify
   network resources.  Today, many CDNs use the current DNS to map a
   request to the suitable surrogate [4].

   During the DNS mapping process only the DNS names are visible to the
   DNS mapping system. A problem occurs when a CDN wants to publish
   content on a specific delivery area. This area can be a subset of
   CDN servers running a specific application, or servers that cover
   only a part of the total CDN footprint.  To make this delivery
   information available to the mapping process, it has to be coded in
   the DNS name space.

   The need for delivery awareness can easily be shown with this
   example:

   A Microsoft Windows Media Stream is published with an URI such as:
   "mms://foo.bar.com/file.foo".  This URI is interpreted at the user
   agent and is not visible for the mapping system. The only part of
   the URI that can be used for request mapping is the DNS name. 
   Hence, all relevant information for the mapping decision has to be
   encoded in the DNS name.

   Since only DNS names are visible during the DNS-based peering,
   information about a desired footprint, delivery area or similar
   information has to be integrated in the DNS name. To peer with a
   limited zone inside a CDN, this zone has to be defined between the
   peering partners and encoded in the DNS name.  For example, this is
   already used by CNN with its "www.cnn.com" and "europe.cnn.com" DNS
   names.

   This memo addresses specifically the issues raised in the context of
   CDN peering.  The scope of this work is limited to DNS-based
   peering, but does not restrict the mapping mechanisms inside each
   individual CDN. For the purpose of this document we consider the
   internal mapping mechanisms of CDNs as black boxes (e.g., a CDN can
   use URI-based mapping internally).

   This memo presents a solution for delivery aware mapping.  At the
   core of this solution is the use of the delivery-aware naming at the
   DNS level. Consult [5] for a description of object coding in the DNS
   name space.  The present memo proposes a more general approach
   towards DNS-based request mapping using delivery-aware DNS names.







Deleuze, et. al.          Expires May 21, 2001                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              CDNP DNS mapping               November 2000


3. Mapping System

   The component of a CDN that maps user requests to an appropriate
   surrogate is called the "mapping system".  Similarly to the routing
   of IP datagrams, it actually contains two distinct processes: 

   o  "forwarding" is the process that uses the "routing table" to
      determine the next hop to the appropriate surrogate.

   o  "routing" is the process that builds the routing table according
      to various metrics and policies.

   In this memo, only the "forwarding" part is addressed.

   Conceptually, mapping systems can make use of three (possibly
   combined) categories of mechanisms (see [5] for details):

   o  DNS-based

   o  transport-layer

   o  application-layer (URI-based)

   DNS-based mapping is always available whatever the content (it does
   not require usage of proxies or application level redirection
   mechanisms).  The interpretation of an URI is hierarchical: first,
   the DNS name is resolved, then a protocol is chosen according to the
   scheme and a connection is established; URI pathname and arguments
   are made available to the server which processes them.  Hence,
   DNS-based mapping can always be used as the first step of a general
   URI based mapping mechanism.

   Other motivations for the use of DNS-based mapping are the
   following: 

   o  Independence of the application-level protocols: The DNS-based
      mapping acts before these protocols so that they are not aware of
      the mapping.

   o  Compatibility with whatever URI utilization: The DNS-based
      mapping does not rely on URI analysis, so URI can be used
      exclusively on user agents, encrypted over the network or used
      many times after the mapping (as HTTP1.1 [3] recommends).








Deleuze, et. al.          Expires May 21, 2001                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              CDNP DNS mapping               November 2000


4. Mapping Peering System

   In the case of peering CDNs, mapping systems must be tied together
   by mapping CPGs (content peering gateways) to form a hierarchical
   mapping peering system [6].  Each CDN has only one mapping system.

   A parent mapping system is a mapping system, authoritative or not,
   which decides that a child mapping system can handle the user
   request or can delegate the mapping to a lower mapping system in the
   hierarchy, in order to find the best suitable surrogate among each
   peering CDN surrogates.

   The first step of the URI mapping mechanism is the DNS-based mapping
   as explained above. It is handled by a DNS based Mapping System
   (DNS-MS).

   The most common mechanisms used for DNS redirection are based on NS
   and CNAME records [5].  The DNS-MS described below is based on CNAME
   records, but can be adapted to one using NS records, with the known
   drawbacks described in [5].  The set of CNAME records involved in
   the DNS-MS peering process is defined as the peering mapping table
   (PMT).  This table contains one CNAME record per entry.  The PMT is
   built by the Peering Mapping Table Manager (PMT Manager). This
   entity can be a DNS-MS administrator which manually updates the
   table, or a peering protocol (not addressed here) that performs this
   task automatically.

4.1 Basic Peering Mechanism

   Here, each DNS-MS is described by only one DNS name. Therefore, the
   peering mechanism is not delivery-aware.  For the sake of clarity,
   the unique DNS name of a DNS-MS "X" can be seen as:
   "<X_unique_subdomain>.X_domain.tld".

   When a parent DNS-MS decides to delegate the current resolution of a
   name "<parent_unique_subdomain>.parent_domain.tld" to a child
   DNS-MS, it replies to the user's DNS server the only CNAME record
   with the new DNS name "<child_unique_subdomain>.child_domain.tld". 
   The user's DNS server then queries the child DNS-MS to resolve this
   new DNS name.

   The PMT manager makes the association (i.e. adds the CNAME entry in
   the PMT) between "<parent_unique_subdomain>.parent_domain.tld" and
   "<child_unique_subdomain>.child_domain.tld".  This association does
   not depend on any content or delivery criteria. If the child CDN is
   not able to distribute the content, the association is suppressed
   and the peered content distribution is stopped.  Since the parent
   has a unique delivery name, the PMT contains one unique entry per
   peer DNS-MS.


Deleuze, et. al.          Expires May 21, 2001                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              CDNP DNS mapping               November 2000


4.2 Delivery-Aware Peering Mechanism

   The CDN peering architecture [6] defines one mapping tree for each
   publisher URI.  The aggregation of the mapping trees whose URIs use
   the same publisher DNS name defines a global delivery tree.

   Each DNS-MS defines its internal delivery trees with the delivery
   criteria as presented in Section 5.  An internal delivery tree is
   defined by a delivery name.  This delivery name is a DNS name
   "<delivery_x>.domain.tld" under the DNS authority of the CDN.  This
   is the name used by the DNS-MS. Other DNS names of the internal
   delivery tree (used by the internal mapping system) are not exported
   outside the DNS-MS.

   As seen before, the basic mechanism implies that each CDN has only
   one internal delivery tree.  All internal delivery trees, one per
   CDN, build one unique global delivery tree that covers all peering
   CDNs . Also, parent DNS-MSs have only one CNAME record pointing to
   the delivery name of the child DNS-MS they are peering with.

   The delivery-aware mechanism implies that each CDN has one or more
   internal delivery trees.  When multiple CDNs are tied together, all
   internal delivery trees build several global delivery trees.  In
   order to peer with a given child DNS-MS, the parent DNS-MS uses one
   CNAME record for each of its internal delivery trees.

   The general DNS-MS peering architecture is defined as follows.  The
   publisher delegates one of its DNS names to the authoritative DNS-MS
   via a publisher delivery name.  Then, the authoritative DNS-MS links
   this delivery name to one delivery name in each child DNS-MS.  This
   procedure is repeated recursively between peered DNS-MSs.

   Therefore, the peering process is defined as follows.  When a parent
   DNS-MS decides to delegate the current resolution of a delivery name
   "<delivery_x>.parent_domain.tld" to a child DNS-MS, the parent
   replies to the user's DNS server a CNAME record with the new
   delivery name "<delivery_y>.child_domain.tld".  The user's DNS
   server then queries the child DNS-MS to resolve this new delivery
   name.

   The PMT manager make the association between
   "<delivery_x>.parent_domain.tld" and "<delivery_y>.child_domain.tld".

   This association must be done accordingly to criteria as presented
   in Section 5.  The PMT contains one set of CNAME records per parent
   DNS-MS delivery name. A set contains one CNAME record per peer
   DNS-MS for the delivery name.  Note that the PMT manager can change
   the PMT depending on network measurements or surrogate feedback.



Deleuze, et. al.          Expires May 21, 2001                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              CDNP DNS mapping               November 2000


   Several parent internal delivery trees may be linked to one child
   internal delivery tree, which becomes a multiplexed delivery tree. 
   However, this kind of internal delivery tree cannot be
   demultiplexed.  For example, if a multiplexed internal delivery tree
   is composed of HTTP and RTSP delivery, it is not possible to
   redirect HTTP related DNS requests to one child and RTSP requests to
   another child (or to another tree in the same child).  Therefore,
   the more internal delivery trees in a CDN, the more it is able to
   peer with other CDNs in a delivery aware way.

4.3 External Naming Issues

   In our model, a CDN can provide several delivery services (through
   distinct delivery trees) that are selected through an appropriate
   DNS name. This memo described how to use those names for CDN
   peering. Each peering CDN knows how to address the delivery trees of
   its peering CDNs.  Those names are used only between pairs of
   peering CDNs and are neither visible to users nor to publishers.

   This section discusses the special case of "peering" between the
   origin server of the publisher and the authoritative mapping system.
   The publisher delivery name must match the delivery tree
   corresponding to the service the publisher bought from the CDN.

   Let's take the example of the European 'Foo' company, which has a
   web site in English with parts of it in French.  This example is
   based on footprints, but any other criteria can be used.  "Foo"
   wants the English parts of its web site to be CDN-delivered
   throughout Europe, and the French parts only in France.  Thus, it is
   necessary that the English parts are associated to a delivery tree
   providing a European footprint and the French parts are associated
   to another delivery tree providing a French footprint.

   Since delivery trees are selected by a DNS name, the parts of the
   web site need to be identified in the DNS name, e.g. www.foo.com for
   English parts and www1.foo.com for French parts.

   This may be achieved by URI rewriting: 

      Static rewriting: It requires the reorganization of the "Foo" web
      site.

      Dynamic rewriting: It is performed on the fly, as a document is
      fetched from the origin server.

   Note that in this context, URI rewriting does not raise the problems
   described in [5] (Section 4.2.2.3): 

   1.  Rewriting is not client dependent.


Deleuze, et. al.          Expires May 21, 2001                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              CDNP DNS mapping               November 2000


   2.  The new DNS name points to a delivery tree, which will then be
       DNS-based mapped, not a surrogate.

   3.  Rewritten content can be cached in surrogates.

   The impact on the distribution system of such a scheme is not
   addressed here.












































Deleuze, et. al.          Expires May 21, 2001                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              CDNP DNS mapping               November 2000


5. Delivery Awareness Criteria

   In the delivery-aware peering mechanism, the PMT manager make use of
   a variety of delivery criteria for create/remove/update the CNAME
   records of the PMT.

   A set of delivery criteria is associated with each parent and child
   delivery name.  A set of publisher criteria is also associated to
   the publisher delivery names.  Therefore, the PMT manager can
   decide, on the basis of the criteria sets, which CNAME entry to
   create/remove/update in the PMT.

   As mentioned above, the publisher may have to modify its delivery
   names, in order to match the delivery services needs, possibly using
   a URI rewriting system.  In addition, the PMT manager has to create
   new delivery names (and corresponding internal delivery trees) to
   match the need of the publisher or of a peer DNS-MS.

   Note that it is not mandatory to have one delivery name for each
   possible combination of criteria.  Note also that some of these
   criteria may not be used in the delivery-aware DNS mapping process
   described above. However, they can be used in other mapping
   processes.

5.1 Criteria Examples

5.1.1 Publisher criteria

   The following lists are not exhaustive and might grow.  In this
   section, these criteria are presented from a publisher point of
   view. The DNS-MS point of view is also mentioned when the publisher
   and delivery criteria differs.

5.1.1.1 Delivery Service

   A publisher may need to deliver different kind of services or
   sub-services: 

   o  web pages 

      *  static web pages

      *  dynamically generated web pages (asp, cgi-bin, ...)

      *  web embedded objects (like images)

   o  standard encoded streams

   o  proprietary encoded streams, which can be derived for each


Deleuze, et. al.          Expires May 21, 2001                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              CDNP DNS mapping               November 2000


      encoding

5.1.1.2 Delivery Cost

   The publisher may specify a maximum cost for the delivery. The
   DNS-MS may specify a cost for the usage of its infrastructure. The
   definition of these cost criteria depends on business models that
   are not addressed here.

5.1.1.3 Delivery Delay

   Some contents or type of contents may need to be delivered within a
   delay bound. For example, this criterion can exclude the use of
   satellite links.

5.1.1.4 Delivery Footprint

   Contents may require delivery to specific geographical zones: 

   o  World

   o  Continents

   o  Countries

   o  States/regions

   o  Cities

   o  Districts

   o  Internet Point of Presence (PoP)

   or any combination of those.

5.1.2 Delivery Criteria

   Each publisher criteria is also a delivery criteria.  In addition,
   varieties of metrics based on network measurements, DNS-MS feedback
   or surrogate feedback are added. These metrics are discussed in [5].

5.2 Default Delivery Names

   One or more delivery criteria must be encoded in a delivery name to
   define it uniquely.  E.g., the web and RTSP service types can be
   encoded as follows: 

   o  www.domain.tld for static html pages



Deleuze, et. al.          Expires May 21, 2001                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              CDNP DNS mapping               November 2000


   o  rtsp.domain.tld for RTSP compatible stream content

   or with a unique identifier (which may be a hash key) 

   o  one.domain.tld

   o  two.domain.tld

   This section gives some recommendations to create delivery names but
   does not intend to impose a unique delivery name space.

   The delivery trees start with the delivery names of the publisher.
   Hence, one publisher delivery name has to be defined for each
   delivery tree required either by the publisher or by the global DNS
   mapping system. As seen before, the publisher delivery names can be
   created with URI rewriting systems.  Since the publisher delivery
   names may be visible to the users, they should be expressed with
   understandable names.

5.2.1 Delivery Name Key

   The publisher delivery name should be composed of a delivery key
   followed by the publisher domain or subdomain referred as
   "domain.tld".  The delivery key is composed of one or more DNS
   labels.  The publisher may choose the delivery key.

   The recommended delivery key is composed of only one DNS label:

   <delivery-key> ::= <text-part> [ <id-part> ]

   <text-part> ::= <letter> | <letter> <text-part>

   <id-part> ::= <digit> | <digit> <id-part>

   <letter> ::= any one of the 52 alphabetic characters A through Z in upper
   case and a through z in lower case

   <digit> ::= any one of the ten digits 0 through 9

   Note that while upper and lower case letters are allowed in delivery
   key, no significance is attached to the case. This is, two delivery
   keys with the same spelling but different case are to be treated as
   if identical.

   Since delivery keys are DNS labels, they must be 63 characters or
   less. Moreover, since CNAME records are appended during DNS
   resolution, it is wise to choose short delivery names in order to
   fit the whole answer in a single UDP DNS message.  If this is not
   the case, the requests would be be restarted with TCP, impacting


Deleuze, et. al.          Expires May 21, 2001                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft              CDNP DNS mapping               November 2000


   performance.

   The text label represents one or more delivery services. The
   following are defined, others may be used: 

   o  "www" for web pages

   o  "ftp" for ftp delivery service

   o  "rtsp" for standard stream delivery

   o  "mms" for Microsoft Windows Media delivery

   The key label is used to differentiate delivery keys having the same
   text label. If only one delivery key uses a text label, it does not
   contain a key label. When several delivery keys use the same text
   label, the most used (from a user point of view) do not contain a
   key label. Hence, the web service may have a "www" delivery key and
   the associated "www.domain.tld" delivery name which is already
   commonly used.

   Other delivery keys having the same text label must have a delivery
   key numbered incrementally and consecutively from 1.

5.2.2 Delivery Name Example

   A publisher "domain.com" has three delivery requirements, R1 to R3: 

   o  R1 criteria: 

      *  service: dynamically generated web (HTML and images)

      *  footprint: World

   o  R2 criteria: 

      *  service: dynamically generated web (HTML and images)

      *  footprint: France and Germany

   o  R3 criteria: 

      *  service: RTSP streaming

      *  footprint: France and Germany






Deleuze, et. al.          Expires May 21, 2001                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft              CDNP DNS mapping               November 2000


5.2.2.1 Publisher Delivery Name

   The publisher delivery names would be the following.

   R1 and R2 have the same delivery service: www. The publisher
   delivery names have to be identified with key labels.  As R1 is the
   primary requirement of the publisher, the delivery key has no
   key-label field. It is "www.domain.com".  Contrary, R2 needs a key
   label to be differentiated from R1. It is "www1.domain.com".

   R2 and R3 have the same delivery footprint, but different delivery
   service. Thus, R3 is differentiated from R2 by the delivery service.
   The naming is then: "rtsp.domain.com".






































Deleuze, et. al.          Expires May 21, 2001                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft              CDNP DNS mapping               November 2000


6. Security Considerations

   Specific security issues will be considered later. However, the
   architecture will use and adopt existing DNS security standards [7].















































Deleuze, et. al.          Expires May 21, 2001                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft              CDNP DNS mapping               November 2000


7. Acknowledgements


















































Deleuze, et. al.          Expires May 21, 2001                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft              CDNP DNS mapping               November 2000


References

   [1]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain Names - Concepts and Facilities", RFC
        1034, November 1987.

   [2]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain Names - Implementation and
        Specification", RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [3]  Fielding, R., Gettys, J., Mogul, J., Nielsen, H., Masinter, L.,
        Leach, P. and T. Berners-Lee, "Hypertext Transfer Protocol --
        HTTP/1.1", RFC 2616, June 1999.

   [4]  Day, M., Cain, B. and G. Tomlinson, "A Model for CDN Peering",
        Internet draft, draft-day-cdnp-model-03.txt (work in progress),
        November 2000.

   [5]  Cain, B., Douglis, F., Green, M., Hofmann, M., Nair, R. and D.
        Potter, "Known CDN Request Mapping Mechanisms", Internet draft,
        draft-cain-cdnp-known-req-map-00.txt (work in progress),
        November 2000.

   [6]  Green, M., Cain, B. and G. Tomlinson, "CDN Peering
        Architectural Overview", Internet draft,
        draft-green-cdnp-gen-arch-01.txt (work in progress), October
        2000.

   [7]  Eastlake, D. and C. Kaufman, "Domain Name System Security
        Extensions", RFC 2065, January 1997.


Authors' Addresses

   Christophe L. Deleuze
   ActiVia Networks
   Space Antipolis 5
   Parc de Sophia Antipolis
   2323 Chemin St Bernard
   06225 Vallauris,   Cedex
   FRANCE

   Phone: +33 4 97 23 46 66
   EMail: Christophe.Deleuze@activia.net
   URI:   http://www.activia.net/








Deleuze, et. al.          Expires May 21, 2001                 [Page 17]

Internet-Draft              CDNP DNS mapping               November 2000


   Laurent G. Gautier
   ActiVia Networks
   Space Antipolis 5
   Parc de Sophia Antipolis
   2323 Chemin St Bernard
   06225 Vallauris,   Cedex
   FRANCE

   Phone: +33 4 97 23 46 46
   EMail: Laurent.Gautier@activia.net
   URI:   http://www.activia.net/


   Michael Hallgren
   Teleglobe France
   Washington Plaza
   44, rue Washington
   75408 PARIS,   
   FRANCE

   Phone: +33 1 56 59 87 44
   EMail: michael.hallgren@teleglobe.com
   URI:   http://www.teleglobe.com/




























Deleuze, et. al.          Expires May 21, 2001                 [Page 18]

Internet-Draft              CDNP DNS mapping               November 2000


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Deleuze, et. al.          Expires May 21, 2001                 [Page 19]
