

Internet Architecture Board                                Steve Deering
INTERNET DRAFT                                             Cisco Systems
15 November 1998                                               Sue Hares
                                                          Merit Networks
                                                      Charles E. Perkins
                                                           Radia Perlman
                                                        Sun Microsystems

                Report on the 1998 IAB Routing Workshop
                     draft-iab-rtr-workshop-00.txt


Status of This Memo

   This document is a submission by the Internet Architecture Board
   Working Group of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).
   Comments should be submitted to the
   iab-routing-workshop@external.cisco.com mailing list.

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at
   any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

   To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check
   the ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-Drafts
   Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net (Northern
   Europe), ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific
   Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).


Abstract

   This document is an overview of a Routing workshop held by the
   Internet Architecture Board during March 25-27, 1998.  The major
   points of discussion are listed, along with some conclusions and
   action items for many of the points of discussion.  The full body of
   the report will be provided in a separate document.










Deering, Hares, Perlman, Perkins     Expires 15 April 1999      [Page i]

Internet Draft             Routing Workshop             15 November 1998




                                Contents


Status of This Memo                                                    i

Abstract                                                               i

 1. Introduction                                                       2

 2. Conclusions and Action Items                                       2
     2.1. Scaling of Unicast Routing and Addressing . . . . . . . .    3
           2.1.1. Unicast Routing - Conclusions . . . . . . . . . .    3
           2.1.2. Unicast Routing - Action Items  . . . . . . . . .    3
     2.2. Levels of Addressing of Addressing and Routing  . . . . .    3
     2.3. Network Address Translation (NAT) devices . . . . . . . .    4
           2.3.1. NAT devices - Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . .    4
           2.3.2. NAT devices - Action Items  . . . . . . . . . . .    4
     2.4. Multicast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    4
           2.4.1. Multicast - Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . .    4
           2.4.2. Multicast - Action Items  . . . . . . . . . . . .    5
     2.5. Routing Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    6
           2.5.1. Routing Stability - Conclusions . . . . . . . . .    6
           2.5.2. Routing Stability - Action Items  . . . . . . . .    6
     2.6. TOS/CoS/Qos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    6
           2.6.1. TOS/CoS/Qos - Action Items  . . . . . . . . . . .    7
     2.7. Routing Protocol Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    7
           2.7.1. Routing Security - Conclusions  . . . . . . . . .    7
           2.7.2. Routing Security - Action Items . . . . . . . . .    7
     2.8. Routing Policy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    7
           2.8.1. Routing Policy - Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . .    7
           2.8.2. Routing Policy - Action Item  . . . . . . . . . .    8
     2.9. Network to Host Flow of Information . . . . . . . . . . .    8
           2.9.1. Host Information - Conclusions  . . . . . . . . .    8
           2.9.2. Host Information - Action Items . . . . . . . . .    8
    2.10. Shorter Topics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    9
          2.10.1. Multi-strand Trunking . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    9
          2.10.2. Routing Diagnostic and Development Tools  . . . .    9
          2.10.3. Anycast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    9
          2.10.4. Load Sensitive IGP routing for Best Effort Traffic  10
          2.10.5. Geographical Addresses and Renumbering  . . . . .   10

 3. Summary of Action items                                           10
     3.1. Action Items for the IAB  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   10
     3.2. Action Items for IETF Working Group Chairs  . . . . . . .   11
     3.3. Action Items for the IRTF Routing Research Group  . . . .   11

 A. Participants                                                      12



Deering, Hares, Perlman, Perkins     Expires 15 April 1999      [Page 1]

Internet Draft             Routing Workshop             15 November 1998


1. Introduction

   From March 25 to March 27, 1998 the Internet Architecture Board
   (IAB) held a workshop on Routing.  The workshop focused on current
   problems within the Internet and the long term solutions that should
   be addressed.  This document summarizes the discussions the group
   had on routing, and lists the conclusions reached by the workshop.
   Section 2 lists the conclusions reached by the participants of the
   workshop and the suggestions for additional work or redirection of
   current work.  Sections 2.1-2.10 attempt to capture the substance
   of the fast-paced discussion.  Appendix A contains a list of the
   participants who attended the workshop.

   The topics covered at length during the IAB workshop were:

    1. Scaling of Unicast Routing and Addressing (section 2.1)
    2. Unicast Addressing Issues (Section 2.2)
    3. The Effect of extending IP version 4 in the Internet by using
       Network Address Transformation boxes (Section 2.3)
    4. Multicast Routing (Section 2.4)
    5. Routing Instability (Section 2.5)
    6. Quality of Service Routing (Section 2.6)
    7. Routing Security (Section 2.7)
    8. BGP Policy (Section 2.8)
    9. Flows of information from network routing to hosts for improved
       services (Section 2.9)

   In addition the following topics were briefly covered:

    a. Multi-strand trunking
    b. Better Tools for monitoring and diagnosis of network problems
    c. Routing protocol bandwidth minimization
    d. Automatic renumbering and automatic organization
    e. Anycast
    f. Load-sensitive Routing
    g. Geographical addressing

   These shorter topics are contained in section 2.10.


2. Conclusions and Action Items

   The participants came to a number of conclusions after the
   discussions described in sections 2.1-2.10.  These conclusions,
   presented in this document, provide summary statements and action
   items for the IETF community.






Deering, Hares, Perlman, Perkins     Expires 15 April 1999      [Page 2]

Internet Draft             Routing Workshop             15 November 1998


2.1. Scaling of Unicast Routing and Addressing

2.1.1. Unicast Routing - Conclusions

   The participants of the workshop came to the following conclusions

    1. Most of the current unicast scaling problems can be fixed with
       improved implementation.

    2. Some long term systemic issues that may eventually overwhelm the
       unicast routing are:

        -  Flaps - which will only get worse unless work is undertaken
        -  Multi-homing

    3. We'd like more research into what's breaking; not just more data,
       but more analysis of the data

   The group reviewed the following potential solutions:

    -  Architected NAT - improving the existing Network Address
       Translation schemes to provide better scaling
    -  IPV6 - deploying an IP version 6 infrastructure
    -  MAP/Encap - map to aggregatable addresses and encapsulate the
       original packet
    -  Do nothing
    -  Aggressive Renumbering - try to continue to encourage
       re-numbering to improve utilization of the IP version 4 address
       space.
    -  Metro addressing - use a geographical or metropolitan based
       addressing scheme


2.1.2. Unicast Routing - Action Items

   We recommend that the IRTF Routing Research groupencourage more
   analysis of routing data, not just the collection of more data.


2.2. Levels of Addressing of Addressing and Routing

   The group examined whether the current Internet has enough levels of
   hierarchy in Internet addresses or routing infrastructure.  The group
   felt the Internet had enough levels of hierarchy for now.








Deering, Hares, Perlman, Perkins     Expires 15 April 1999      [Page 3]

Internet Draft             Routing Workshop             15 November 1998


2.3. Network Address Translation (NAT) devices

2.3.1. NAT devices - Conclusions

   Upon reviewing the NATs, the group

    1. Noted that NAT devices are fairly widely deployed
    2. Identified various issues about the use of NAT devices within the
       internet
    3. Discussed the interaction between NAT devices and applications
    4. Listed the following options regarding NAT devices:
        -  Have no NATs
        -  Fix NATs to provide better interaction with the wider
           Internet
        -  Fix applications to interact better with NAT boxes
        -  Don't do certain things like IP Security (IPSec)


2.3.2. NAT devices - Action Items

    1. Forward our concerns, problems and suggestions to the appropriate
       working groups
    2. Note architectural work outside the NAT working group
    3. Suggest to the IAB that it continue to be concerned about the
       issues involving NATs


2.4. Multicast

2.4.1. Multicast - Conclusions

   Since the multicast model was created, many multicast applications
   have been tried over the Internet multicast routing fabric.  The
   group began to discuss the multicast model in terms of enabling
   multicast applications to run efficiently and scale toward the future
   growth.  Multicast applications vary in the requirements they place
   on the multicast routing.

   Multicast applications may have a varying:

    -  number of sources,
    -  number of receivers,
    -  amount of data,
    -  amount of data in a burst, and length of quiet periods
    -  number of groups utilized per application or per group of
       cooperating applications,
    -  amount of time during which the group exists, and
    -  topological distance between members of the group.
    -  volatility of membership



Deering, Hares, Perlman, Perkins     Expires 15 April 1999      [Page 4]

Internet Draft             Routing Workshop             15 November 1998


   Multicast routing must provide the flexibility to support the
   varying requirements of different multicast applications.  The
   current multicast model establishes multicast routing paths upon
   reception of a data packet.  The discussion on the viability of the
   multicast model examined the viability of the model in terms of the
   uses of multicast routing by applications and the scalability to
   full Internet usage.  The current multicast model was examined to
   determine if the model is still viable for the Internet today.  For
   example, providing for many groups of small conferences (few people
   to few remote people) with global topological scope has bad scaling
   characteristics given the current multicast model.

   The group felt the existing multicast protocols and multicast should
   be evaluated in terms of the requirements listed above.  The group
   suggested that the evaluation should include the multicast protocols
   DVMRP [5], MOSPF [8], PIM [4], CBT [2], and Express (an unpublished
   single-source multicast model proposed by Hugh Holbrook and David
   Cheriton), as well as the following mechanisms used by multicast
   applications:

    1. Registering of the Core or the RP (Rendevous Point),
    2. Having the ID of the group include the core, and having joins
       specify the core
    3. Having the ID of the group include the core, and having joins and
       data specify both
    4. Sending data via unicast to all members, and
    5. Sending data via unicast transport to the RP.

   The group acknowledged that the current multicast model does not
   scale well for all scenarios that applications use.

   The group noted that reliable multicast is surprisingly orthogonal to
   the issues about the scaling of the multicast model to all possible
   applications.


2.4.2. Multicast - Action Items

   Encourage evaluation and written reports on the evaluation of these
   multicast protocols and mechanisms for different types of protocols.

   Notify the IRTF Routing Research Group of the need to charter
   activity in this area.









Deering, Hares, Perlman, Perkins     Expires 15 April 1999      [Page 5]

Internet Draft             Routing Workshop             15 November 1998


2.5. Routing Stability

2.5.1. Routing Stability - Conclusions

   Damping the effects of route updates enhances stability, but possibly
   at the cost of reachability for some prefixes.  A prefix can be
   damped and reachable via another path, so that for some prefixes the
   effects of damping are more serious than for other prefixes.  The
   performance of various algorithms for enhancing stability should
   be measured by recording whether the affected route prefixes are
   reachable or not reachable.  Using current damping approaches,
   approximately 1% of the prefixes are affected at any one point in
   time.  We should try to find out how many prefixes are unreachable
   because of damping.


2.5.2. Routing Stability - Action Items

   The conclusion is that this effort merits continued investigation.

   The IRTF Routing Research Group should measure how stable things are,
   and if stability is an issue, to study methods of making things more
   stable.


2.6. TOS/CoS/Qos

   The group noted that the exact definitions of the terms Type of
   Service (ToS), Class of Service (CoS), and Quality of Service (QoS)
   are imprecise in the current usage.  The start of the discussion was
   to define the terminology as follows:

    -  ToS - defined as hop by hop routing based on destination plus TOS
       bits [9]
    -  CoS - defined as classes of service based on service contracts.
       These classes of service are enabled by a variety of mechanisms
       which include:  queuing and multiple physical or link level
       paths.
    -  QoS routing - defined as managing routes that meet certain
       quality of service constraints, and involving the following
       steps:
        *  the routing of the resource requests
        *  setting up a path that satisfies the constraints
        *  routing data accordingly

   There is no smooth dividing line between between ToS and QoS. ToS is
   relative.  Qos is absolute.  The group discussed whether there is a
   demand for ToS, CoS and QoS. Differentiated-services [3] as discussed
   in the IETF is ToS++.



Deering, Hares, Perlman, Perkins     Expires 15 April 1999      [Page 6]

Internet Draft             Routing Workshop             15 November 1998


   The group also discussed a more general concept of "Constraint
   Based Routing" which was defined as traffic engineering on massive
   flows.  Constraint based routing allows the providers to utilize
   the bandwidth in their network to handle traffic requests of
   users.  Constraint based routing (besides enabling policy management
   techniques) allows providers to route traffic based on the
   characteristics of the traffic flows.


2.6.1. TOS/CoS/Qos - Action Items

   We recommend that IETF should look into the issue of Constraint Based
   Routing.


2.7. Routing Protocol Security

2.7.1. Routing Security - Conclusions

   After a lengthy discussion of the various problems of network
   security, the group notes that:

    1. Routers need intrinsic system security as good as or better than
       any host computer.
    2. Improving router security will not solve all problems.
    3. Console access to the router can do everything.
    4. One compromised router can create disaster.
    5. ISPs and vendors should consider taking some control traffic out
       of band, due to lack of wire speed authentication.
    6. We discussed other issues that will be passed on to the
       appropriate people involved with network security.
    7. Identified areas of work to improve things (e.g., wire speed
       authentication).


2.7.2. Routing Security - Action Items

   The IETF should encourage work on "wire speed" authentication,
   pair-wise authentication of routers in routing protocols, and
   Byzantine robustness [6] in routing protocols.


2.8. Routing Policy

2.8.1. Routing Policy - Conclusions

   During our discussion on routing policy the group reviewed what could
   be done with BGP. The group noted that:




Deering, Hares, Perlman, Perkins     Expires 15 April 1999      [Page 7]

Internet Draft             Routing Workshop             15 November 1998


    1. Some routing policies requested by ISPs or NSPs are not solvable
       with BGP. Some of these "unsolvable" routing policies can be put
       into effect using tunnels and static configuration.
    2. BGP is only a mechanism for announcing reachability
    3. BGP routing controls traffic direction regardless of traffic
       volume.
    4. BGP policy management is too delicate, too easy to mess up or
       fragile.
    5. Router Configuration Language is very complex, error-prone
    6. Can't do symmetric routing so ISPs/NSPs/Enterprise nets should
       deal with it.

   The group concluded the Internet needed a better routing policy
   specification language.


2.8.2. Routing Policy - Action Item

   Pass the concerns about the Routing Policy Syntax Language (RPSL) [1]
   to chairs of the Routing Policy Syntax (RPS) working group [11].


2.9. Network to Host Flow of Information

2.9.1. Host Information - Conclusions

   Publishing information about traffic statistics along infrastructure
   routes could improve the way Internet services replicate data for
   retrieval from various sites.  This replication could be especially
   important for the retrieval of information off the web.  Currently,
   web pages refer people to caches local to their sites; for instance,
   a European site might be used for United Kingdom customers and a US
   site for North American customers.  Proponents of web caches want to
   auto-configure the locations of web caches so a user's web browser
   can automatically discover the local cache.  Other applications share
   this need for finding the best cache for a particular service.


2.9.2. Host Information - Action Items

   The group recommends a BOF be held on Measuring Path Characteristics.
   Measurement of path characteristics should include:

    -  format for exchange of measurement data
    -  mechanisms for distribution of measurement data
    -  IPPM working group [7] is dealing with issues within the
       measurement problem space.





Deering, Hares, Perlman, Perkins     Expires 15 April 1999      [Page 8]

Internet Draft             Routing Workshop             15 November 1998


2.10. Shorter Topics

2.10.1. Multi-strand Trunking

   PPP did multi-link in a way that had too much computation and
   could not be used for faster links.  Internet technology should
   treat multiple parallel trunks as 1 link at the IP layer, but with
   multi-dimensional metrics.


2.10.1.1. Multi-strand Trunking - Action Items

   There is design and development work at layer two which should be
   done to support the multiple parallel trunks.  This layer two work
   is outside the scope of the IETF. Layer three routing should support
   richer metrics in OSPF.


2.10.2. Routing Diagnostic and Development Tools

2.10.2.1. Routing Diagnostics - Conclusions

    1. It would be nice to have an Authoritative Database listing those
       prefixes permitted from each AS. The authoritative data base was
       attempted before without success, but the group felt it might be
       useful to try again to create such an Authoritative Database.
    2. SNMP version 3 should be deployed in order to make use of better
       authentication, scope and rate limiting
    3. Remotely-controlled traffic monitors should be used to measure
       traffic
    4. Better tools are needed for pro-active problem detection


2.10.2.2. Routing Diagnostics - Action Items

    1. Authoritative Database should be encouraged within the Internet
    2. SNMP version 3 working groups should be notified about the issues
       about authentication, scope, and rate limiting.
    3. Encourage funding of better tools for remotely controlled traffic
       sources and pro-active problem detection.


2.10.3. Anycast

2.10.3.1. Anycast - Conclusions

    1. We need a document describing the benefits and deficits of
       anycast.




Deering, Hares, Perlman, Perkins     Expires 15 April 1999      [Page 9]

Internet Draft             Routing Workshop             15 November 1998


    2. Local-scoped well-known anycast addresses will be useful to
       applications.


2.10.3.2. Anycast - Action Items

   A BOF should be held to plan work on anycast.

   If a working group forms, a paper on the benefits and deficits of
   anycast should be included as part of the charter.


2.10.4. Load Sensitive IGP routing for Best Effort Traffic

2.10.4.1. Load Sensitive IGP - Conclusions

   While load sensitive routing is interesting in some ways, it cannot
   be considered until certain problems are worked out.  Currently
   constraint based routing is assigning administrative metrics to allow
   routing to adapt to different traffic patterns.  Load sensitive
   routing may increase oscillation and instability of routes.  This
   instability of routes, sometimes called churn, may affect the ability
   of the routing infrastructure to scale.

   Load sensitive routing would allow IGPs to better utilize links.
   Past and current efforts in load sensitive routing include:  QOS
   OSPF [10], Q-OSPF [10], and load sensitive routers developed by BBN.


2.10.4.2. Load Sensitive IGP - Action items

   IRTF Routing Research group chair and Routing Area Director should
   discuss this area and determine what portions of Load Sensitive IGP
   routing are ready for IETF, and which portions require additional
   research.


2.10.5. Geographical Addresses and Renumbering

   This topic was discussed, but without any conclusions or action
   items.


3. Summary of Action items

3.1. Action Items for the IAB

    1. The IAB should be concerned about the issues involving NATs




Deering, Hares, Perlman, Perkins     Expires 15 April 1999     [Page 10]

Internet Draft             Routing Workshop             15 November 1998


    2. Authoritative Database (for addresses within domains) should be
       encouraged within the Internet
    3. Encourage funding of better tools for remotely controlled traffic
       sources and pro-active problem detection.


3.2. Action Items for IETF Working Group Chairs

    1. NAT: Forward our concerns, problems and suggestions to the
       appropriate working groups
    2. We recommend that IETF should work the issue of Constraint Based
       Routing.
    3. The IETF should encourage work on "wire speed" authentication,
       pair-wise authentication of routers in routing protocols, and
       Byzantine robustness in routing protocols.
    4. Pass the concerns about the Routing Policy Syntax Language (RPSL)
       to the Routing Policy Syntax (RPS) working group chair.
    5. The group recommends a BOF be held on Measuring Path
       Characteristics.  The BOF should consider the data exchange
       format of measurement and mechanisms to distribution of data
       mechanism.  It is noted that the IPPM working group is dealing
       with issues within the measurement problem space.
    6. There is layer two work which should be done to support the
       multiple parallel trunks which is outside the scope of the IETF.
       Layer three routing should support richer metrics in OSPF.
    7. SNMP version 3 working groups should be notified about the issues
       about authentication, scope, and rate limiting.
    8. A BOF should be held to plan work on anycast.  Recommend that a
       document on the benefits and deficits of anycast should be part
       of the proposed working group charter.


3.3. Action Items for the IRTF Routing Research Group

    1. We recommend that the IRTF Routing Research working group try to
       encourage more analysis of routing data, not just the collection
       of more data.

    2. Encourage evaluation and written reports on the evaluation of
       these multicast protocols and mechanisms for different types of
       protocols

    3. IRTF Routing Research group chair and Routing Area Director
       should discuss this area and determine what portions of Load
       Sensitive IGP routing are ready for IETF, and which portions
       require additional research.






Deering, Hares, Perlman, Perkins     Expires 15 April 1999     [Page 11]

Internet Draft             Routing Workshop             15 November 1998


A. Participants

      Harald Alvestrand               Harald.Alvestrand@maxware.no,
      Fred Baker                      fred@cisco.com,
      Jeff Burgan                     burgan@corp.home.net,
      Brian Carpenter                 brian@hursley.ibm.com,
      Noel Chiappa                    jnc@ginger.lcs.mit.edu,
      Rob Coltun                      rcoltun@fore.com,
      Steve Deering                   deering@cisco.com,
      Deborah Estrin                  estrin@usc.edu,
      Dino Farinacci                  dino@cisco.com,
      Paul Francis                    francis@slab.ntt.co.jp,
      Elise Gerich                    epg@home.net,
      Joel Halpern                    jhalpern@newbridge.com,
      Sue Hares                       skh@merit.edu,
      Cyndi Jung                      cmj@3Com.com,
      Dave Katz                       dkatz@jnx.com,
      Tony Li                         tli@juniper.net,
      Peter Lothberg                  roll@stupi.se,
      Louis Mamakos                   louie@uu.net,
      Dave Meyer                      dmm@cisco.com,
      Keith Moore                     moore@cs.utk.edu,
      Bob Moskowitz                   rgm@htt-consult.com,
      Thomas Narten                   narten@raleigh.ibm.com,
      Vern Paxson                     vern@ee.lbl.gov,
      Charlie Perkins                 Charles.Perkins@Eng.Sun.COM,
      Radia Perlman                   Radia.Perlman@East.Sun.COM,
      Yakov Rekhter                   yakov@cisco.com,
      Allyn Romanow                   allyn@MCI.NET,
      Martha Steenstrup               msteenst@bbn.com,
      George Swallow                  swallow@cisco.com,



References

    [1] C. Alaettinoglu, T. Bates, E. Gerich, D. Karrenberg, D. Meyer,
        M. Terpstra, and C. Villamizar.  Routing policy specification
        language (RPSL).  Request for Comments (Proposed Standard) 2280,
        Internet Engineering Task Force, January 1998.

    [2] T. Ballardie.  Core based trees (CBT) multicast routing
        architecture.  Request for Comments (Experimental) 2201,
        Internet Engineering Task Force, September 1997.

    [3] S. Blake, D. Black, M. Carlson, E. Davies, Z. Wang, and
        W. Weiss.  An Architecture for Differentiated Services.
        draft-ietf-diffserv-arch-02.txt, October 1998.  (work in
        progress).



Deering, Hares, Perlman, Perkins     Expires 15 April 1999     [Page 12]

Internet Draft             Routing Workshop             15 November 1998


    [4] S. Deering.  Protocol independent multicast-sparse mode
        (PIM-SM): protocol specification.  Request for Comments
        (Experimental) 2117, Internet Engineering Task Force, June 1997.

    [5] S. Deering, C. Partridge, and D. Waitzman.  Distance vector
        multicast routing protocol.  Request for Comments (Experimental)
        1075, Internet Engineering Task Force, November 1988.

    [6] Charlie Kaufman, Radia Perlman, and Mike Speciner.  Network
        Security:  Private Communication in a Public World, pages
        462--465.  Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1995.

    [7] W. Leland and M. Zekauskas (chairs).  IP Performance Metrics
        (IPPM), 1997.
        http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/ippm-charter.html.

    [8] J. Moy.  Multicast extensions to OSPF.  Request for Comments
        (Proposed Standard) 1584, Internet Engineering Task Force, March
        1994.

    [9] K. Nichols, S. Blake, F. Baker, and D. Black.  Definition of
        the Differentiated Services Field (DS Field) in the IPv4 and
        IPv6 Headers.  draft-ietf-diffserv-header-04.txt, October 1998.
        (work in progress).

   [10] H. Sandick and E. Crawley (chairs).  QoS Routing (qosr), 1997.
        http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/qosr-charter.html.

   [11] C. Villamizar and C. Alaettinoglu (chairs).  Routing Policy
        Syntax (RPS), 1995.
        http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/rps-charter.html.





















Deering, Hares, Perlman, Perkins     Expires 15 April 1999     [Page 13]

Internet Draft             Routing Workshop             15 November 1998


Author's Addresses

   Questions about this memo can be directed to:

      Stephen E. Deering                 Susan Hares
      Cisco Systems, Inc.                Merit, Inc.
      170 West Tasman Drive              1071 Beal Avenue,
      San Jose, CA 95134-1706            Ann Arbor, MI 48109
      USA                                USA

      Phone:  +1 408 527-8213            Phone:  +1 313 936-2095
      EMail:  deering@cisco.com          EMail:  skh@merit.edu





      Radia Perlman                      Charles E. Perkins
      Sun Microsystems Laboratories      Sun Microsystems Laboratories
      2 Elizabeth Drive                  15 Network Circle
      Chelmsford, MA 01824               Menlo Park, CA 94025
      USA                                USA

      Phone:  +1 978 442-3252            Phone:  +1 650 786-6464
      EMail:  Radia.Perlman@sun.com      EMail:  cperkins@eng.sun.com
                                         Fax:  +1 650 786-6445


























Deering, Hares, Perlman, Perkins     Expires 15 April 1999     [Page 14]


