

Network Working Group                                           D. Beard
Internet-Draft                                           Nortel Networks
Expires: August 22, 2003                                       S. Murphy
                                                 Network Associates, Inc
                                                                 Y. Yang 
                                                           Cisco Systems
                                                       February 21, 2003


                    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols
                  draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-01.txt


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 22, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   Routing protocols are subject to attacks that can harm individual
   users or the network operations as a whole.  The lack of a common set
   of security requirements has led to the use in existing routing
   protocol of a variety of different security solutions, which provide
   various levels of security coverage.

   The RPSEC working group intends to deliver in a separate document a
   set of security requirements for consideration of routing protocol
   designers.  The first step in developing the security requirements is



Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


   to analyze the threats that face routing protocols.  This document
   describes the threats, including threat sources and capabilities,
   threat actions, and threat consequences as well as a breakdown of
   routing functions that might be separately attacked.

Table of Contents

   1.    Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.    Routing Functions Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.1   Targeted Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.    Threat Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.1   Threat Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.2   Threat Actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.3   Threat Consequences  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.3.1 Threat Consequence Zone  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   3.3.2 Threat Consequence Periods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   4.    Generally Identifiable Routing Threats Actions . . . . . . . 12
   4.1   Deliberate Exposure  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   4.2   Sniffing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   4.3   Traffic Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   4.4   Spoofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   4.5   Falsification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   4.5.1 Falsifications by Originators  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   4.5.2 Falsifications by Forwarders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   4.6   Interference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   4.7   Overload . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   4.8   Byzantine Failures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   4.9   Discarding of Control Packets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
   4.10  Network Mapping Threats  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
   5.    Multicast Routing Protocol Considerations  . . . . . . . . . 26
   6.    Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
         References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
         Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
   A.    Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
         Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . 32
















Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


1. Introduction

   The RPSEC working group is tasked to deliver a description of the
   security requirements for routing protocols.  This internet draft
   discusses an analysis of the threats that face routing protocols, as
   a precursor to developing a common set of security requirements for
   routing protocols.  Therefore, we intentionally do not address threats
   to routers (hacking, denial of service flooding attacks, etc.) or to
   specific routing protocol implementations (bugs, etc.).  The security
   requirements derived from this threat analysis are intended to be
   guidance to those who are designing routing protocols.








































Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


2. Routing Functions Overview

   Routing protocols in general have several common functions:

   o  Transport Subsystem: The routing protocol transmits messages to
      its peers using some underlying protocol.  For some, as in OSPF,
      this is IP.  For others, this can be a broadcast link layer, as in
      AODV.  Still others may run over TCP.  In many cases, the routing
      protocol is subject to attacks on its underlying protocol.

   o  Neighbor State Maintenance: Each protocol has a different
      mechanism for determining its peers in the routing topology.  Some
      protocols have distinct exchange through which they establish
      peering relationships, e.g., Hello exchanges in OSPF. The peering
      relationship formation is the first step of topology
      determination.  For protocols that maintain state about their
      peering relationships, attacks that disrupt the peering
      relationship can have widespread consequences.  For example, if
      the DR election is disrupted in an OSPF network, an unauthorized
      router could be chosen as designated router.  This might allow
      unauthorized access to routing information.  In BGP, if a router
      receives a CEASE message, it can break the peering relationship
      and cause any related topology information to be flushed.

   o  Database Maintenance: Routing protocols exchange network topology
      and reachability information.  The routers collect this
      information in routing databases in varying detail.  The
      maintenance of these databases is a significant portion of the
      function of a routing protocol.  The information in the database
      must be authentic and authorized; otherwise the function of
      routing in the overall network is damaged.  For example, if an
      OSPF router sends LSA's with the wrong Advertising Router, the
      receivers will compute a SPF tree that is incorrect and might not
      forward the traffic.  If a BGP router advertises a NLRI that it is
      not authorized to advertise, then receivers might forward that
      NLRI's traffic toward that router and the traffic would not be
      deliverable.  A PIM router might transmit a JOIN message to
      receive multicast data it would otherwise not receive


2.1 Targeted Functions

   Just as a router's functions can be divided into control and data
   plane (protocol traffic vs. data traffic), so the routing protocol
   has a control and a data plane.  A routing protocol has some message
   exchanges that are intended only for control of the protocol state.
   This is the routing protocol control plane.  Other message exchanges
   are intended to distribute the information used to perform the



Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


   forwarding function, whether that is to establish a forwarding table
   in each router or to return a description of the route to use.  This
   is the routing protocol data plane.  Each of the routing functions
   may have both control and data aspects, but there will naturally be
   an emphasis on one or the other.  Neighbor maintenance is likely to
   be focused on the routing protocol control plane aspects, for
   example, while database maintenance may have more focus on the
   routing protocol data plane aspects.

   Both the control and the data plane are subject to attack.  An
   attacker who is able to target the routing protocol control plane so
   as to break a neighbor (e.g., peering, adjacency) relationship can
   have a strong effect on the behavior of routing in those routers and
   likely the surrounding neighborhood.  An attacker who is able to
   break a database exchange between two routers can also affect routing
   behavior.  In the routing protocol data plane, an attacker who is
   able to introduce bogus data can have a strong effect on the behavior
   of routing in the neighborhood.

































Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


3. Threat Definitions

   Threat is defined in [SEC-GLOSS] as a potential for violation of
   security, which exists when there is a circumstance, capability,
   action, or event that could breach security and cause harm. A threat
   presents itself when an attacker has the ability to take advantage of
   an existing security weakness.  Threats can be categorized based on
   various rules, such as threat sources, threat actions, threat
   consequences, threat consequence zones, and threat consequence
   periods.

3.1 Threat Sources

   Legitimate devices (routers) participate in the routing dialog and
   computation, intended by the authoritative network administrator,
   running correct and bug-free code, and using correct and bug-free
   configuration information. -- By correct and bug-free configuration
   information, we mean the configurations obey routing protocols and
   are intended by the authoritative network administrator.

   On the other hand, attackers may participate routing, not being
   authorized, running incorrect codes, or using invalid configurations.
   In general, attackers can be outsiders or insiders.  An insider is an
   authorized participant in the routing protocol.  An outsider is any
   other host or network.  A host is determined to be an outsider or an
   insider from the point of view of a particular router.  Even an
   authorized protocol speaker can be an outsider to a particular router
   if the router does not consider the speaker to be a legitimate peer
   (as could conceivably happen on a multi-access link).

   Specifically, threats can be classified into four categories, based
   on their sources [DV-SECURITY]:

   o  Threat from compromised links: A compromised link is where an
      attacker can, somehow, access a physical medium and/or have some
      control over the channel.  This threat exists when there is no
      access control mechanisms applied to physical mediums or channels,
      or such mechanisms can be circumvented. The attacker may
      eavesdrop, replay, delay, or drop routing messages, or break
      routing sessions between authorized routers, without participating
      in the routing exchange.

   o  Threats from compromised devices (e.g. routers): A compromised
      device (router) is an authorized router with routing software
      bugs, hardware defects, and / or incorrect/unintended
      configurations.  This threat takes place when there are no
      mechanisms to verify a device's (router) system integrity, i.e.
      the router is working correctly as been intended by the



Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


      authoritative network administrator, or such mechanisms can be
      circumvented.  The attacker may inappropriately claim authority
      for some network resources, or violate routing protocols, such as
      advertising invalid routing information and etc.

   o  Threat from unauthorized devices (routers): An unauthorized device
      (router) participates in routing exchange and computation, without
      being authorized (explicitly or implicitly) from the authoritative
      network administrator. This threat happens when there is no access
      control mechanism applied to routing sessions/routing exchanges or
      such mechanism can be circumvented. The attacker may gain
      knowledge of the network topology through routing exchange, as
      well as do anything that a compromised router can do.

   o  Threat from masquerading devices (routers): A masquerading device
      (router) illegitimately assumes another router's identity. This
      threat occurs when there are no (data origin or peer entity)
      authentication mechanisms, or such mechanisms can be circumvented.
      The attacker can do anything that an unauthorized router can do.

   A device (router) can play multiple roles concurrently.  A legitimate
   OSPF router might be a masquerading RIP router, and a compromised
   iBGP link might be a compromised OSPF router as well.

3.2 Threat Actions

   A threat action is an assault on system security [SEC-GLOSS], which
   could be an intentional behavior, or an accidental event.

   The actions that might be used to attack routing protocols include:

   o  Masquerade: The attacker, whether insider or outsider, may adopt
      the identity of a legitimate peer. (This is an attack against
      origin authenticity.)

   o  Interception:The attacker gains access to routing information that
      is considered sensitive.  (This is an attack against
      confidentiality, i.e., privacy.)

   o  Falsification: The attacker is able to substitute modified
      messages for valid routing messages.  (This is an attack against
      integrity.)

   o  Misuse: The attacker is able to introduce unauthorized routing
      information that disrupts routing behavior.  (This is an attack
      against authorized use.)

   o  Replay The attacker is able to re-introduce previously transmitted



Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


      messages.  (This is an attack against freshness.)

   These attacks might be used by insider or outsider to accomplish any
   of the compromises listed below.

3.3 Threat Consequences

   A threat consequence is a security violation that results from a
   threat action [SEC-GLOSS].  The compromise to the behavior of the
   routing system can damage a particular network or host or can damage
   the operation of the network as a whole.

   Four types of threat consequences, disclosure, deception, disruption,
   and usurpation, are identified in [SEC-GLOSS]. Specifically for
   threats against routing protocols, these consequences can be
   described as:

   o  Disclosure: Disclosure of routing information happens where a
      router successfully accesses the information without being
      authorized. Compromised links can cause disclosure, if routing
      exchanges lack confidentiality.  Compromised devices (routers),
      unauthorized devices (routers), and masquerading devices (routers)
      can always cause disclosure, as long as they are successfully
      involved in the routing exchanges.  Please note, although
      disclosure of routing information can pose a security threat or be
      part of a later, larger, or higher layer attack, confidentiality
      is not generally a design goal of routing protocols.

   o  Deception: This consequence happens when a legitimate router
      receives a false routing message and believes it to be true.  All
      attackers (Compromised links, compromised device (routers),
      unauthorized devices (routers), and masquerading devices (routers)
      can cause this consequence if the receiving router lacks ability
      to check routing message integrity, routing message origin
      authentication or peer router authentication.

   o  Disruption: This consequence occurs when a legitimate router's
      operation is being interrupted or prevented. Subvert links can
      cause this by replaying, delaying, or dropping routing messages,
      or breaking routing sessions between legitimate routers.
      Compromised devices (router), unauthorized devices (routers), and
      masquerading device (routers) can cause this consequence by
      sending false routing messages, interfering normal routing
      exchanges, or flooding unnecessary messages. (DoS is a common
      threat action causing disruption.)

   o  Usurpation:  This consequence happens when an attacker gains
      control over a legitimate router's services/functions. Compromised



Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


      links can cause this by delaying or dropping routing exchanges, or
      replaying out-dated routing information.  Compromised routers,
      unauthorized routers, and masquerading routers can cause this
      consequence by sending false routing information, interfering
      routing exchanges, or system integrity.

   Note: an attacker does not have to directly control a router to
   control its services.  For example, in Figure 1, Network 1 is
   dual-homed through Router A and Router B, and Router A is preferred.
   However, Router B is compromised and advertises a lower metric.
   Consequently, devices on the Internet choose the path through Router
   B to reach Network 1.  In this way, Router B steals the data traffic
   and Router A surrenders its control of the services to Router B. This
   depicted in Figure 1.


   +-------------+   +-------+
   |  Internet   |---| Rtr A |
   +------+------+   +---+---+
          |              |
          |              |
          |              |
          |            *-+-*
      +---+---+       /     \
      | Rtr B |------*  N 1  *
      +-------+       \     /
                       *---*



                           Figure 1

   Also, several threat consequences might be caused by a single threat
   action.  In Figure 1, there exist at least two consequences:
   routers using Router B to reach Network 1 are deceived, while Router
   A is usurped.

   Within the context of the threat consequences described above, damage
   that might result from attacks against the network as a whole may
   include:

   o  Network congestion: more data traffic is forwarded through some
      portion of the network than would otherwise need to carry the
      traffic,

   o  Blackhole: large amounts of traffic are directed to be forwarded
      through one router that cannot handle the increased level of
      traffic and drops many/most/all packets,



Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


   o  Looping: data traffic is forwarded along a route that loops, so
      that the data is never delivered (resulting in network
      congestion),

   o  Partition: some portion of the network believes that it is
      partitioned from the rest of the network when it is not,

   o  Churn: the forwarding in the network changes (unnecessarily) at a
      rapid pace, resulting in large variations in the data delivery
      patterns (and adversely affecting congestion control techniques),

   o  Instability: the protocol becomes unstable so that convergence on
      a global forwarding state is not achieved, and

   o  Overload: the protocol messages themselves become a significant
      portion of the traffic the network carries.

   The damage that might result from attacks against a particular host
   or network address may include:

   o  Starvation: data traffic destined for the network or host is
      forwarded to a part of the network that cannot deliver it,

   o  Eavesdrop: data traffic is forwarded through some router or
      network that would otherwise not see the traffic, affording an
      opportunity to see the data or at least the data delivery pattern,

   o  Cut: some portion of the network believes that it has no route to
      the host or network when it is in fact connected,

   o  Delay: data traffic destined for the network or host is forwarded
      along a route that is in some way inferior to the route it would
      otherwise take,

   o  Looping: data traffic for the network or host is forwarded along a
      route that loops, so that the data is never delivered,

   It is important to consider all compromises, because some security
   solutions can protect against one attack but not against others.  It
   might be possible to design a security solution that protected
   against an attack that eavesdropped on one destination's traffic
   without protecting against an attack that overwhelmed a router.  Or
   that prevented a starvation attack against one host, but not against
   a net wide blackhole.  The security requirements must be clear as to
   which compromises are being avoided and which must be addressed by
   other means (e.g., by administrative means outside the protocol).





Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


3.3.1 Threat Consequence Zone

   A threat consequence zone covers an area within which the network
   operations have been affected by the threat consequences.  Possible
   threat consequence zones can be classified as: a single link or
   router, multiple routers (within a single routing domain), a single
   routing domain, multiple routing domains, or the global Internet. The
   threat consequence zone varies based on the threat action and origin.
   Similar threat actions that happened at different locations may cause
   totally different threat consequence zones. For example, when a
   compromised link breaks the routing session between a distribution
   router and a stub router, only reach ability from and to the network
   devices attached on the stub router will be impaired. In other words,
   the threat consequence zone is a single router. Nonetheless, if the
   compromised router is located between a customer edge router and its
   corresponding provider edge router, such an action might cause the
   whole customer site to lose its connection. In this case, the threat
   consequence zone might be a single routing domain.

3.3.2 Threat Consequence Periods

   Threat consequence period is defined as a portion of time during
   which the network operations have been impacted by the threat
   consequences. The threat consequence period is influenced by, but not
   totally dependent on the duration of the threat action. In some
   cases, the network operations will get back to normal as soon as the
   threat action has been stopped.  In other cases, however, threat
   consequences may appear longer than threat action. For example, in
   the original ARPANET link-state algorithm, some errors in a router
   might introduce three instances of an LSA, and all of them would be
   flooded throughout the network forever, until the entire network was
   power cycled [PROTO-VULN].

   With appropriate security detection facilities, the network might
   detect the threat action, implement countermeasures, and resume
   normal operations even before the threat action has been stopped.  In
   this documentation, we assume such facilities do not exist.














Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


4. Generally Identifiable Routing Threats Actions

   This section addresses generally identifiable and recognized threat
   action against routing protocols.  The threats are not necessarily
   specific to individual protocols but may be present in one or more of
   the common routing protocols in use today.

4.1 Deliberate Exposure

   Deliberate Exposure is defined as an intentional action that
   attackers employ to release routing information directly to other
   routers. This definition presumes that the receiving routers are not
   authorized to access the routing information. However, an exposure is
   different from a deliberate exposure. While the deliberate exposure
   is always a threat action, the exposure is not. Routing protocols are
   designed to expose routing information.  A legitimate router should
   always expose routing information to its legitimate peers.  In some
   cases, a legitimate router may expose routing information to peering
   unauthorized/masquerading routers, if it is deceived.  However, there
   is no reason that a legitimate router should keep exposing correct
   routing information to its peers when those peers have been
   determined to be unauthorized or masquerading entities.

   The consequence of deliberate exposure is the disclosure of routing
   information.

   The threat consequence zone of deliberate exposure depends on the
   routing information that the attackers have exposed. The more
   knowledge they have exposed, the bigger the threat consequence zone.

   The threat consequence period of deliberate exposure might be longer
   than the duration of the action itself. The routing information
   exposed will not be out-dated until there is a topology change of the
   exposed network.

4.2 Sniffing

   Sniffing is an action whereby attackers monitor and/or record the
   routing exchanges between authorized routers.  Compromised links can
   sniff the links over which they have control. (Compromised routers,
   unauthorized routers, and masquerading routers can sniff, but do not
   need to do this, to access the routing information. They can learn
   the routing information as long as they are successfully involved in
   the routing exchanges).

   The consequence of sniffing is disclosure of routing information.

   The threat consequence zone of sniffing depends on the attacker's



Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


   location, the routing protocol type, and, ultimately, what routing
   information has been recorded. For example, if the compromised link
   were located in an OSPF totally stubby area, the threat consequence
   zone should be limited to the whole area.  Or, the compromised link
   could gain knowledge of multiple routing domains, if it sniffs an
   eBGP session between two providers.

   The threat consequence period might be longer than the duration of
   the action. After the compromised link stops sniffing, its knowledge
   will not be out-dated until there is a topology change of the
   disclosed network.

4.3 Traffic Analysis

   Traffic analysis is action whereby attackers gain routing information
   by analyzing the characteristics of the data traffic. Compromised
   links can analyze the data traffic over the links where they have
   control. (Compromised routers, unauthorized routers, and masquerading
   routers do not need to do this, although they can, to access the
   routing information. They learn the routing information by being
   successfully involved in the routing exchanges).

   The consequence of data traffic analysis is the disclosure of routing
   information.  For example, the source and destination IP address of
   the data traffic, the type, magnitude, and volume of traffic is
   disclosed.

   The threat consequence zone of the traffic analysis depends on the
   attacker's location and, ultimately, what data traffic has flown
   through. A compromised link at the network core should be able to
   gain more information than its counterpart at the edge.

   The threat consequence period might be longer than the duration of
   the traffic analysis. After the attacker stops traffic analysis, its
   knowledge will not be out-dated until there is a topology change of
   the disclosed network.

4.4 Spoofing

   A spoofing is defined as an action whereby an attacker participates
   in the routing computation and exchanges with authorized routers by
   illegitimately assumes a legitimate router's identity.  All types of
   attackers (compromised links, compromised routers unauthorized
   routers, and masquerading routers) can spoof. When an attacker
   succeeds to spoof, it plays a role of masquerading router.

   The consequences of spoofing are:




Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


   o  The disclosure of routing information: The masquerading router
      will be able to participate in the routing computation and
      exchanges, and consequently gain access to the routing
      information.

   o  The deception of peer relationship:  The authorized routers, which
      exchange routing messages with the masquerading router, do not
      realize they are peering with a router that is faking another
      router's identity.

   Spoofing is special in that it can be used to carry out other threat
   actions causing other threat consequences.   For example, after an
   attacker spoofs successfully, it can send out unrealistic routing
   information that might cause disruption of network services.  Please
   note these consequences are directly resulted from other threat
   actions instead of spoofing, which are also discussed in this
   documentation. It can be said that spoofing is the means by which one
   masquerades.

   The threat consequence zone covers two different scopes:

      The consequence zone of the disclosed routing information depends
      on what routing information has been exchanged between the
      attacker and its peers.

      The disclosure of routing information: The masquerading router
      will participate in the routing computation and exchanges, and
      consequently gain access to the routing information.

   There are other consequences caused by a spoofing (masquerading)
   router. For example, the masquerading router might cause disruption
   of a network by sending unrealistic routing information. But these
   consequences are directly resulted from other threat actions instead
   of spoof.

   The threat consequence zone covers two different scopes:

   o  The consequence zone of the fake peer relationship will be limited
      to those routers mistrusting the attacker's identity.

   o  The consequence zone of the disclosed routing information depends
      on the attacker's location, the routing protocol type, and,
      ultimately, what routing information has been exchanged between
      the attacker and its deceived peers.

   The threat consequence period has two different definitions too:

   o  The consequence period of the fake peer relationship is same as



Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


      the duration of the spoof. As soon as the attacker stops spoofing,
      the fake peer relationship disappears.

   o  The consequence period of the disclosed routing information will
      be longer than the duration of the spoof. After the attacker stops
      spoofing, its knowledge will not be out-dated until there is a
      topology change of the disclosed network.


4.5 Falsification

   Falsification is defined as an intentional action whereby false
   routing information is being sent.  Routers use routing information
   to depict network topology, compute routing table, and further
   forward data traffic. False routing information describes the network
   in an unrealistic view, whether or not intended by the authoritative
   network administrator.

   To falsify the routing information, an attacker has to be either the
   originator or a forwarder of the routing information. It cannot be a
   receiver-only.

4.5.1 Falsifications by Originators

   An originator of routing information can launch following
   falsifications:

4.5.1.1 Overclaiming

   An over-claiming is defined as an action that an attacker employs to
   advertise its ownership of some network resources, while in reality,
   this ownership does not exist, or the advertisement is not
   authorized.  This is given in  Figure 2 and Figure 3 below.


















Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


        +-------------+   +-------+   +-------+
        | Internet    |---| Rtr B |---| Rtr A |
        +------+------+   +-------+   +---+---+
               |                          |
               |                          |
               |                          |
               |                        *-+-*
           +---+---+                   /     \
           | Rtr C |------------------*  N 1  *
           +-------+                   \     /
                                        *---*


                           Figure 2



        +-------------+   +-------+   +-------+
        |  Internet   |---| Rtr B |---| Rtr A |
        +------+------+   +-------+   +-------+
               |
               |
               |
               |                        *---*
           +---+---+                   /     \
           | Rtr C |------------------*  N 1  *
           +-------+                   \     /
                                        *---*


                           Figure 3

   The above figures provide examples. Router A, the attacker, is
   connected with the Internet through Router B. Router C is authorized
   to advertise its link to Network 1. In Figure 2, Router A owns a
   link to the Network 1, but is not authorized to advertise it. In
   Figure 3, Router A does not own such a link. But in either case,
   Router A advertises the link to the Internet, through Router B.

   Compromised routers, unauthorized routers, and masquerading routers
   can over-claim network resources.

   The consequence of overclaiming includes:

   o  Usurpation of the overclaimed network resources.  In Figure 2
      and 3, it will cause a usurpation of Network 1 when Router B or
      other routers on the Internet (not shown in the figures) believe
      that Router A provides the best path to reach the Network 1. They,



Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


      the routers, thereby forward the data traffic, destined to Network
      1, to Router A. The best result is the data traffic uses an
      unauthorized path (Figure 2), and the worst case is the data
      never reach the destination Network 1 (Figure 3).  The ultimate
      consequence is Router A gains the control over the Network 1's
      services, by controlling the data traffic.

   o  Usurpation of the legitimate advertising routers.  In Figure 2
      and 3, Router C is the legitimate advertiser of Network 1.  By
      overclaiming, Router A also controls (partially or totally) the
      services/functions provided by the Router C.  (This is NOT a
      disruption, because Router C is operating in a way intended by the
      authoritative network administrator.)

   o  Deception of other routers. In Figure 2 and 3, Router B, or
      other routers on the Internet, might be deceived to believe the
      path through Router A is the best.

   o  Disruption of data planes on some routers. This might happen on
      routers that are on the path, which is used by other routers to
      reach the overclaimed network resources through the attacker. In
      Figure 2 and 3, when other routers on the Internet are
      deceived, they will forward the data traffic to Router B, which
      might be overloaded.

   The threat consequence zone varies based on the consequence:

   o  Where usurpation is concerned, the consequence zone covers the
      network resources that are overclaimed by the attacker (Network 1
      in Figure 2 and 3), and the routers that are authorized to
      advertise the network resources but lose the competition against
      the attacker(Router C in Figure 2 and 3).

   o  Where deception is concerned, the consequence zone covers the
      routers that do not believe the attacker's advertisement and use
      the attacker to reach the claimed subnets (Router B and other
      deceived routers on the Internet in Figure 2 and 3).

   o  Where disruption is concerned, the consequence zone includes the
      routers that are on the path of misdirected data traffic (Router B
      in Figure 2 and 3).

   The threat consequence will cease when the attacker stops
   overclaiming, and will totally disappear when the routing tables are
   converged.  As a result the consequence period is longer than the
   duration of the overclaiming.





Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


4.5.1.2 Underclaiming

   An underclaiming threat is defined as an action that an attacker
   illegitimately hides its authorized ownership of some network
   resources. The attacker could be the only router authorized to claim
   the network resources, or there might exist some legitimate backup
   routers.  Figures below provide two examples.


   +-------------+   +-------+
   |  Internet   |---| Rtr A |
   +------+------+   +---+---+
          |              |
          |              |
          |              |
          |            *-+-*
      +---+---+       /     \
      | Rtr B |      *  N 1  *
      +-------+       \     /
                       *---*



                           Figure 4



























Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


   +-------------+                +-------+
   |  Internet   |----------------| Rtr A |
   +------+------+                +---+---+
          |                           |
          |                           |
          |                           |
          |                         *-+-*
      +---+---+     +-------+      /     \
      | Rtr C |-----| Rtr B |-----*  N 1  *
      +-------+     +-------+      \     /
                                    *---*



                           Figure 5 

   Router A, the attacker, owns a link to Network 1 and is authorized to
   advertise Network 1. Nevertheless, Router A refuses to advertise
   Network 1.  In Figure 4, Network 1 is single-homed with Router A and
   therefore can only be advertised by Router A. In Figure 5 Network is
   dual-homed with Router A and B, and both routers are authorized to
   advertise Network 1 (Router A may or may not provide a preferred path
   against Router B, the backup router).

   Compromised routers, unauthorized routers, and masquerading routers
   can underclaim network resources.

   The consequence of underclaiming includes:

   o  Usurpation of the underclaimed network resources: In Figure 5 when
      Router A underclaims Network 1, Network 1 is isolated from the
      rest of the world, and cannot provide services to other devices,
      though Network 1's own operation is not disrupted.  In Figure 4,
      if the path through Router A is preferred, the underclaiming will
      force Network 1 to use a sub-optimal path to provide its services.
      (If the path through Router B is intended to be preferred, the
      services by Network 1 will not really be hurt even though Router A
      underclaims).

   o  Usurpation of the legitimate backup routers. In Figure 5, Router
      A's path is preferred but Router A underclaims Network 1, it
      actually force Router B to serve Network 1. (Again, if Router B's
      path is intended to be preferred, Router A's underclaim does not
      really usurp Router B.)

   o  Deception of other routers.  Routers on the Internet (not shown in
      Figure 4 or Figure 5) might not be able to reach Network 1 (Figure
      5) or have to use a sub-optimal path through Router B when



Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


      Router A's path is preferred.

   o  Disruption of data planes on some routers. This might happen on
      routers that are on the sub-optimal paths.  In Figure 5, when
      other routers on the Internet are deceived and use the sub-optimal
      path through Router B to reach Network 1, they will forward the
      data traffic to Router C. Router B and C might then become
      overloaded.  (When the path through Router B is intended to be
      preferred, Router B and C might also be overloaded. However, the
      disruption in such a case is not a consequence of an underclaim).

   Note: Some others type of usurpation might result from an underclaim
   in routing protocols.  Below Figure provides an example.


        		           
        *---*                                                 *---*
       /     \    +-------+   +-------------+   +-------+    /     \
      *  N 2  *---| Rtr B |---|  Internet   |---| Rtr A |---*  N 1  *
       \     /    +-------+   +-------------+   +-------+    \     /
        *---*                                                 *---*



                           Figure 6

   In Figure 6, Network 2 is attached with the Router B and provides 
   similar services as Network 1. When Router A hides Network 1, devices
   on the Internet will turn to Network 2 for those services. Although 
   this issue results from an underclaim in routing protocol, this is 
   rather a usurpation issue in related service (application) protocols, 
   and we are not discussing it in detail in this documentation. 

   The threat consequence zone varies based on the consequence:

   o  Where usurpation is concerned, the consequence zone covers the
      network resources that are underclaimed by the attacker (Network 1
      in Figure 4 and 5), and the routers that are intended to be
      backup with a lower preference (Router B in Figure 5, if Router
      A's path is preferred).

   o  Where deception is concerned, the consequence zone covers the
      routers that cannot reach the underclaimed network resources or
      those that have to use sub-optimal paths.

   o  Where disruption is concerned, the consequence zone covers the





Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 20]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


      routers that cannot reach the underclaimed network resources or
      those that have to use sub-optimal paths.

   Like overclaiming, the consequence period is longer than the duration
   of the underclaiming--the threat consequence will mitigate when the
   attacker stops underclaiming and will totally disappear when routing
   tables are converged.

4.5.1.3 Misclaiming

   A Misclaiming threat is defined as an attacker action advertising its
   authorized ownership of some network resources in a way that is not
   intended by the authoritative network administrator. An attacker can
   eulogize or disparage when advertising these network resources.
   Compromised routers, unauthorized routers, and masquerading routers
   can misclaim network resources.

   The threat consequences of Misclaiming are a combination of
   consequences from overclaiming and underclaiming. Eulogizing the
   network resources might cause the same consequences made by
   overclaiming, while disparaging might trigger the same results from
   underclaiming.

   The consequence zone and period are also similar to those of
   overclaiming or underclaiming.

4.5.2 Falsifications by Forwarders

   When a legitimate router forwards routing information, it must or
   must not modify the routing information, depending on the routing
   information and the routing protocol type. For example, in RIP, the
   forwarder must modify the routing information by increasing the hop
   count by 1. On the other hand, the forwarder must not modify the type
   1 LSA in OSPF. In general, forwarders in distance vector routing
   protocols are authorized to and must modify the routing information,
   while most forwarders in link state routing protocols are not
   authorized to and must not modify most routing information.

   As a forwarder authorized to modify routing message, an attacker does
   not forward necessary routing information to other authorized
   routers. Unauthorized aggregation (summarization) is special type of
   understatements.


4.5.2.1 Misstatement

   This is defined as an action whereby the attacker describes route
   attributes in a wrong way. For example, in RIP, the attacker



Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 21]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


   increases the path cost by two hops instead of one. Another example
   is, in BGP, the attacker deletes some AS numbers from the AS PATH.

   When forwarding routing information that should not be modified, an
   attacker can launch the following falsifications:

   o  Deletion: Attacker deletes valid data in the routing message.

   o  Insertion: Attacker inserts false data in the routing message.

   o  Substitution: Attacker replaces valid data in the routing message
      with false data.

   o  Replaying: Attacker replays out-dated data in the routing message.

   All types of attackers (Compromised links, compromised routers,
   unauthorized routers, and masquerading routers) can falsify the
   routing information when they forward the routing messages.

   The threat consequences of these falsifications by forwarders are
   similar to those caused by originators: Usurpation of some network
   resources and related routers; deception of routers using false
   paths; and disruption of data planes of routers on the false paths.
   The threat consequence area and period are also similar.


4.6 Interference

   Interference is defined as a threat action where attackers inhibit
   exchanges on legitimate routers. Attackers can do this by adding
   noise, not forwarding packets, replaying out-dated packets, delaying
   responses, denial of receipts, and breaking synchronization.

   Compromised links can interfere with the routing exchanges over the
   links where they have control.  Compromised, unauthorized and
   masquerading routers can slowdown their routing exchanges or create
   flapping routing sessions of the legitimate peering routers.

   The consequence of interference is the disruption of routing
   operations.

   The consequence zone of interference varies based on the source of
   the threats:

   o  When a compromised link launches the action, the threat
      consequence zone covers routers that are using the link to
      exchange the routing information.  Routers behind might be
      disrupted too.



Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 22]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


   o  When compromised routers, unauthorized routers, or masquerading
      routers are the attackers, the threat consequence zone covers
      routers with which the attackers are exchanging routing
      information, and router behind.

   o  The threat consequences might disappear as soon as the
      interference is stopped, or might not totally disappear until the
      networks are converged.  Therefore, the consequence period is
      equal or longer than the duration of the interference.


4.7 Overload

   Overload is defined as a threat action whereby attackers place excess
   burden on legitimate routers.  Attackers can overload data plane or
   control plane. Because data plane is involved in routing exchanges,
   overload of data plane will also influence the routing operations.

   The consequence of overload is the disruption of routing operations.
   The consequence zone varies based on several factors:

   o  When compromised links launch an overload action against the
      control plane, the consequence zone covers routers that are using
      the links to exchange the routing information, and routers behind.

   o  When compromised links launch an overload action against the data
      plane, the consequence zone coves routers that are physically
      connected by the links, and routers behind.

   o  When Compromised routers, unauthorized routers, or masquerading
      routers launch an overload action against the control plane, the
      threat consequence zone covers routers with which the attackers
      are exchanging routing, and routers behind.

   o  When Compromised routers, unauthorized routers, or masquerading
      routers launch an overload action against the data plane, the
      threat consequence zone covers of routers with which the attackers
      have physical connections, and routers behind.

   The threat consequences might disappear as soon as the overload is
   stopped, or not disappear until networks are converged.


4.8 Byzantine Failures

   When a host or network behaves in a way contrary to the protocol
   specification or in a way that is not authorized, the behavior is
   called a "Byzantine failure"[BYZANTINE].These failures can include



Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 23]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


   timing error (producing messages at intervals contrary to the
   specification), protocol errors (producing messages at variance with
   the specification, e.g., responding with the incorrect message type),
   or data error (producing messages that carry faulty data).

   Byzantine attacks may be seen where any intermediate node or group of
   nodes can intentionally create routing loops, misrouting packets on
   non-optimal paths, or selectively dropping packets (black hole).
   Another way to state the problem is that Byzantine failures occur
   when a processor returns incorrect or malicious data.  Under such an
   attack, only the source and destination nodes are assumed to be
   trusted.  Detecting a Byzantine error is harder than the fail-stop
   model in the sense that at least one other processor must do the same
   computation to confirm the results.  What isn't clear is just how
   much validation is required to determine whether a Byzantine failure
   has occurred


4.9 Discarding of Control Packets

   Similar to Byzantine threats discussed above, uncontrolled discarding
   of control packets lies in the same plane.  That is, discarding of
   control packets will have the same consequence as an incorrect
   routing control packet propagated in the network by a compromised
   router. In distance vector protocols the consequences may not be as
   dire because of the protocol behavior, i.e. the routing update, is
   exchanged only with the neighbor.  However in the case of link state
   routing protocols, the threat associated to discarding of control
   packet can become a serious issue, as the routing updates are flooded
   in the network. Exploitation of this threat was discussed by S.F. Wu
   B. Vetter and F. Wang  from the perspective of an insider attacks in
   a Link State Routing environment.  It is worth considering this
   threat in more detail.

   If the compromised (bad) router partitions the network, i.e. the
   router is the only path between two good routers, then the bad router
   can avoid forwarding the routing information on to the network on the
   other side.













Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 24]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


           *-----* 		              *-----*
          /       \          *---*           /       \
         / Routers \        /     \         / Routers \
        *  on one   *------*   F   *-------* on other  *
         \ side    /        \     /         \  side   /
          \       /          *---*           \       /
           *-----*                            *-----*


                            Figure 7

   In this scenario, the network is partitioned and either side may not
   receive correct updates and the update packets may be dropped.
   Clearly if F is positioned such that the network is not partitioned,
   then the correctness of the protocol in such circumstances depends on
   the mechanism of transmitting routing updates. In the case of a
   typical LSRP like OSPF, reliable flooding is used that guarantees
   that the updates are received by each and every router in the
   network. Hence even when a set of bad routers partition a network, if
   there exists at least one good path between all the routers then this
   threat can be deterred by designing a robust transmitting mechanism
   for control updates.

4.10 Network Mapping Threats

   Based on a simple set of inputs, computers can generate graphical and
   quantitative representations of informal knowledge networks within an
   organization.  If there were no preventive measures in place, network
   map knowledge obtained by unauthorized access to intelligence can be
   costly and expensive threats.  Motivation for snooping can range from
   curiosity to voyeur tendencies. The threat with router plane data
   snooping is the fact that it looks to historical information to be an
   indication of what will happen in the future. The principal threat
   aspect is that the snooped data can be used to develop a network
   topology. When unauthorized attackers develop a model, they attempt
   to create one that will be relevant for all situations going forward.
   Although these models may not be exact for every situation, they can
   be applied with a reasonable amount of certainty without introducing
   any biases based on past information.












Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 25]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


5. Multicast Routing Protocol Considerations

   Based on a simple set of inputs, computers can generate graphical and
   quantitative representations of informal knowledge networks within an
   organization.  If there were no preventive measures in place, network
   map knowledge obtained by unauthorized access to intelligence can be
   costly and expensive threats.  Motivation for snooping can range from
   curiosity to voyeur tendencies. The threat with router plane data
   snooping is the fact that it looks to historical information to be an
   indication of what will happen in the future. The principal threat
   aspect is that the snooped data can be used to develop a network
   topology. When unauthorized attackers develop a model, they attempt
   to create one that will be relevant for all situations going forward.
   Although these models may not be exact for every situation, they can
   be applied with a reasonable amount of certainty without introducing
   any biases based on past information.

   In general, multicast routing updates can be fabricated, modified,
   replayed, deleted, and snooped. For example, unauthorized nodes can
   simply participate in the multicast routing protocol dialog when no
   access control mechanisms are defined for the protocol.  Non-routing
   devices can masquerade as an authorized router and inject spurious
   routing updates, perhaps using source routing attacks or TCP session
   hijacking attacks. Communication links can be compromised by an
   intruder to facilitate the manipulation of routing messages.
   Individual routers can be attacked and compromised to run modified
   software, or use a modified configuration.

   Multicast communication may be specifically targeted by security
   threats, due to its potential for communicating with large numbers of
   receivers simultaneously.  An attacker may attempt to use multicast
   sessions in order to spread specific data to recipients, or may use
   multicast traffic patterns to overload links as a denial-of-service
   (DOS) attack.

   In some architecture such as PIM-DM, even routers which are not
   actively participating in the multicast tree must maintain state
   information on active groups within the routing domain.

   Multicast routing protocols are at least as susceptible as unicast
   routing protocols to security threats.  In general, multicast routing
   updates can be fabricated, modified, replayed, deleted, and snooped.
   For example, unauthorized nodes can simply participate in the
   multicast routing protocol dialog when no access control mechanisms
   are defined for the protocol.  Non-routing devices can masquerade as
   an authorized router and inject spurious routing updates, perhaps
   using source routing attacks or TCP session hijacking attacks.
   Communication links can be compromised by an intruder to facilitate



Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 26]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


   the manipulation of routing messages. Individual routers can be
   attacked and compromised to run modified software, or use a modified
   configuration.

   Just as with unicast routing, the key vulnerabilities of multicast
   routing lie in the introduction of misleading routing information,
   through non-existent (black hole) or incorrect routes, or in
   intercepting the routing information for malicious purposes.
   Incorrect routing information can form the basis for DOS attacks,
   while intercepting routing information (particularly group membership
   information) can reveal compromising topological information.

   Denial-of-service attacks may come either from senders or receivers
   in the multicast model.  That is, if uncontrolled, senders may create
   large numbers of multicast groups, thus potentially creating a
   processing burden on multicast routers throughout the domain.
   Receivers, if uncontrolled, may join large numbers of multicast
   groups, thus causing the establishment of paths from the senders in
   each group to the receiver, as well as causing the flow of packets
   for each of the groups to converge on the receiver.































Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 27]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


6. Security Considerations

   This entire informational draft RFC is security related. Specifically
   it addresses security of routing protocols as associated with threats
   to those protocols.   In a larger context, this work builds upon the
   recognition of the IETF community that signaling and control/
   management planes of networked devices need strengthening.  Routing
   protocols can be considered part of that signaling and control plane.
   However, to date, routing protocols have largely remained unprotected
   and open to malicious attacks.  This document discusses inter and
   intra domain routing protocol threats as we know them today and lays
   the foundation for a future draft which fully discusses security
   requirements for routing protocols.






































Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 28]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


References

   [SEC-GLOSS] R.Shirey, Internet Security Glossary, RFC 2828, May 2000

   [DV-SECURITY] B.R.Smith, S.Murthy, and J.J. Garcia-Luna-Aceves, 
   Securing Distance-Vector Routing Protocols, Symposium on Network and 
   Distributed System Security 1997, Feb. 1997

   [PROTO-VULN] E.Rosen, Vulnerabilities of Network Control Protocols: An
   Example, Computer Communication Review, Jul. 1981

   [BYZANTINE]  R.Perlman, Network Layer Protocols with Byzantine Robustness, 
   August     1988 

   [OSPF-SIG] S. Murphy, M. Badger, and B. Wellington, OSPF with
   Digital Signatures, RFC2154, June 1997

   [OSPFv2]  J.Moy, OSPF Version 2, RFC 2328, April 1998 

   [SENSOR-IDS] V.Mittal  and G.Vigna, Sensor-Based Intrusion Detection for 
   Intra-Domain Distance-Vector Routing, Proceedings of the ACM Conference 
   on Computer and Communication Security (CCS'02), Washington, DC, 
   November 2002 

   [DOS-IDS]  S.Cheung et. al., Protecting Routing Infrastructures from
   Denial of Service using co-operative intrusion detection, In Proceedings 
   of the 1995 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy

   [DIST-MONINTOR]  K.A. Bradley et. al., A distributed Network Monitoring 
   approach

   [ATTACK-LS] S.F. Wu B. Vetter, and F. Wang.An Experimental Study of 
   Insider Attacks in a Link State Routing Protocol, In 5th IEEE 
   International Conference on Network Protocols, Atlanta, GA, 1997. 

   [IGMP] B. Cain, S. Deering, I. Kouvelas, B. Fenner, and A. Thyagarajan, 
   Internet Group Management Protocol, Version 2, RFC 3376, October 2002  

   [PIM-SM] D.  Estrin, D. Farinacci, A. Helmy, D. Thaler, S. Deering, 
   M. Handley, V. Jacobson, C. Liu, P. Sharma, and L. Wei, Protocol 
   Independent Multicast-Sparse Mode (PIM-SM): Protocol Specification, 
   RFC 2362, June 1998 

   [THREATS] - A. Ballardie and J. Crowcroft, Multicast-Specific Security 
   Threats and Counter-Measures;; In Proceedings "Symposium on Network and 
   Distributed System Security", February 1995, pp.2-16.
   (ftp://cs.ucl.ac.uk/darpa/IDMR/mcast-sec-isoc.ps.Z) 




Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 29]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003

Authors' Addresses

   Dennis Beard
   Nortel Networks
   3500 Carling Avenue
   Nepean, Ontario  K2H 8E9
   Canada

   Phone:
   EMail: beardd@nortelnetworks.com


   Sandy Murphy
   Network Associates, Inc
   3060 Washington Rd.
   Glenwood, MD  21738
   USA

   Phone: 443-259-2303
   EMail: Sandra_murphy@nai.com


   Yi Yang
   Cisco Systems
   7025 Kit Creek Road
   RTP, NC  27709
   USA

   Phone:
   EMail: yiya@cisco.com






















Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 30]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


Appendix A. Acknowledgements

This draft would not have been possible save for the excellent efforts
and team work characteristics of those listed here.

   Ayman Musharbash - Nortel Networks
   Paul Knight - Nortel Networks
   Elwyn Davies - Nortel Networks
   Ameya Dilip Pandit - Graduate student - University of Missouri
   Senthilkumar Ayyasamy - Graduate student - University of Missouri









































Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 31]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 32]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Acronyms
	AODV - Ad-hoc On-demand Distance Vector routing protocol 

	AS - Autonomous system. Set of routers under a single technical
	administration. Each AS	normally uses a single interior gateway
	protocol (IGP) and metrics to propagate routing information
	within the set of routers. Also called routing domain.

	AS-Path - In BGP, the route to a destination. The path consists
	of the AS numbers of all routers a packet must go through to reach a
	destination.

	BGP - Border Gateway Protocol. Exterior gateway protocol used to
	exchange routing information among routers in different autonomous
	systems.

	eBGP - External BGP. BGP configuration in which sessions are
	established between routers in different ASs.

	iBGP - Internal BGP. BGP configuration in which sessions are
	established between routers in the same ASs.

	LSRP - Link-State Routing Protocol

	LSA - Link-State Announcement

	M-OSPF - Multicast Open Shortest Path First

	NLRI - Network layer reachability information. Information that
	is carried in BGP packets and is used by MBGP.

	OSPF - Open Shortest Path First. A link-state IGP that makes
	routing decisions based on the shortest-path-first (SPF) algorithm 
	(also referred to as the Dijkstra algorithm).





Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 33]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols     February 2003


	PIM (and PIM DM) - Protocol Independent Multicast. A
	protocol-independent multicast routing protocol. PIM Sparse Mode 
	routes to multicast groups that might span wide-area and 
	interdomain internets. PIM Dense Mode is a flood-and-prune protocol. 

	RIP - Routing Information Protocol. Distance-vector interior
	gateway protocol that makes routing decisions based on hop count.

	SPF - Shortest-path first, an algorithm used by IS-IS and OSPF
	to make routing decisions based on the state of network links. Also
	called the Dijkstra algorithm.

	TCP - Transmission Control Protocol. Works in conjunction with
	Internet Protocol (IP) to send data over the Internet. Divides a 
	message into packets and tracks the packets from point of origin 
	to destination.




































Beard, et al.            Expires August 22, 2003              [Page 34]




