Internet Draft                                 Hugh Mahon
Expiration: May 2001                            Hewlett-Packard
File: draft-mahon-policy-mgmt-00.txt           Yoram Bernet
                                                Microsoft
                                               Shai Herzog
                                                IP Highway
                                                November 9, 2000






               Managing a Policy Management System









Status of this Memo

This  document  is  an  Internet-Draft and is in full conformance
with all provisions of Section 10  of  RFC2026.   Internet-Drafts
are  working  documents  of  the  Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF), its areas, and  its  working  groups.   Note  that  other
groups  may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a  maximum  of  six
months  and  may  be updated, replaced, or made obsolete by other
documents at any time.  It  is  inappropriate  to  use  Internet-
Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as ``work
in progress.''

The  list  of  current  Internet-Drafts  can   be   accessed   at
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

The  list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Copyright Notice

Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000).  All Rights  Reserved.

Abstract

This document contains information about uses of a policy manage-
ment  system,  considerations  for  administrators,  and  general
information about issues for policy based management.











Internet Draft          Policy Management           November 2000


This  document  is  one  of several documents describing multiple
aspects of policy management.  For  more  documents  relating  to
policy  management see the Web page for the IETF Policy Framework
Working Group under the IETF home page (http://www.ietf.org/).

This document is the result of  discussions,  e-mail,  and  other
communications  within  the  Policy  Framework  Working Group and
among individuals.

Table of Contents

   1. Introduction .........................................    2
   2. General Policy Management Issues .....................    2
   2.1 Provisioned vs. Signaled QoS Mechanisms .............    2
   2.2 Policy assignment ...................................    4
   2.2.1 Policy applicability ..............................    6
   2.3 Policy Operation ....................................    6
   2.3.1 Policy Size .......................................    7
   2.3.2 Policy Capability .................................    8
   2.4 Policy Conflicts ....................................    9
   2.4.1 Conflict Between Two Rules Within a Policy ........    9
   2.4.2 Conflicts Between Actions Within a Rule ...........   10
   2.4.3 Conflict (Inconsistency) Between Policies .........   10
   2.5 Time aspects of policy ..............................   11
   3. Security Considerations ..............................   12
   4. Intellectual Property ................................   13
   5. References ...........................................   13
   6. Acknowledgements .....................................   14
   7. Author Information ...................................   14
   8. Full Copyright Statement .............................   15







1.  Introduction

2.  General Policy Management Issues

   There are many areas that need to be covered to develop policy
   based management.  This document is

   2.1.  Provisioned vs. Signaled QoS Mechanisms

      There  are  two  mechanisms by which resources may be allo-
      cated: provisioned (or pre-defined, or pro-active) and sig-
      naled   (or   on-demand,  or  reactive).   Each  has  their
      strengths and weaknesses.

      With provisioned mechanisms,  traffic  treatment  (such  as
      CAR,  priority,  shaping, etc.) can be specified as well as


Mahon,Bernet,Herzog      Expires May 2001                [Page 2]

Internet Draft          Policy Management           November 2000


      the characteristics of the traffic to receive  that  treat-
      ment  (i.e.,  packet  header information such as source and
      destination IP address, IP port numbers, etc.).  An  admin-
      istrator  would  observe  traffic  patterns on the network,
      compare that with the desired state (based on  business  or
      operational  needs), and then craft policies which allocate
      resources accordingly.  Such mechanisms may work quite well
      for  traffic such as HTTP, telnet, or FTP, which are toler-
      ant of variance in flow quality (jitter,  packet  re-order-
      ing,  etc.),  but  still  can  benefit  from having greater
      throughput provided by the above mentioned QoS  mechanisms.

      The  stength  of  signaling, simply put, is that it enables
      parts of the network to offer high quality guarantees,  and
      to  simultaneously be used efficiently.  Without signaling,
      it is necessary either to compromise  the  quality  of  the
      guarantees,  or to over-provision parts of the network.  In
      certain parts of the network, over-provisioning  may  be  a
      viable option.  However, in other parts it may not.  If the
      network administrator is to have  the  flexibility  to  not
      over-provision  those  parts  of the network which would be
      prohibitively expensive to over-provision *and* to  support
      high  quality guarantees through them, then end to end sig-
      naling must be availble to be used for policy based  admis-
      sion control decisions.

      Signaling mechanisms can provide information beyond the QoS
      needs of the traffic  for  which  it  is  signaling.   User
      information (not available in packet headers), and applica-
      tion identification (which would be  hidden  by  IPSec,  or
      unavailable  if well-known or registered ports aren't used)
      can be provided, thus allowing higher  quality  information
      about the traffic than may be available otherwise.

      Since  network  administrators manage in temrs of users and
      applications, and network devices classify in terms  of  IP
      addresses and ports, any mechanism which improves the bind-
      ing of users/applications to IP  addresses  and  ports  (or
      laternate  classification  criteria  in the case of IPSec),
      improve the manageability of the network.

      But the greatest value of the signal is that by  traversing
      the same path in the network as the traffic for which it is
      signaling, it can communicate the specific  QoS  needs  for
      the  connection.  If the needs cannot be met anywhere along
      the path, an explicit notification is provided, effectively
      a 'busy signal', notifying the application that it will not
      get the desired QoS.

      The signal, then, acts as a horizontal communication mecha-
      nism  assuring resource allocation along the path of a con-
      nection, coordinating the QoS mechanisms to ensure expected
      treatement  for  the  traffic.   In  contrast,  provisioned


Mahon,Bernet,Herzog      Expires May 2001                [Page 3]

Internet Draft          Policy Management           November 2000


      mechanisms will act as individual points  to  provide  pre-
      specified  levels of QoS, unaware of what other devices are
      doing.

      Why, then, wouldn't signaling be used for all  traffic  for
      which  better than best effort QoS is desired?  The signal-
      ing does incur a cost in additional network traffic, set up
      time,  and  processing  on  the  devices  and  end  systems
      involved.  Such overhead makes sense for  connections  that
      will  last  for  a minute or more, or where variance in QoS
      can produce dramatically undesirable  results.   VoIP  fits
      both  criteria.   Traffic whose connections are short-lived
      (e.g., HTTP), or can tolerate variable  QoS  within  limits
      (e.g., telnet, FTP), may not warrant such overhead.

      A  common need for both signaled and provisioned QoS mecha-
      nisms, though, is policy.  It is  with  policies  that  the
      administrator  would  specify  how  much  resource is to be
      allocated to any particular use, whether it is to  allow  a
      certain  amount  of bandwidth to be used for all VoIP traf-
      fic, or limit how much bandwidth a  single  connection  can
      use  (for  example to prevent a single user from allocating
      the entire VoIP bandwidth to send high quality audio  to  a
      friend).

      Related  to  the provisioned vs. signaled models is the use
      of  outsourcing  vs.  pre-configuration.   Signaling  lends
      itself to outsourcing of policy based decisions better than
      provisioned because of the granularity provided by the sig-
      nal  (one  or  a  few signals for a connection that lasts a
      long time versus classifying each packet).  This,  however,
      doesn't mean that to use RSVP a device must use an external
      PDP.  It could use a local PDP (in the device)  if  it  has
      sufficient  processing  capability.   Conversely,  a device
      that uses provisioned QoS mechanisms may outsource a  deci-
      sion  when  it  recognizes  a  new flow, and then cache the
      packet header information to provide policy  specified  QoS
      for the rest of the flow.

   2.2.  Policy Assignment

      Policies must be associated with a manageable entity, which
      in this document are called Policy Targets.  For example, a
      router has multiple interfaces on it, and each interface is
      an ingress point to a network (LAN, WAN,  backbone,  etc.).
      Many such devices have the ability to affect the Quality of
      Service of traffic going out through these  interfaces  (as
      opposed  to  coming  in through an interface).  It is these
      interfaces, which are the control  points,  which  are  the
      targets of QoS policies.





Mahon,Bernet,Herzog      Expires May 2001                [Page 4]

Internet Draft          Policy Management           November 2000



                 +---+                            +----+
                 |   |Client A                    |    |Server 1
                 |   |\                          /|    |
                 +---+ \      +---------+       / +----+
                        \     |Network  |      /
                   Dept  +----|element  |-----+   Corporate WAN
                        / Int1|         |Int2  \
                       /      +---------+       \
                 +---+/                          \+----+
                 |   |                            |    |
                 |   |Server 2                    |    |Client B
                 +---+                            +----+

             Figure 1. Policy assignment example.


      Figure 1 represents a simple schematic of two networks con-
      nected by a network element  (e.g.,  a  router).   In  this
      example,  the  network element does not have the ability to
      control traffic entering on an interface, but  can  control
      (via  queues,  marking, etc.) the traffic going out through
      an interface.

      One network is a Departmental LAN, and the other is a  Cor-
      porate  WAN.  The network element connecting these two net-
      works has two interfaces, Int1 and Int2.  The traffic going
      in  to  the  Dept. LAN will be regulated at Int1, while the
      traffic going to the Corporate WAN  will  be  regulated  at
      Int2.

      To  control  traffic  going from the Dept. LAN to the Corp.
      WAN, a policy would be deployed  to  Int2,  whether  it  is
      traffic  which is returning to Client B from Server 2 or is
      traffic from Client A to  Server  1.   Conversely,  traffic
      entering  the  Dept. LAN is controlled by Int1, whether the
      traffic is a request to Server 2 or a response to Client A.

      The  distinction  between  the interfaces, and the policies
      targeted to each is important for many reasons.  For  exam-
      ple,  if  the manager of the Dept. LAN wanted to set higher
      priority for Web usage of users of the Dept. LAN  than  Web
      usage  from  outside  of  the  Dept.  LAN (i.e., to the Web
      servers on the Dept. LAN from the  rest  of  the  company),
      then  the policies affecting the traffic must be structured
      in one of two ways:

      1.   The policies deployed to Int1 are different than poli-
           cies  deployed to Int2 and the conditions can refer to
           traffic type only (e.g.,  source  and  destination  IP
           Port numbers).




Mahon,Bernet,Herzog      Expires May 2001                [Page 5]

Internet Draft          Policy Management           November 2000


      2.   The  policies  deployed to Int1 and Int2 are the same,
           and the conditions  refer  not  only  to  the  traffic
           types,  but  to the source or destination addresses or
           subnets.

      Either approach is valid.  The advantage to #1 is that  the
      policy  will be smaller, and should require less memory and
      processing on the network element to implement (the  number
      of  'ifs'  that  must  be processed to implement the policy
      would be smaller).  Of  course,  the  same  policy  can  be
      deployed  anywhere else in the network if the same kinds of
      behaviors are desired at one or more specific points in the
      network.  And because specific addresses or subnets are not
      used, the policy is easily reused (if only traffic type  is
      the characteristic).

      The disadvantage of #2 is that it would be larger, since it
      is specifying the behavior for flowing out both interfaces,
      and  thus  would  cause  policy which would be used only on
      Int2 (in this example) to be installed on Int1,  and  vice-
      versa.  The advantage of this approach is that the adminis-
      trator may install this same policy anywhere in the network
      and it will yield the same behavior, reducing the number of
      policies the administrator would need to author and  track.


      2.2.1.  Policy applicability

         It  is  important  to point out that while this document
         often refers to policy applying to a 'device', policy is
         applicable to other logical entities as well.  A network
         stack within a general computer system (i.e., host  com-
         puter),  an  application  running  on a host computer, a
         firewall application running on a host computer, etc.

         Thus, in the QoS example  of  policies,  policy  may  be
         applied  to  any physical or logical entity which gener-
         ates, handles, or otherwise impacts the flow of  network
         traffic.

   2.3.  Policy Operation

      There  are  many considerations regarding policy when it is
      used to configure a device (as opposed to the decision out-
      sourcing  mode  described by the COPS RSVP PDP/PEP interac-
      tion).

      How large are policies, what are the implications of expan-
      sion,  and  even  how  well  could policy map to a specific
      device can enter into the usage  of  policy  when  specific
      devices  (instead  of 'typical') are considered.  This dis-
      cussion is not intended to prescribe a 'least common denom-
      inator' model for policy, but to describe how policy may be


Mahon,Bernet,Herzog      Expires May 2001                [Page 6]

Internet Draft          Policy Management           November 2000


      used with devices with limited capabilities.

      2.3.1.  Policy Size

         Policy to express a certain set of  behaviors  may  take
         different  sizes.   The number of Policy Rules contained
         within a given Policy, the number of  conditions,  etc.,
         all depend on the requirements placed on the Administra-
         tor.

         While the intent of policy is to reduce device  specific
         considerations  visible  to the administrator it will be
         difficult to eliminate all device considerations.   This
         is not unlike the fact that a PC user today must be cog-
         nizant of whether or not a given application  will  work
         on a PC equipped with a given amount of RAM.

         Discussions  with  Network  Administrators have revealed
         that many do not wish to use more than a handful  (4  or
         5)  of  classes  of network traffic.  This may result in
         only 4 or 5 rules within a policy.  Of course, how those
         classes  are  defined may vary.  Below are some examples
         of how classes of traffic may be identified:

          1. destIPsubnet == 192.168.32.0/255.255.248.0 &&
                    destIPport == 80

          2. srcIPport = 25

          3. srcIPsubnet == 192.168.32.0/255.255.248.0 &&
                    dayOfWeek == _MTWRF_


         The following is a sample policy rule specifying traffic
         of a given type (HTTP) going between two machines:

          if ((srcIPaddr == 192.168.2.4) &&
              (destIPaddr == 192.168.72.12) &&
               (destIPport == 80))
          then
                  priority=6
          else if  ((destIPaddr == 192.168.2.4) &&
                    (srcIPaddr == 192.168.72.12) &&
                    (srcIPport == 80))
          then
                  priority=6
          endif


         The  translation of the above rules would be fairly sim-
         ple.  Some devices can handle many rules such  as  those
         above,  while  other  devices can only handle relatively
         few (e.g., 16 or less).


Mahon,Bernet,Herzog      Expires May 2001                [Page 7]

Internet Draft          Policy Management           November 2000


         Sizing of policy can also affect performance.  For exam-
         ple,  a  router could experience greater latency in for-
         warding a packet if too many rules (or rules  containing
         many condition lists) were configured on the device.  On
         the other hand, a firewall configured with security pol-
         icy may have no problem handling a hundred or more rules
         describing what traffic is to  be  allowed  through  the
         firewall.

         The size of policy on the Policy Target, therefore, is a
         combination of the complexity of the  number  of  Policy
         Rules  and  the  actions and conditions expressed in the
         policy as well as the capabilities of the device  itself
         relative to the ability of the policy to be expressed in
         the configuration commands of the device.  The same pol-
         icy  may  consume  less  memory  on  one  device than on
         another because  of  differences  in  the  configuration
         capabilities of the two devices.

      2.3.2.  Policy Capability

         If  a  device has the ability to control traffic and can
         exert that control by basing the behavior on things such
         as  information  in the packet header, it is a candidate
         for use with QoS policies.  (The criteria for whether or
         not  something  can  be used with policy is dependent on
         what capability, functionality, or behavior  the  policy
         types involved are abstracting.)

         Not  all  devices  have  the same capabilities.  While a
         policy type may be able to be mapped to a function on  a
         device,  that device may not offer all of the conditions
         (means for classification) that other devices with simi-
         lar functions offer.  For example, a policy for specify-
         ing Committed Rate may use the value of  the  IP  Prece-
         dence  field  to  classify traffic.  A particular router
         may not be able to handle this  feature.   If  a  policy
         with IP Precedence in a rule condition is targeted for a
         device which cannot use IP  Precedence,  the  UI  should
         notify  the  user and prevent deployment.  At a minimum,
         if the UI is not equipped for this, the Policy  Consumer
         should  return  a status message that the policy was not
         implementable on the Policy  Target  (if  there  was  no
         work-around  by using some other feature of the target).

         In another variation on the capabilities  of  a  device,
         not  all  devices  can  handle multiple conditions which
         together identify traffic.  (This may not apply to  time
         conditions.)   If a Rule within a Policy contains multi-
         ple conditions, and the Target is on a device which can-
         not handle such a Rule, the Administrator should receive
         a message indicating an error in the Policy.



Mahon,Bernet,Herzog      Expires May 2001                [Page 8]

Internet Draft          Policy Management           November 2000


         Some devices are simply limited in the number of  rules,
         or the total number of conditions within rules, that can
         be evaluated.  In such a case the  Policy  Consumer  (or
         some  element higher in the system) should provide feed-
         back of this limitation.

   2.4.  Policy Conflicts

      There are two types of policy conflicts that could exist:

              1. conflicts between two rules within a policy
              2. conflicts between actions within a rule

      2.4.1.  Conflict Between Two Rules Within a Policy

         Within a Policy Group are one or more Policy Rules.   As
         defined in [INFOMODEL] these Policy Rules contain Policy
         Actions and Policy Conditions.

         Within a single Policy, it is possible to have more than
         one  Policy Rule which will evaluate 'true' for one cir-
         cumstance.  The oft cited example is as follows:

               Rule 1
                 if (srcIPaddr == 192.168.2.3)
                         Priority=5

               Rule 2
                 if (srcIPsubnet == 192.168.1.0/255.255.248.0)
                         Priority=3

               ...


         In the above example, both Rule 1 and Rule 2 would eval-
         uate true if the source IP address were 192.168.2.3.  If
         a configuration were to  be  entered  into  an  existing
         device (e.g., a router) to implement this behavior there
         would be a forced ordering of evaluation,  so  that  the
         first match would be the action implemented.

         The  Policy  Framework  WG currently defines in the Core
         Information Model a priority value associated  with  the
         Policy Rule.  This priority is used by the administrator
         to set which Policy Rule is to have a  higher  priority,
         so  that  if  more  than one Policy Rule can evaluate as
         true, which Policy Rule has  precedence.   Unfortunately
         there is no uniqueness to the priority value, so that it
         is still possible to have  multiple  rules  which  could
         evaluate  true  and  there  is  no way for the system to
         determine which has higher priority.




Mahon,Bernet,Herzog      Expires May 2001                [Page 9]

Internet Draft          Policy Management           November 2000


         The problem with the priority  approach  is  that  since
         priority  values  need  not be unique for a given set of
         rules, different systems may choose different  rules  to
         apply  given  the same input, which would lead to incon-
         sistent QoS for traffic  matching  the  multiple  Policy
         Rules.  Rule evaluation must be deterministic, such that
         the same policy, encountering the same input conditions,
         renders   the   same  results  wherever  the  policy  is
         installed.  Rule evaluation must be clearly determinable
         in  order  for the administrator to properly specify and
         understand how the policy  (containing  multiple  rules)
         will  operate  in the managed environment.  Without such
         determinism, policy will not meet  the  needs  of  those
         interested in using it.

      2.4.2.  Conflicts Between Actions Within a Rule

         If a rule contains multiple actions, it is possible that
         the actions (or the results of the  actions)  will  con-
         flict  with  each other.  An example of this is that one
         action sets one type of queueing on a  device,  and  the
         other  action  sets  another type of queueing, which for
         that particular device are incompatible.  For each  type
         of device such conflict may be detectable, but in a gen-
         eral case may not be.

      2.4.3.  Conflict (Inconsistency) Between Policies

         When multiple policies are deployed throughout the  net-
         work  it  is possible that the behavior specified in one
         location will not be the same as behavior  specified  in
         another location.


                         +----------+          +----------+
                         |Net Elem A|          |Net Elem B|
               LAN Alpha |          | LAN Beta |          | LAN Gamma
                +--------+Int1  Int2+----------+Int3  Int4+----------
                |        |          |          |          |
             +--+-----+  |          |          |          |
             |User PC |  +----------+          +----------+
             |        |
             +--------+

             Figure 2.


         In  Figure  2  there  are two network elements, A and B,
         which are connected together serially, and  traffic  may
         pass from LAN Alpha through LAN Beta to LAN Gamma.  If a
         user on LAN Alpha expects to have the same QoS when com-
         municating  with systems on LAN Beta and LAN Gamma, then
         the subset of policy (i.e.,  rules)  pertaining  to  the


Mahon,Bernet,Herzog      Expires May 2001               [Page 10]

Internet Draft          Policy Management           November 2000


         user's traffic (based on address, traffic type, or other
         characteristic) deployed on the  interfaces  of  network
         elements A and B must agree.

         If  all  of  the  LANs  are  being  maintained by one IT
         department, and the user has contracted for 200 kbps for
         traffic  to  systems  on  LAN  Gamma,  then the policies
         deployed on interfaces 1, 2, 3, and 4 must  all  support
         at  least  that  much  throughput  for  the  user.   For
         instance, if policy deployed  to  Int2  and  Int4  allow
         200kbps  for traffic coming from the user's machine, and
         policy deployed to Int1 and Int3 only allowed 150kbps of
         traffic  to the user's PC, then the policies deployed to
         Int1 and Int3 could be in  conflict  with  the  policies
         deployed to Int2 and Int4.

         For policy management such a conflict should be detected
         before the user complains about lower than expected per-
         formance.

         The  means for such detection would need to be in policy
         system at a point where the policies are visible.   That
         is,  Int1 cannot determine that its policies are in con-
         flict with Int2 unless it has visibility into the  poli-
         cies  for Int2.  Network Element A cannot determine that
         the policies for it are in conflict  with  the  policies
         for NE B unless it can see the policies for NE B.  There
         are many reasons that make it undesirable for all policy
         managed  entities to see the policy for all other policy
         managed entities on the network.

         It makes sense, then, for the function to determine con-
         flict  between  policies to be implemented in the policy
         system before policies are deployed to their targets (or
         the Policy Consumers for those targets).

         Determining  conflicts such as those described above may
         not be possible with policy information alone.   It  may
         be  necessary  to have a higher level, or different, set
         of information which describes the actual  service  that
         is to be delivered.

         Because  inter-policy  conflict  is  such an unknown, it
         recommended that inter-policy conflict not be a require-
         ment  for (early) policy management systems.  A standard
         for policy management systems should, however, allow for
         the  the  use  of  conflict detection functions, or at a
         minimum not preclude their use.

   2.5.  Time Aspects of Policy

      With the policyTimePeriodCondition (and  the  PolicyRuleVa-
      lidityPeriod  condition  as  part of the Policy Rule) it is


Mahon,Bernet,Herzog      Expires May 2001               [Page 11]

Internet Draft          Policy Management           November 2000


      possible to have behaviors related to time.

      This leads to interesting possibilities for policy.

      With time-based policies Administrators may establish poli-
      cies  to  limit  certain kinds of traffic to provide enough
      bandwidth for the nightly backup.  Some customers may  only
      want  to  pay for better QoS during business hours.  Policy
      can be put in place to allow an  Accounting  Department  to
      have  better QoS for accessing corporate financial informa-
      tion during the last three days of the month.  All of these
      would  be  possible  without the manual intervention of the
      Administrator at the time the policies are to  go  into  or
      out of effect.

      To  take  advantage  of  time-based policies, most existing
      devices (which do not have time- or  date-based  configura-
      tion capabilities) would need a Policy Consumer implemented
      separately from the device.  New managed  elements  may  be
      developed  with time and date keeping functions on them, or
      Policy Targets may reside on a host system which has  those
      functions.

      It  is also possible that the Policy Management Application
      would change policy stored in the Policy  Repository  based
      on  time.   This  would  have the advantage of removing the
      need for time keeping on the Policy Target (or Policy  Con-
      sumer), but it would mean that Policy data is not as static
      as currently expected.   It  also  would  cause  a  lag  in
      deployment  of  Policy  to the Target since more components
      are involved (the Policy Management Application, the Repos-
      itory if indirect delivery is involved, and the Policy Con-
      sumer).  This could be solved, but a  solution  would  make
      the entire system more expensive.

      Another affect of time-based policy is on the status of the
      policy deployment.  Depending on the implementation of  the
      Policy  Consumer  and  the conflict detection mechanisms in
      the system (if any exist) there may be a problem  with  the
      policy  information  that  is not visible until portions of
      the policy with time conditions become 'active'.  In  other
      words, portions of the policy (rules, or condition lists in
      a rule) with time conditions become 'active' when the  time
      or  date  match  values  in  the policyTimePeriodCondition.
      These rules or  condition  lists  may  contain  information
      which  brings the rule into conflict with one or more other
      rules.  Or even worse, the time based rule may contain con-
      ditions which are not supported by the Policy Target.

3.  Security Considerations

   The  security requirements for policy management are addressed
   in more detail in other drafts relating to  policy.   A  short


Mahon,Bernet,Herzog      Expires May 2001               [Page 12]

Internet Draft          Policy Management           November 2000


   list  of  the  requirements  for  security  related  to policy
   includes:

       - authentication of server and client
       - provisions for ensuring integrity of policy information
       - security of the policy repository
       - encryption of policy information (especially for policy
         related to security)



4.  Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope  of
   any  intellectual  property  or  other  rights  that  might be
   claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of  the  tech-
   nology  described  in this document or the extent to which any
   license under such rights might or  might  not  be  available;
   neither does it represent that it has made any effort to iden-
   tify any such rights.  Information on  the  IETF's  procedures
   with  respect  to  rights  in  standards-track  and standards-
   related documentation can be found in BCP-11.

   Copies of claims of rights made available for publication  and
   any assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result
   of an attempt made to obtain a general license  or  permission
   for  the  use  of  such  proprietary rights by implementers or
   users of this specification can be obtained from the IETF Sec-
   retariat.

   The  IETF  invites any interested party to bring to its atten-
   tion any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or  other
   proprietary  rights  which  may  cover  technology that may be
   required to practice this standard.  Please address the infor-
   mation to the IETF Executive Director.


5.  References


   [TERMS]         S.  Bradner,  "Key  words  for  use in RFCs to
                   Indicate  Requirement  Levels",  Internet  RFC
                   2119, March 1997.


   [TERMINOLOGY]   J.  Strassner,  E.  Ellesson, "Terminology for
                   describing  network  policy   and   services",
                   Internet     Draft     draft-strassner-policy-
                   terms-01.txt, February 1999.


   [INFOMODEL]     B. Moore, E. Ellesson, J.  Strassner,  "Policy
                   Framework  Core  Information  Model", Internet


Mahon,Bernet,Herzog      Expires May 2001               [Page 13]

Internet Draft          Policy Management           November 2000


                   Draft             draft-ietf-policy-core-info-
                   model-03.txt, January 2000.


   [POLFRAME]      M.  Stevens,  W. Weiss, H. Mahon, B. Moore, J.
                   Strassner,  G.  Waters,  A.   Westerinen,   J.
                   Wheeler,  "Policy  Framework",  Internet Draft
                   draft-ietf-policy-framework-00.txt,  September
                   1999.


   [COPS]          J.  Boyle,  R. Cohen, D. Durham, S. Herzog, R.
                   Rajan, A.  Sastry, "The COPS (Common Open Pol-
                   icy  Service)  Protocol",  RFC  2748,  January
                   2000.


6.  Acknowledgements

   Special thanks to Mark Stevens, Bob Moore, Andrea  Westerinen,
   Avri  Doria,  Cheh  Goh,  Ken  Owens, Rick Roeling,  and Brian
   O'Keefe for input and feedback during the development of  this
   draft.   Thanks  also  go  to  Ed Ellesson and Bert Wijnan for
   their guidance on what should be discussed in this document.

7.  Author Information

       Hugh Mahon
       Hewlett-Packard Co.
       3404 East Harmony Road, MS A2
       Fort Collins, CO 80528-9599
       Phone: +1 970 898 2487
       EMail: hugh_mahon@hp.com

       Yoram Bernet
       Microsoft
       1 Microsoft Way
       Redmond, WA 98052
       USA
       phone: +1 206 936 9568
       email: yoramb@microsoft.com

       Shai Herzog
       IPHighway
       Parker Plaza, 16th Floor
       400 Kelby St. Fort-Lee NJ 07024
       201.585.0800
       herzog@iphighway.com







Mahon,Bernet,Herzog      Expires May 2001               [Page 14]

Internet Draft          Policy Management           November 2000


8.  Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright  (C)  The  Internet  Society  (2000).   All   Rights
   Reserved.

   This  document  and  translations of it may be copied and fur-
   nished to others, and derivative works that comment on or oth-
   erwise  explain it or assist in its implementation may be pre-
   pared, copied, published and distributed, in whole or in part,
   without restriction of any kind, provided that the above copy-
   right notice and this  paragraph  are  included  on  all  such
   copies  and  derivative  works.  However, this document itself
   may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the  copy-
   right  notice  or  references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the   purpose  of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process  must  be
   followed,  or as required to translate it into languages other
   than English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual  and  will
   not  be  revoked  by the Internet Society or its successors or
   assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided
   on  an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL  WARRANTIES,  EXPRESS  OR
   IMPLIED,  INCLUDING  BUT  NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE
   USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS  OR
   ANY  IMPLIED  WARRANTIES  OF  MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
   PARTICULAR PURPOSE."
























Mahon,Bernet,Herzog      Expires May 2001               [Page 15]

Internet Draft          Policy Management           November 2000


   1. Introduction .........................................    2
   2. General Policy Management Issues .....................    2
   2.1 Provisioned vs. Signaled QoS Mechanisms .............    2
   2.2 Policy assignment ...................................    4
   2.2.1 Policy applicability ..............................    6
   2.3 Policy Operation ....................................    6
   2.3.1 Policy Size .......................................    7
   2.3.2 Policy Capability .................................    8
   2.4 Policy Conflicts ....................................    9
   2.4.1 Conflict Between Two Rules Within a Policy ........    9
   2.4.2 Conflicts Between Actions Within a Rule ...........   10
   2.4.3 Conflict (Inconsistency) Between Policies .........   10
   2.5 Time aspects of policy ..............................   11
   3. Security Considerations ..............................   12
   4. Intellectual Property ................................   13
   5. References ...........................................   13
   6. Acknowledgements .....................................   14
   7. Author Information ...................................   14
   8. Full Copyright Statement .............................   15




































Mahon,Bernet,Herzog      Expires May 2001               [Page 16]


