



Network Working Group                                         V. Bertola
Internet-Draft                                              Open-Xchange
Intended status: Informational                            4 January 2022
Expires: 8 July 2022


               Everything But The User Is An Intermediary
                draft-bertola-everything-but-the-user-00

Abstract

   This document provides the author's perspective on the shortcomings
   of the Internet threat model defined in RFC 3552 and currently in use
   at the IETF.  It then proposes the basic conceptual framework for an
   additional model, the "holistic threat model", describing how it
   could be used to broaden the analysis of non-technical protocol
   impacts in the design phase.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 8 July 2022.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.



Bertola                    Expires 8 July 2022                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Everything But The User            January 2022


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction and Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  The End-to-End Principle  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.2.  Intermediaries in Today's Internet  . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.3.  The Current Internet Threat Model . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Shortcomings of the Current Threat Model  . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.1.  Shortcomings in the Scope of Attackers  . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.2.  Shortcomings in the Scope of Threats  . . . . . . . . . .   6
   3.  The Holistic Threat Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.1.  Applicability of the Holistic Threat Model  . . . . . . .   8
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   6.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9

1.  Introduction and Background

1.1.  The End-to-End Principle

   The architecture and design of Internet protocols traditionally stems
   from the "end-to-end principle" - the choice of concentrating the
   intelligence and the complexity of the services of a network at its
   edges, reducing to the minimum possible level the functions and the
   prerogatives of the inner nodes of the network.  When the
   implementation of a network's functions is built as a set of layers
   relying on each other, the intelligence and the complexity are pushed
   upwards, to the layers nearer to the end-user, minimizing the
   activities of the lower layers [Salzer].

   Under this principle, application-level protocols are designed as a
   communication between two endpoints sitting at the edge of the
   network, directly interacting with the respective end-users, or, for
   human-to-server communication, with the physical or juridical entity
   providing the service at the endpoint.  While in some cases
   communications can be directed to more than one endpoint, in-network
   intermediaries to these communications simply do not exist; all
   parties involved in the communication sit at the network's edge.

1.2.  Intermediaries in Today's Internet

   Over time, throughout the technical development of the Internet, it
   has not always been possible to upkeep the end-to-end principle in
   full.  There now are services and functions that involve
   intermediaries, that is, entities other than the endpoints, sitting
   on the network path between them and performing higher-level
   functions.




Bertola                    Expires 8 July 2022                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Everything But The User            January 2022


   For example, the relative scarcity of IPv4 addresses prompted the
   introduction of nodes that would encapsulate the end-user's traffic
   and pretend to be the actual endpoint of the Internet connection,
   then passing back the packets received in response.  Security checks
   have been implemented by having intermediate network nodes examine
   all the traffic, sometimes up to content at the highest application
   level, and determine whether such traffic should be allowed to reach
   the other endpoint or not.

   Some functionalities also require the involvement of third parties
   acting as "side intermediaries", that is, additional parties to the
   communication that sit elsewhere than on the network path between the
   endpoints, and are brought into the communication as an endpoint to a
   separate network connection.  An example is the DNS resolution
   process, as the network stack setting up a connection to the endpoint
   must establish a separate connection to a separate service, the DNS
   resolver, to discover the IP address of the endpoint from its name.

   Given the general recognition of the end-to-end principle, the role
   of intermediaries in the design of Internet protocols has generally
   been controversial.  As added parties into a communication,
   intermediaries can be used as a point of surveillance and control
   over traffic that the end-user did not mean them to see.  On the
   other hand, intermediaries can also be used to provide valuable
   services, such as enabling the user to identify network destinations
   by name rather than by IP address, or such as increased security for
   users that would not be able to identify threats directly (e.g.
   against phishing websites).

1.3.  The Current Internet Threat Model

   The threat model used when evaluating the safety of Internet
   protocols has generally assumed that endpoint behaviour and risks are
   out of scope, only focusing on the communication itself.  Thus, in
   the last decade, the increased attention to the privacy and security
   of the end-user's network activities led to the progressive
   elimination of intermediaries, especially those that were deployed by
   network operators halfway on the path of Internet communications.

   Frequently, the instrument used to this purpose has been the
   encryption and disguise of communications between the two network
   endpoints; sometimes, protocol changes, including high-level routing
   changes and traffic aggregation, have also been conceived to reduce
   opportunities for discriminating or tracking traffic.

   In some cases, however, these instruments have been claimed to
   produce effects that actually endanger the user's privacy and
   security - among these, the aggregation and centralisation of traffic



Bertola                    Expires 8 July 2022                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Everything But The User            January 2022


   into the infrastructure of a limited number of operators, and the
   elimination of any possibility for positive intermediation, such as
   in-network security checks.

   As the overall privacy of the end-user's communication is determined
   both by the privacy during the transport of the information and by
   the privacy of the processing that happens within the endpoints, an
   increase in the former could be compensated by a decrease in the
   latter, with a negative net effect.  At the IETF and elsewhere,
   discussions are ongoing on how Internet protocol design could also
   take into account this risk.

   Since many of these threats are related to endpoint behaviour, or to
   a combination of protocol features and non-technical endpoint
   decisions such as the model, timeframe and policies for their
   deployment, they cannot be caught by a threat model that declares
   endpoints to be out of scope.

   As a contribution to this discussion, this document proposes a
   different and more general approach to the assessment of potential
   risks, considering both in-network and endpoint actors as
   intermediaries, and extending the analysis to non-technical issues.
   This model could be used whenever a broader impact analysis is
   considered useful.

2.  Shortcomings of the Current Threat Model

   The current Internet threat model is formalized in RFC 3552
   [RFC3552].  While the goals described in section 2 of that document
   are still generally valid, in today's Internet environment the threat
   model described in section 3 sometimes fails to capture all the
   relevant threats that could affect the accomplishment of those goals.

2.1.  Shortcomings in the Scope of Attackers

   The first shortcoming of the current Internet threat model is that it
   attempts to evaluate the impact on the properties of a communication
   between human beings (or between a human and a computer service) by
   only assessing the properties of the communication between the
   protocol endpoints, assuming for the purpose of protocol design that
   no attacks can happen during the processing of communications between
   the protocol endpoint and the end-user, or that these attacks can be
   effectively pre-empted and countered by the end-user.

   Section 3 of RFC 3552 supplies a justification for this assumption;
   it states that "Protecting against an attack when one of the end-
   systems has been compromised is extraordinarily difficult."  Indeed,
   under this assumption the protocol designer can conflate two separate



Bertola                    Expires 8 July 2022                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Everything But The User            January 2022


   communication layers, the protocol one - an exchange of information
   between two software or hardware elements acting as protocol
   endpoints at the edges of the network - and the end-user one - an
   exchange of information between human beings.  This assumption is
   quite helpful for protocol design, as it reduces the quantity and
   quality of threats that have to be examined.  However, it inevitably
   excludes other relevant threats from the analysis, giving users no
   protection from them.

   This assumption could have been justified under a number of external
   conditions that were mostly true when the original Internet threat
   model was conceived, such as:

   1.  The end-user has full control over the device that they are
       using.

   2.  The end-user is freely able to choose the application and the
       operating system that they are using, picking some that they can
       trust.

   3.  The end-user is sufficiently competent in technology to be able
       to assess the risks of misbehaviour by the endpoint elements of
       their communication, and to judge whether to entrust them with
       data and information.

   However, in today's Internet, these conditions are generally false.
   Internet end-users are in average much less tech-literate than they
   were in 2003, when RFC 3552 was written; even more so if we consider
   the Internet of 1984, when the end-to-end principle as we know it
   today was formalized.

   Over the last decade, network services based on open, federated
   protocols - like e-mail or the Web - have increasingly been
   complemented or replaced by newer services - like instant messaging
   or social media - based on a single-operator, single-implementation
   "walled garden" model, thus giving the user much more limited
   choices, or no choice at all, over which application to use.  Most
   users now access the Internet from smartphones, almost entirely
   running on one of two dominant operating systems.  To account for the
   more limited technical competence of end-users, newer devices and
   applications often give them limited configuration choices.  The
   advent of the cloud computing model has brought forth a vast range of
   home appliances and software applications that only communicate with
   the servers of their own makers, often with no opportunity for the
   user to verify or alter their network communications.






Bertola                    Expires 8 July 2022                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Everything But The User            January 2022


   While useful in technical terms, this assumption in today's scenario
   - at least in some cases - leaves too many threats out of scope to be
   still acceptable.

2.2.  Shortcomings in the Scope of Threats

   Another shortcoming of the current Internet threat model derives from
   its limited technical focus.  When it was designed, the threat model
   focused only on the security of the communication; from the end-
   user's viewpoint, communication security was defined in section 2.1
   of RFC 3552 as the union of three more specific goals -
   confidentiality, data integrity and peer entity authentication.

   In 2013, the IETF deemed it necessary to add a separate, specific
   focus on potential threats to the user's privacy, releasing RFC 6973
   [RFC6973].  While building on the original goal of confidentiality,
   this document moved the analysis to a higher, less technical level,
   bringing into scope the non-technical consequences of technical
   communication breaches.  To protect the user's privacy effectively,
   it was deemed necessary to consider the non-technical purposes and
   motivations that could prompt an attacker to exploit any flaws and
   weaknesses in communication protocols.  Moreover, in section 4 RFC
   6973 already questioned the validity of RFC 3552's assumption of non-
   compromised endpoints.

   In 2017, the scope of the suggested analysis was further broadened by
   RFC 8280 [RFC8280].  While still being a proposal subject to further
   research, this document codified an even broader range of non-
   technical threats to social, economical and political rights, such as
   freedom of expression, non-discrimination, freedom of assembly and so
   on; it then suggested how to consider potential adverse effects to
   these rights when designing protocols.

   In the last twenty years, the IETF appears to have followed the
   societal trend that, in parallel with the increased usage and
   pervasiveness of the Internet in the everyday life of all human
   beings, brought the non-technical consequences of technical design
   choices by the Internet's technical community and industry to the
   attention of the public opinion and of the policymakers.  It is now
   expected that a sense of social and corporate responsibility, and
   policy objectives defined outside of the technical community,
   contribute to shaping the choices that will determine the future
   evolution of the Internet.

   However, the analysis of non-technical consequences of technical
   design choices does not just require technical skills, but also
   competence in fields like business administration, economy, policy,
   law and social sciences.  The efforts of protocol engineers to take



Bertola                    Expires 8 July 2022                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Everything But The User            January 2022


   into account the dynamics and the effects in these other fields are
   commendable, but there is the need to bring the appropriate
   competences into the discussion, while avoiding mission creep for
   technical standards organizations.  Any attempt to address this
   shortcoming should also consider this issue.

3.  The Holistic Threat Model

   As a consequence of the shortcomings that have been identified above,
   to perform a complete evaluation of the risks to the security and
   privacy of end-users and to their rights in general, it would be
   necessary to expand the scope of the threat analysis in two
   directions.

   First, it would be necessary to consider all elements that have
   access to the end-user's information, data, metadata and content,
   independently from whether they sit within the network or within the
   endpoint devices; any element located anywhere between the fingers
   (or other human-machine interface) of the sending end-user and the
   eyes of the receiving end-user (or the operator of the application-
   level Internet service) is in scope.  In short, "everything but the
   user is an intermediary"; since both the endpoint devices and any in-
   network intermediaries have access to user information, all of them
   should be considered as third parties that could potentially attack
   the end-user.

   Secondly, to understand how these elements might realistically
   behave, it would be necessary to consider not just the technical
   building blocks, but the physical or juridical entities that operate
   or control them, and the non-technical motivations that could push
   them to attack or constrain the user, such as economic advantages,
   the accumulation and preservation of power, the desire to surveil or
   stalk another person and many others.

   Under this extended threat model, no claim should be made over the
   privacy, security or any other property of Internet communications
   from the end-user's perspective, unless all parties different from
   the user(s) that take part in the communication, and all their
   possible motivations, have been considered: hence the "holistic"
   threat model.











Bertola                    Expires 8 July 2022                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Everything But The User            January 2022


3.1.  Applicability of the Holistic Threat Model

   In theory, the holistic threat model is a necessary response to the
   shortcomings identified above.  The more limited analysis performed
   under the RFC 3552 threat model could not only lead to incomplete
   results, failing to identify significant threats, but could even lead
   to counterproductive results.  Architectural choices that are
   assessed as increasing the user's privacy could, under a broader
   analysis of likely non-technical dynamics, actually cause new threats
   to the user's privacy, for example by promoting business models based
   on data monetization or the centralization of user information into
   fewer hands.

   However, the skillsets and research necessary to conduct such a
   multidisciplinary analysis, and the sheer amount of actors and
   possible behaviours, could make the effort too heavy and practically
   unfeasible, or simply excessive for specifications of limited impact.

   As an initial experiment, the holistic threat model could be applied
   as a second step for selected documents, after performing a security
   and privacy analysis under the current threat model, whenever the
   initial examination of the properties of a new specification raises
   concerns on potential broader impacts.

   It is important to note that even the assessment on whether a
   specification could have impacts on non-technical issues and
   stakeholders requires in principle the broader skillset necessary to
   perform the full analysis.  In other words, to determine whether a
   holistic assessment would be necessary, it is necessary to consult
   the non-technical stakeholders that could be affected by the new
   specification, letting them do a preliminary analysis and raise any
   potential concerns before the specification is finalized.

   In the end, the need identified by this document calls for a stronger
   and more effective interaction between the IETF and other parts of
   the Internet's industry, policy and user communities on a global
   scale.  Efforts to establish such an interaction should be made
   jointly by the IETF and by the other relevant stakeholders; how to do
   that in practice could be the subject of a separate discussion.

4.  Security Considerations

   This document discusses the assumptions under which security
   considerations should be developed in the future.  It is meant to
   contribute to the ongoing discussion over a possible revision of RFC
   3552 [RFC3552], which specifies how to write security considerations.





Bertola                    Expires 8 July 2022                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Everything But The User            January 2022


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

6.  Informative References

   [RFC3552]  Rescorla, E. and B. Korver, "Guidelines for Writing RFC
              Text on Security Considerations", BCP 72, RFC 3552,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3552, July 2003,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3552>.

   [RFC6973]  Cooper, A., Tschofenig, H., Aboba, B., Peterson, J.,
              Morris, J., Hansen, M., and R. Smith, "Privacy
              Considerations for Internet Protocols", RFC 6973,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6973, July 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6973>.

   [RFC8280]  ten Oever, N. and C. Cath, "Research into Human Rights
              Protocol Considerations", RFC 8280, DOI 10.17487/RFC8280,
              October 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8280>.

   [Salzer]   Salzer, J. H., Reed, D. P., and D. D. Clark, "End-to-end
              arguments in system design", 1 November 1984,
              <https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/357401.357402>.

Author's Address

   Vittorio Bertola
   Open-Xchange Srl
   Via Treviso 12
   10144 Torino
   Italy

   Email: vittorio.bertola@open-xchange.com
   URI:   https://www.open-xchange.com/
















Bertola                    Expires 8 July 2022                  [Page 9]
