

NSIS                                                          O. Schelen
Internet-Draft                                                    Operax
Expires: May 5, 2003                                        A. Couturier
                                                                 Alcatel
                                                                R. Bless
                                                         Univ. Karlsruhe
                                                                 R. Geib
                                                               T-Systems
                                                               O. Dugeon
                                                                   FTR&D
                                                        November 4, 2002


           Path-coupled and Path-decoupled Signaling for NSIS
                     draft-schelen-nsis-opopsig-01

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 5, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   The NSIS Work group will develop the requirements, architecture and
   protocols for the next IETF steps on signaling.  Two approaches for a
   signaling model have been discussed: path-coupled and path-decoupled
   (previously denoted as on-path and off-path).  This draft provides a



Schelen, et al.           Expires May 5, 2003                   [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Path-coupled / Path-decoupled Signaling  November 2002


   conceptual comparison between path-coupled and path-decoupled
   signaling together with reasons for why an NSIS protocol should be
   designed to support both cases.  The collection of data objects to be
   carried by the protocol should basically be the same in both cases
   and will evolve over time as new usages for NSIS protocol are
   identified.  The differences between the two flavors of this NSIS
   protocol are then explained.

1. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].

2. Introduction

   The Next Steps in Signaling (NSIS) working group is chartered to
   develop the requirements, architecture and protocols for the next
   IETF steps on signaling.  Two approaches about the signaling model
   have been discussed: path-coupled and path-decoupled.  This draft
   provides a conceptual comparison between those two approaches
   together with reasons for why an NSIS protocol should be designed to
   support them both by offering two different flavors.  The collection
   of data objects to be carried by the protocol should basically be the
   same in both cases and will evolve over time as new usages for NSIS
   are identified.  We identify at a high level the differences between
   the path-coupled and path-decoupled flavors of the protocol.

3. Terminology

   NSIS Initiator (NI) -  NSIS Entity that initiates NSIS signaling for
   a network resource based on user or application requirements.  This
   can be located in the end system, but may reside elsewhere in network
   [2].

   NSIS Responder (NR) - NSIS Entity that terminates NSIS signaling and
   can optionally interact with applications as well.

   NSIS Forwarder (NF) - NSIS Entity on the path between a NI and NR,
   which may interact with local resource management function (RMF) for
   this purpose.  NSIS Forwarder also propagates NSIS signaling further
   through the network.  It is responsible for interpreting the
   signaling carrying the user parameters, optionally inserting or
   modifying the parameters according to domain network management
   policy [2].

   Control Information: information that governs the treatment to be
   applied to a flow or an aggregate (e.g., QoS treatment including



Schelen, et al.           Expires May 5, 2003                   [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Path-coupled / Path-decoupled Signaling  November 2002


   service class, flow administration, and any associated security or
   accounting information [2].

4. Path-coupled Signaling

4.1 Description of path-coupled signaling

   Path-coupled signaling refers to the situation where the signaling
   path is tied to the data path of the IP flow to be signaled.  That
   means signaling messages referring to a particular data flow follow
   the same path as packets of that data flow, i.e., signaling messages
   pass through the same devices as data packets of the data flow.

   In the forward direction signaling messages usually carry the same IP
   destination address as data packets of the related user data flow.
   It must be noted, that some signaling messages (e.g., responses) may
   also follow the same path in the reverse direction.  Usually, the
   previous hop must be remembered and directly addressed in this case.
   An example for a path-coupled signaling protocol is RSVP [4].

   In summary path-coupled signaling shows the following properties:

   o  Only network elements that forward data packets can participate in
      signaling, i.e., routers must process the signaling messages.

   o  Routers that forward IP packets along the data path can
      participate in the signaling by intercepting and processing
      incoming signaling messages.

   o  The next signaling hop in forwarding direction is discovered by
      transmitting signaling packets through an ordinary lookup in the
      local IP forwarding table, using the final destination address of
      the signaling packets.  The signaling path in the reverse
      direction (upstream) has to be remembered from the forward
      direction (i.e., the previous hop must be stored), because routes
      can be asymmetric.

   o  The path of the signaling messages adapts automatically to route
      changes for data packets (if associated with a soft-state
      mechanism).

   o  Signaling unaware routers can forward a signaling message
      correctly to the next hop if the destination address of the
      signaling message is the same as for the data flow.







Schelen, et al.           Expires May 5, 2003                   [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Path-coupled / Path-decoupled Signaling  November 2002


4.2 Advantages of path-coupled signaling

4.2.1 Efficient device configuration

   One advantage of path-coupled signaling is that nodes along the data
   path can install or update configuration data (state) just by
   receiving, processing and forwarding signaling packets, following the
   traditional routing mechanisms.  In case the devices to be configured
   are located along the path, this mechanism is considered the
   simplest.  It does not require additional configuration protocol
   exchange, as the signaling hops are the same as the IP forwarding
   ones.

4.2.2 Bypassing signaling unaware clouds

   In case of an IP cloud which is signaling unaware (e.g., because of
   over-provisioning), signaling packets can go through the cloud
   transparently, like normal IP packets.  At the egress router of that
   cloud, signaling still follows the data path and can be processed by
   the next hops.  Even if an IP cloud following the traditional IP
   routing is signaling unaware, it is still a path-coupled signaling
   carrier.

4.2.3 Automatic adaptation to changed routes

   The path of signaling messages adapts automatically to route changes
   which is often, but not always, desired.  As a result of route
   changes, reservation state will automatically be installed in routers
   along a new path while it will be removed in routers along the old
   path.

4.3 Disadvantages of path-coupled signaling

4.3.1 Limited flexibility for integration of other entities

   Typically IP networks are provisioned for delivering certain services
   internally, while customers/peers have various access schemes at
   edges/boundaries.  Accountable services (e.g., max bandwidth with
   ensured QoS, max number of concurrent VoIP calls, access bandwidth
   variations over time of day and day of week, advance reservations,
   price profiles) require installing states in policy servers that are
   not located on the data path.  Establishing such services typically
   requires interaction between client and NSIS forwarder (policy
   server) to perform state processing and state installation.

   However, entities and hosts that are not located on the data path
   cannot be easily included into a path-coupled signaling process.
   This makes it more difficult to use signaling proxies or



Schelen, et al.           Expires May 5, 2003                   [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Path-coupled / Path-decoupled Signaling  November 2002


   administrative servers (e.g., policy or accounting servers).  The
   latter is for example required when a server hosting user profiles
   participates in the admission control procedure.  In general, all
   actions that require keeping persistent states, e.g., for accounting
   or retrieving service level data (such as user profiles or policies)
   cannot be easily supported by routers.  The current solution is to
   out-source the signaling processing via the COPS interface [5].  As
   policies are more and more important especially in cases of customer
   access and peering between several ISPs, policy servers are expected
   to be extensively involved in signaling processing.

4.3.2 Impact of non contiguous signaling paths

   Path-coupled signaling is based on the fundamental assumption that
   the signaling path is the same as the data path.  Usually, in a
   stable network condition (no route changes occur) consecutive packets
   of a single flow are all routed the same way, based on the IP
   destination address.  This will be called "traditional IP routing" in
   the following.  Traditional IP routing is of course predominant in
   the Internet today, therefore path-coupled signaling benefits from
   deployment advantages.

   This situation may suffer from threats in several deployments.  QoS
   routing, traffic engineering or load balancing technologies may route
   flows differently than in the traditional IP routing model.  In these
   cases, a signaling unaware cloud is not anymore a transparent
   signaling carrier, as nothing assures it will forward the signal at
   the same place it will forward the data flow.  Then, signaling
   unaware clouds can break the path-coupled signaling, and can simply
   install reservation state at wrong paths.

4.3.3 Signaling processing and complex control functions in routers

   One problem is that signaling message processing and more complex
   control tasks (e.g., resource-based admission control) have to be
   implemented in routers.  A change of control functions (e.g.,
   admission control algorithms) requires also a change to the routers.

   One problem of RSVP and IntServ is that every router in the network
   must implement IntServ and RSVP in order to link the sink and the
   source with a chain of QoS capable routers that all allocate
   resources for the flow.  Of course, RSVP aggregation [6], or RSVP
   over DiffServ [7][8] architectures propose to reduce the number of
   flow states inside network domains by concentrating per-flow
   reservations in strategically positioned routers, called RSVP
   aggregators and de-aggregators (e.g., positioned at diffserv ingress
   and egress routers).  However, this model still imposes that all
   flow-aware nodes must implement the signaling.  In a network



Schelen, et al.           Expires May 5, 2003                   [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Path-coupled / Path-decoupled Signaling  November 2002


   consisting of several providers, de-aggregation into micro-flows and
   re-aggregation is performed at all domain boundaries (ingress points
   and peering points).  This imposes that a large portion of the
   routers must be upgraded in order to build a coherent signaling and
   QoS capable network.

4.3.4 Limited support in mobile scenarios

   In some scenarios with mobile senders or receivers it may be
   desirable to have a "seamless" hand-over.  In this case, resources
   along the new path should be reserved before the data flow is
   actually switched from the old path to the new path.

4.3.5 Protection and Security

   Path-coupled signaling messages being transmitted to an unknown next
   signaling hop may be hard to protect.

4.3.6 NAT and private address schemes

   Path-coupled signaling messages transmitted through a Firewall/NAT
   must be changed when passing this device.  When a network operator
   uses a private address scheme, the end user IP address must be
   translated before reaching the public part of the network.  NAT
   devices that translate addresses in headers must also translate
   addresses carried in the body of signaling messages to reflect the
   NAT processing.  To achieved this goal, NAT devices must be NF
   devices to convey NSIS compliant signaling messages.

5. Path-decoupled Signaling

5.1 Description of Path-Decoupled Signaling

   Path-decoupled signaling refers to the situation where the signaling
   path is not necessarily bound to the data path of the signaled flow.
   End stations/users may signal to particular entities (e.g., servers)
   in the network of their providers.  The "path" taken by path-
   decoupled signaling messages correspond to the AS path rather than
   the hop by hop path taken by path-coupled signaling messages.  That
   means signaling messages may be destined to devices that are not on
   the forwarding path of the particular flow.  This happens either when
   signaling is not initiated by end hosts, or when signaling is
   directed to NSIS forwarders that are not on the data path.  In this
   model, the IP destination address of a signaling message is separated
   from the destination address flow(s) for which resources are
   requested.

   In summary path-decoupled signaling shows the following properties:



Schelen, et al.           Expires May 5, 2003                   [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Path-coupled / Path-decoupled Signaling  November 2002


   o  The signaling path is decoupled from the actual data path,
      therefore it allows to signal entities that are not on the data
      path.  This allows to shift some control functions to other
      entities than routers.

   o  Path-decoupled signaling simplifies interworking with domains
      applying forwarding planes other than IP (e.g.  MPLS or WDM) or
      using private addressing schemes.

   o  To modify and control resources at the routers passed by the data-
      flow corresponding to a path-decoupled signaling message, the data
      path must be predicted by path-decoupled signaling units.

   o  The path-decoupled signaling system must be able to configure
      routers in the data path by access to a management interface.

   o  Path-decoupled signaling must be able to discover the next
      signaling hop.


5.2 Advantages of path-decoupled signaling

5.2.1 Independence of signaling plane and forwarding plane

   By nature, path-decoupled signaling isolates signaling processing
   (e.g., admission control in case of QoS signaling) from the
   underlying network nodes.  Because the complexity of the service
   control and admission control is isolated in servers, it allows in
   the short term to implement QoS signaling on top of a simple DiffServ
   network.  A similar architecture based on pre-provisioned networks is
   explained in [10].  The advantage is to preserve the IP legacy of
   stateless class-based forwarding (not requiring state with respect to
   individual data flows).  This provides scalability in routers, both
   in control and forwarding plane.  Signaling can be carried out at the
   application layer between NSIS initiators and NSIS Forwarders.  Path-
   decoupled signaling offers the same type of benefits in the long
   term.  The separation between the signaling layer and the IP
   forwarding layer allows an ISP to isolate functionalities, and make
   them evolve independently.  There is flexibility in network evolution
   as new routers or nodes can be integrated in the network without
   having to be per-flow or NSIS session aware.  Also, new algorithms
   for admission control can be deployed without having to upgrade the
   routers.

5.2.2 Low upgrade complexity in routers

   To support a path-decoupled signaling standard, upgrading of routers
   is not needed or may be limited to a relay function identifying an



Schelen, et al.           Expires May 5, 2003                   [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Path-coupled / Path-decoupled Signaling  November 2002


   NSIS message and transmitting it to a path-decoupled signaling unit
   responsible for this router.  The latter method can be used for
   interworking with path-coupled signaling.

5.2.3 Flexibility in signaling entity deployment

   In deployment of a new protocol, there may be some applications and
   end-points that are NSIS aware while others are not.  The path-
   decoupled model can work transparently to end-points and application
   by having NSIS initiated from application frameworks or from separate
   network/resource management frameworks.  Also, endpoints or web
   servers can offer applications allowing end-users to self-manage
   their general purpose network access.  VoIP or multimedia network
   applications relies on servers such as soft- switches, gatekeepers,
   SIP proxies and application servers that are not on the data path of
   the multimedia flows.  These servers are candidates to be an NI, as
   they are responsible for the service sessions.  These kinds of NIs
   could use a path-decoupled signaling protocol to interact with an NF.

5.2.4 Support for non-traditional routing

   Network sections applying forwarding planes other than IP may require
   an interworking functionality with NSIS signaling.  While layer 2
   issues are out of scope for NSIS, MPLS is operational in several
   large international IP backbones.  While a path-coupled signaling
   architecture requires an IP/MPLS gateway to implement the new NSIS
   protocol, an interworking function and possibly some modified MPLS
   signaling protocol, a path-decoupled system could take care of all
   that.  End to end service deployment across heterogeneous network
   platforms may benefit from path-decoupled signaling.

5.2.5 Mobility

   Path-decoupled signaling enables seamless hand-overs combined with a
   reduction of signaling in the case of wireless mobility.  A path-
   decoupled signaling unit learning about a mobile terminal now
   connected to a new access router may transfer the signaling context
   of the mobile terminal to the new access router and simultaneously
   remove state in the old access router.  No additional air interface
   signaling is required to re-install state in the new access router.
   The resulting hand-over is fast and saves scarce battery power.

5.2.6 Security

   Path-decoupled signaling units may discover neighboring path-
   decoupled signaling units prior to any end to end service
   reservation.  Hence, it is sound to expect signaling between path-
   decoupled systems to be protected once end to end messages are



Schelen, et al.           Expires May 5, 2003                   [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Path-coupled / Path-decoupled Signaling  November 2002


   processed.  Similar to security mechanisms to be applied by NSIS, the
   discovery mechanism for a path-decoupled protocol may not have to be
   specified by NSIS.

5.3 Disadvantages of path-decoupled signaling

5.3.1 Determining the next signaling hop

   Because signaling entities are not placed along the data path, the
   next destination of a signaling message cannot be determined by
   determining the next hop in the data path.

   However, there are several ways to determine the next signaling node.
   One possibility is to extend legacy configuration mechanisms at
   access networks such as DHCP or stateless auto configuration by the
   required addresses of NFs.  Adjacent domains may have either
   statically configured next hops or may use an extra discovery
   mechanism.  Routing tables can be used to determine which domain is
   the next hop.

5.3.2 Synchronization with routing tables

   In addition to admission control or state installation, a path-
   decoupled NSIS Forwarder must determine where to route the signaling
   messages, depending on where the flow to be signaled is routed.  In
   case of path-coupled signaling, the signaling packet is ignored or
   processed, and then routed as a normal packet.

   A path-decoupled NF must determine where particular traffic leaves
   its domain and enters a neighboring domain.  For this, topology
   awareness is needed.  This draft does not intend to give an
   exhaustive list of architectures enabling a routing synchronization
   between the forwarding plane, and the signaling plane as this is out
   of the scope of the NSIS charter.  However, there are solutions that
   can be implemented by passively participating in intra-domain routing
   (e.g., OSPF, IS-IS) and listening to inter-domain routing (e.g., by
   IBGP to edge routers inside the domain).  The functionality is
   similar to what is found inside a router today but passive in the
   sense that no routes are advertised and no peering is performed with
   routers in other domains.

5.3.3 Installing state in routers

   When considering QoS provisioning in DiffServ networks, path-
   decoupled signaling typically involves configuration of traffic
   conditioners at domain boundaries in order to perform policing and
   marking at the network edges (especially in the very first router).
   Various standards and proprietary interfaces can be supported by an



Schelen, et al.           Expires May 5, 2003                   [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Path-coupled / Path-decoupled Signaling  November 2002


   NSIS Forwarder in order to transport the necessary configuration data
   (e.g., profiles) to the routers.  SNMP or COPS are two IETF standards
   that can be used to configure routers.  It has to be noted that this
   signaled configuration of network elements may have a performance
   issue due to the available mechanisms.

6. A Combined Solution

   Up to this point, the draft presents the advantages and issues of
   path-coupled and path-decoupled signaling, as it has been discussed
   in the mailing list.  The aim of this chapter is to advocate for a
   non-exclusive solution.

6.1 Path-coupled and path-decoupled models inter-working

   A strategy for NSIS could be to focus on a particular model, the
   preferred one being path-coupled, and refuse or postpone the work
   concerning path-decoupled.  As both models have their benefits and
   weaknesses, depending on the environment, the NSIS WG solution should
   be flexible enough to allow them both.  There are situations where
   the signaling models could be combined for the same flow.

   For example, the following situation should be possible:

   o  One ISP may use an application-level path-decoupled solution to
      provide services to its customers, while continuing the signaling
      path-coupled towards a peering domains that adopt traditional IP
      routing.  This situation corresponds to the gatekeeper/SIP proxy/
      content server initiating a reservation.

   o  One ISP may prefer path-coupled signaling from terminals and at
      access router link forwards the request to a policy framework that
      can take decisions based on customer profiles and network status,
      and also based on contracts with neighboring domains using path-
      decoupled signaling.

   o  At the border between a domain following the traditional IP
      routing with another domain which adopts e.g.  traffic engineering
      techniques, the path-coupled signaling can be extracted and then
      continued path-decoupled.

   These situations need a "signaling gateway router" implementing path-
   coupled signaling on some of its interfaces and path-decoupled
   signaling on the others.

   Because it would be useful to have a simple implementation of the
   signaling gateway router, and because the additional required
   specification work is small, a unified solution presenting two



Schelen, et al.           Expires May 5, 2003                  [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Path-coupled / Path-decoupled Signaling  November 2002


   flavors - path-coupled and path-decoupled - of the same signaling is
   a reasonable choice.  The following sections will explain the
   differences between these two flavors.

6.2 Data objects for path-coupled and path-decoupled signaling

6.2.1 Destination address

   The information that are used to identify a flow are generally port
   numbers and IP address/prefix for destination and origination,
   protocol number, DSCP/TOS value and, in IPv6, flow label.  In case of
   path-coupled signaling for a micro-flow, the destination address of
   the flow must be the same as the one of the signaling packet.
   However, this does not preclude a replication of the IP destination
   address in the IP payload of the signaling packet.  This is the case
   in RSVP.  When the flow is an aggregate, there must be in the
   signaling packet's header an IP destination address chosen inside the
   aggregate prefix, and the prefix itself must be inside the signaling
   packet payload.  So, concerning path-coupled model, the signaling
   carries a flow specification that can contain a destination address
   or prefix.

   In the path-decoupled case, the signaling carries a flow
   specification that must always contain a destination address or
   prefix, as the packet header contains the destination address of the
   next NF.

6.2.2 Ingress address

   In the path-decoupled model, it is necessary to specify in the
   request what is the entry point of a flow in the domain controlled by
   an NF.  This can be done by using the IP address of the router
   interface that receives the flow or alternatively the source address
   for a host sending a request to its local ISP (provided it is well-
   defined which ingress interface that the host will use).  The reason
   for this is that with path-decoupled signaling, the requests sent to
   an NF can encompass flows entering the domain through several
   interfaces of one or several routers.  In order to know which router
   and which interface will receive the flow, this information must be
   added in the request.  For requests between adjacent NFs the upstream
   NFs must find out which incoming interface of the downstream domain
   that will be used.

   To summarize, the differences between an path-coupled signaling and
   its associated path-decoupled version are:

   o  the addition, if not already mandatory in path-coupled, of the IP
      destination address/prefix in the flow specification



Schelen, et al.           Expires May 5, 2003                  [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    Path-coupled / Path-decoupled Signaling  November 2002


   o  the addition of an ingress address object in the flow
      specification.

   It is expected that a signaling gateway router receiving an path-
   coupled signaling message, after having processed it, will add the
   destination address (if needed) and the ingress address in the
   message, and forward it.

6.3 Protocol concepts

   Path-coupled signaling has traditionally been implemented as a
   specific protocol on top of IP that is interpreted by routers along
   the path.  It is likely that an NSIS path-coupled flavor will be
   designed along these lines as routers typically are not involved in
   application layer signaling.  This is a quite complex task both in
   terms of specification and deployment in routers.

   A path-decoupled signaling flavor can be implemented at the
   application layer (over TCP, UDP or other transport protocol).  The
   design can therefore focus more on specifying data-objects as no new
   support is needed for transport functionality.  It will also be
   possible to try out and deploy the signaling in networks with current
   diffserv standard, without requiring new standards in the routers.

   Both path-coupled and path-decoupled models should use pair-wise
   handshake between NFs involved in providing e2e service.  Early path-
   coupled protocols (e.g., RSVP) did signal along the path without
   handshake for reliable delivery between adjacent neighbors, but it
   has been identified [9] that such a model has problems meeting
   required state maintenance.

7. Conclusion

   Both path-coupled and path-decoupled models are relevant for
   signaling in IP networks, and answer technical needs.  In order to
   increase the applicability and deployment of a new signaling, this
   document proposes to specify in NSIS one protocol that has one path-
   coupled and one path-decoupled flavor.  The identified differences
   between the two variants are one or two protocol objects defining
   ingress and destination address for requests.  The path-decoupled
   flavor may be implemented at application layer, while the path-
   coupled flavor most likely would be implemented as a protocol on top
   of IP.

8. Security Considerations

   Because this document only discusses aspects of path-coupled and
   path-decoupled signaling there are no direct security implications.



Schelen, et al.           Expires May 5, 2003                  [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    Path-coupled / Path-decoupled Signaling  November 2002


   However, for both signaling modes several security mechanisms should
   be applied, especially integrity protection and authentication of
   signaling messages in order to prevent unauthorized usage of
   resources and to allow proper accounting.

   Thus, several security mechanisms can be applied and combined, e.g.,
   using IPsec mechanisms to secure the transport of signaling messages,
   use of dedicated authentication and integrity protection mechanisms
   in the signaling protocol itself as well as integration of existing
   AAA solutions.

9. Acknowledgements

   The terms path-coupled and path-decoupled were proposed by Robert
   Hancock et al.  in [3].

References

   [1]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]   Brunner, M., "Requirements for Signaling Protocols", draft-
         ietf-nsis-req-04 (work in progress), August 2002.

   [3]   Freytsis, I., "Next Steps in Signaling: Framework", draft-ietf-
         nsis-fw-00 (work in progress), October 2002.

   [4]   Braden, B., Zhang, L., Berson, S., Herzog, S. and S. Jamin,
         "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1 Functional
         Specification", RFC 2205, September 1997.

   [5]   Durham, D., Boyle, J., Cohen, R., Herzog, S., Rajan, R. and A.
         Sastry, "The COPS (Common Open Policy Service) Protocol", RFC
         2748, January 2000.

   [6]   Baker, F., Iturralde, C., Le Faucheur, F. and B. Davie,
         "Aggregation of RSVP for IPv4 and IPv6 Reservations", RFC 3175,
         September 2001.

   [7]   Blake, S., Black, D., Carlson, M., Davies, E., Wang, Z. and W.
         Weiss, "An Architecture for Differentiated Services", RFC 2475,
         December 1998.

   [8]   Bernet, Y., Ford, P., Yavatkar, R., Baker, F., Zhang, L.,
         Speer, M., Braden, R., Davie, B., Wroclawski, J. and E.
         Felstaine, "A Framework for Integrated Services Operation over
         Diffserv Networks", RFC 2998, November 2000.




Schelen, et al.           Expires May 5, 2003                  [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    Path-coupled / Path-decoupled Signaling  November 2002


   [9]   Braden, B. and B. Lindell, "A Two-Level Architecture for
         Internet Signaling", draft-braden-2level-signal-arch-00 (work
         in progress), November 2001.

   [10]  De Clercq, J., Van den Bosch, S. and A. Couturier, "An
         architecture for a gradual deployment of end-to-end QoS on an
         Internet-wide scale", draft-declercq-vsn-arch-00 (work in
         progress), October 2002.

   [11]  Schulzrinne, H., Tschofenig, H., Fu, X., Eisl, J. and R.
         Hancock, "CASP - Cross-Application Signaling Protocol", draft-
         schulzrinne-nsis-casp-00 (work in progress), September 2002.


Authors' Addresses

   Olov Schelen
   Operax AB
   Aurorum 8
   SE 97775 Lulea
   Sweden

   EMail: Olov.Schelen@operax.com
   URI:   http://www.operax.com


   Alban Couturier
   Alcatel
   Ets de Marcoussis R&I/ULC
   Route de Nozay
   91461 Marcoussis CEDEX, France
   FR

   EMail: Alban.Couturier@alcatel.fr


   Roland Bless
   Institute of Telematics, Universitaet Karlsruhe (TH)
   Zirkel 2
   76128 Karlsruhe
   Germany

   Phone: +49 721 608 6413
   EMail: bless@tm.uka.de
   URI:   http://www.tm.uka.de/~bless






Schelen, et al.           Expires May 5, 2003                  [Page 14]

Internet-Draft    Path-coupled / Path-decoupled Signaling  November 2002


   Ruediger Geib
   T-Systems Nova GmbH
   Am Kavalleriesand 3
   64295 Darmstadt
   Germany

   Phone: +49 6151 832 138
   EMail: Ruediger.Geib@t-systems.com
   URI:   http://www.t-nova.de


   Olivier Dugeon
   France Telecom R&D
   2 Avenue Pierre Marzin
   F-22307 Lannion
   France

   Phone: +33 296 05 2880
   EMail: Olivier.Dugeon@francetelecom.com
































Schelen, et al.           Expires May 5, 2003                  [Page 15]

Internet-Draft    Path-coupled / Path-decoupled Signaling  November 2002


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Schelen, et al.           Expires May 5, 2003                  [Page 16]

