



QUIC                                                    A. Ferrieux, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                         I. Hamchaoui, Ed.
Intended status: Experimental                                Orange Labs
Expires: October 11, 2019                                  April 9, 2019


                           The QUIC Loss Bits
                draft-ferrieuxhamchaoui-quic-lossbits-00

Abstract

   This document specifies the addition of loss bits to the QUIC
   transport protocol and describes how to use them to measure and
   locate packet loss.

Note to Readers

   This document specifies an experimental delta to the QUIC transport
   protocol.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 11, 2019.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Ferrieux & Hamchaoui    Expires October 11, 2019                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               QUIC Loss Bits                   April 2019


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Passive Loss measurement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.1.  Proposed Short Header Format Including Loss Bits  . . . .   3
     2.2.  Semantics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
       2.2.1.  Setting the sQuare Bit on Outgoing Packets  . . . . .   3
       2.2.2.  Setting the Retransmit Bit on Outgoing Packets  . . .   3
       2.2.3.  Resetting state on CID change . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Using the loss bits for Passive Loss Measurement  . . . . . .   4
     3.1.  End-to-end loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.2.  Upstream loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.3.  Downstream loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.4.  Bidirectional flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Security and Privacy Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6

1.  Introduction

   Packet loss is a hard and pervasive problem of day-to-day network
   operation, and locating them is crucial to timely resolution of
   crippling end-to-end throughput issues.  To this effect, in a TCP-
   dominated world, network operators have been heavily relying on
   information present in clear in TCP headers: sequence and
   acknowledgement numbers, and SACK when enabled.  By passive on-path
   observation, these allow for quantitative estimation of packet loss.
   Additionally, the lossy segment (upstream or downstream from the
   observation point) is unambiguous; this is crucial as it gives the
   ability to quickly home in on the offending segment, by moving the
   passive observer around.

   In the QUIC context, the equivalent transport headers being
   encrypted, such observation is not possible.  To restore network
   operators' ability to maintain QUIC clients experience, this document
   adds two explicit loss bits to the QUIC short header, named "Q"
   (sQuare signal) and "R" (Retransmit).  Together, these bits allow the
   observer to estimate upstream and downstream loss, enabling the same
   dichotomic search as with TCP.






Ferrieux & Hamchaoui    Expires October 11, 2019                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               QUIC Loss Bits                   April 2019


2.  Passive Loss measurement

   The proposed mechanisms enable loss measurement from observation
   points on the network path throughout the lifetime of a connection.
   End-to end loss as well as segmental loss (upstream or downstream
   from the observation point) are measurable thanks to two dedicated
   bits in short packet headers, named loss bits.  The loss bits
   therefore appear only after version negotiation and connection
   establishment are completed.

2.1.  Proposed Short Header Format Including Loss Bits

   As of the current editor's version of [QUIC-TRANSPORT], two bits are
   "reserved" in the first byte of short headers.  This proposal
   naturally fits in there, allocating these two bits as Q and R.  Of
   course, the very purpose of Q and R being to enable on-path
   observation, the current restrictions about their encryption and zero
   value should be lifted in QUIC versions supporting this proposal.

2.2.  Semantics

   The semantics of these bits are as follows:

   Q: The sQuare bit is toggled every N outgoing packets as explained
   below in Section 2.2.1.

   R: The Retransmit bit is set to 0 or 1 according to the not-yet-
   disclosed-lost-packets counter, as explained below in Section 2.2.2.

2.2.1.  Setting the sQuare Bit on Outgoing Packets

   Each endpoint independently maintains a sQuare value, 0 or 1, during
   a block of N outgoing packets (e.g.  N=64), and sets the sQuare bit
   in the short header to the currently stored value when a packet with
   a short header is sent out.  The sQuare value is initiated to 0 at
   each endpoint, client and server, at connection start.  This
   mechanism thus delineates slots of N packets with the same marking.
   Observation points can estimate the upstream losses by simply
   counting the number of packets during a half period of the square
   signal, as described in Section 3.

2.2.2.  Setting the Retransmit Bit on Outgoing Packets

   Each endpoint, client and server, independently maintains a not-yet-
   disclosed-lost-packets counter and sets the Retransmit bit of short
   header packets to 0 or 1 accordingly.  The not-yet-disclosed-lost-
   packets counter is initialized to 0 at each endpoint, client and
   server, at connection start, and reflects packets considered lost by



Ferrieux & Hamchaoui    Expires October 11, 2019                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               QUIC Loss Bits                   April 2019


   the QUIC machinery, the content of which is pending for
   retransmission.  When a packet is declared lost by the QUIC
   retransmission machinery (see [QUIC-RECOVERY]) the not-yet-disclosed-
   lost-packets counter is incremented by 1.  When a packet with a short
   header is sent out by an end-point, its retransmit bit is set to 0
   when the not-yet-disclosed-lost-packets counter is equal to 0.
   Otherwise, the packet is sent out with a retransmit bit set to 1 and
   the not-yet-disclosed-lost-packets counter is decremented by 1.
   Thus, the retransmit bit performs unary encoding of the amount of
   loss: observation points can estimate the number of packets
   considered lost by the QUIC transmission machinery in a given
   direction by counting packets in this direction with a retransmit bit
   equal to 1.

2.2.3.  Resetting state on CID change

   When sending the first packet of a given connection with a new
   connection ID, each endpoint resets its sQuare value and not-yet-
   disclosed-lost-packets counter to zero.  This eliminates the
   possibility for transient sQuare or Retransmit bit state to be used
   to link flows across connection migration or ID change.

3.  Using the loss bits for Passive Loss Measurement

3.1.  End-to-end loss

   The Retransmit bit mechanism merely reflects the number of packets
   considered lost by the sender QUIC stack with a slight delay.  In
   case of fast retransmit due to repeted acknowlegments of a packet,
   this delay is at least equal to the one way delay in the reverse
   direction.  It is larger otherwise (eg RTO).  The retransmit
   mechanism alone suffices to estimate the end-to-end losses; similar
   to TCP passive loss measurement, its accuracy depends on the loss
   affecting the retransmit-bit-marked packets, which are in themselves
   proof of previous loss.

3.2.  Upstream loss

   During a QUIC connection lifetime, the sQuare bit mechanism
   delineates slots of N packets with the same marking.  When focusing
   on the sQuare bit of consecutive packets in a direction, this
   mechanism sketches a periodic square signal which toggles every N
   packets.  On-path observers can then estimate the upstream losses by
   simply counting the number of packets during a half period (level 0
   or level 1) of the square signal.  Packets with a long header are not
   marked, but yet taken into account by the sender when counting the N
   outgoing packets before its next toggle.  Observers should assign
   long header packets to the pending slot if possible (i.e. up to N



Ferrieux & Hamchaoui    Expires October 11, 2019                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               QUIC Loss Bits                   April 2019


   packets counted in this slot), to the next one otherwise.  Thus,
   slots with less than N packets, whatever their header length,
   generally denote upstream loss.  As with TCP passive detection based
   on missing sequence numbers, this estimation may become inaccurate in
   case of packet reordering which blurs the edges of the square signal
   ; heuristics may be proposed to filter out this noise in the
   observation points.

   The slot size N should be carefully chosen : too short, it becomes
   very sensitive to packet reordering and loss.  Too large, short
   connections may end before completion of the first square slot,
   ruining any loss estimation.  Slots of 64 packets are suggested as a
   reasonable trade-off.

3.3.  Downstream loss

   The Retransmit bit mechanism can be coupled with the sQuare bit
   mechanism to estimate downstream losses.  Indeed, passive observers
   can infer downstream losses by difference between end-to-end and
   upstream losses.

   The sQuare bit mechanism allows for observers to compute loss
   measurement at the end of every half square signal period (level 0 or
   level 1).

   The Retransmit bit mechanism provides for the end-to-end loss after
   reaction of the sender stack.

   On-path observers can estimate upstream and downstream loss at
   various scales, from the square slot level to the connection lifetime
   level.

   Note that observers should perform a loose synchronisation between
   the sQuare and the Retransmit measurements when accurate evolution of
   segmental loss over connection lifetime is sought, so as to compare
   the same portion of the packet stream.

3.4.  Bidirectional flows

   The Q and R bits sent by one endpoint cover loss of packets sent by
   the same endpoint, allowing a midpoint observer to estimate loss in
   that direction; no specific cooperation is needed between the
   endpoints beyond negotiating a QUIC version that supports this
   proposal.  Hence, the server will be enabling troubleshooting of the
   download path, and the client will work for the upload path.  This
   allows to be confident about getting a useful signal in asymmetric
   situations: clients may for example implement Q and R improperly, the




Ferrieux & Hamchaoui    Expires October 11, 2019                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               QUIC Loss Bits                   April 2019


   download path will still be debuggable as long as servers do it
   right.

   It should also be noted that the method does not suffer from the
   natural asymmetry in packet rate of a typical download or upload
   scenario.  Indeed, although there are often fewer acknowledgements
   than payload-bearing packets, the unary encoding by R of payload loss
   is borne by the payload stream itself.  This allows to report loss in
   the important direction in both a timely and accurate fashion without
   sampling or quantization.

4.  Security and Privacy Considerations

   The loss bits are intended to expose loss to observers along the
   path, so the privacy considerations for the loss bits are essentially
   the same as those for passive loss measurement in general.  Loss
   gives no hint on customer geolocalisation; moreover, reset of loss
   accounting state on CID changes prevents linkability.

5.  IANA Considerations

   An IANA registry has been suggested for QUIC versions.  In support of
   the fully negotiated status of the proposed extension, a natural way
   of deploying this feature would be through such a registered version.

6.  Acknowledgments

   The sQuare Bit was originally specified by Kazuho Oku in early
   proposals for loss measurement.

7.  Normative References

   [QUIC-RECOVERY]
              Iyengar, J., Ed. and I. Swett, Ed., "QUIC Loss Detection
              and Congestion Control".

   [QUIC-TRANSPORT]
              Iyengar, J., Ed. and M. Thomson, Ed., "QUIC: A UDP-Based
              Multiplexed and Secure Transport", draft-ietf-quic-
              transport-latest (work in progress).

Authors' Addresses

   Alexandre Ferrieux (editor)
   Orange Labs

   Email: alexandre.ferrieux@orange.com




Ferrieux & Hamchaoui    Expires October 11, 2019                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               QUIC Loss Bits                   April 2019


   Isabelle Hamchaoui (editor)
   Orange Labs

   Email: isabelle.hamchaoui@orange.com















































Ferrieux & Hamchaoui    Expires October 11, 2019                [Page 7]
