INTERNET DRAFT 
                                                    Phillip D. Neumiller 
                                                               Peter Lei 
                                                         Randall Stewart 
                                                            Qiaobing Xie 
                                                          Motorola, Inc. 
 
                                                         Patrice Calhoun 
                                                              Jack Kempf 
                                                  Sun Microsystems, Inc. 
                                                            15 June 2000 
 
                                                            John Loghney 
                                                             Nokia, Inc. 
 
            Open Base Station Transport (OBAST) Requirements 
                     <draft-neumiller-req-00.txt> 
 
                    
 
Status of This Memo 
------------------- 
      This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with   
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents, valid for a maximum of six 
   months, and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
      The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
          http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
      The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
          http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract  
-------- 
   This document outlines the requirements for a set of open IP based 
   protocols enabling seamless mobility across diverse radio access 
   networks.  This document begins by stating some architectural tenets 
   upon which the requirements for the OBAST protocol set are based.  
 
Neumiller, et al,                                          Page 1 of 1 

INTERNET-DRAFT Open Base Station Transport Requirements      June 2000 
   Furthermore, what the authors currently believe to be the eventual 
   desirable wireless Internet architecture is described. This 
   architecture is shown to enable a common protocol set that we refer 
   to as open base station transport (OBAST). 
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
                                Contents                               
    
   Status of This Memo                              1 
   Abstract                                         1 
   1.     Introduction                              2 
   1.1    Terminology                               2 
   2.     Review of Architectural Tenets            3 
   3.     Baseline OBAST Implied Architecture       6 
    
    
1.        Introduction 
====================== 
      This document lists requirements for a protocol set enabling 
   access points and/or base stations, of different radio access network 
   types, to communicate with each such that seamless handovers may 
   occur between these radio nodes.  We refer to this protocol set as: 
   Open Base Station Transport (OBAST).  A mailing list has been set up 
   for OBAST at majordomo@cig.mot.com; simply put "subscribe obast-list 
   <youremail>" in the body of a message sent to this address.  There 
   are fundamental architectural tenets that facilitate "seamless 
   roaming".  We shall review those first by speaking in terms of what 
   OBAST is and isn't. 
    
1.1       Terminology 
--------------------- 
   AP = access point 
   BTS = base transceiver station 
   CDG-IOS = CDMA Development Group-Inter-Operability Standard 
   CDMA = Code Division Multiple Access 
   GSM = Global System for Mobile communications 
   OBAST = Open Base Station Transport 
   Macro-mobility = Inter-IP domain mobility 
   MAP = Mobile Application Part 
   Micro-mobility = intra-IP domain mobility 
   PSTN = Public Switched Telephone Network 
   RAN = Radio Access Network 
   RNC = Radio Network Controller 
Neumiller, et al.,      Expires December 2000             Page 2 of 2 

INTERNET-DRAFT Open Base Station Transport Requirements      June 2000 
   SDU = Selection Distribution Unit 
   SS7 = Signaling System 7 
   TIA = Telecommunications Industry Associates 
   UMTS = Universal Mobile Telephone System 
   WLAN = Wireless Local Area Network 
   WPAN = Wireless Personal Area Network 
    
2.        Review of Architectural Tenets 
======================================== 
Simplicity 
---------- 
   There is a huge amount of commonality between the SS7 ISUP/IS-41 and 
   GSM MAP signaling sets used for inter-system mobility in classical 
   cellular deployments.  There is also a large amount of functional 
   overlap at the TIA reference points above A-bis (the point of base 
   station attachment to the rest of the network), where IuPs, GSM A-
   bis, and CDG-IOS (IS-634) all play a role on UMTS, GSM systems, and 
   CDMA systems respectively.  There are several micro-mobility 
   proposals including Cellular IP, hierarchical Mobile IP, EMA, HAWAII, 
   and IAPP (now an IEEEE standard) for 802.11 access.  The inter-
   network protocols between deployed cellular systems will likely 
   remain in place for a long time.  However, by pushing all radio 
   related behavior down into the BTS or AP, OBAST hopes to simplify the 
   "top of the access point protocol" and eventually provide seamless 
   roaming between wireless personal area networks (WPANs), wireless 
   LANs (WLANs), and next generation cellular networks. 
    
OBAST is Open and Universal 
--------------------------- 
   The current situation in radio access networks is that they are 
   closed and require complicated protocols to inter-network, if 
   internetworking is possible at all.  OBAST seeks to open up radio 
   access networks to provide the same kind of internetworking that has 
   been so successful in the wired world.  The history of the Internet 
   has proven that open protocols have a distinct technological 
   advantage, because they are developed, reviewed, and implemented, by 
   a broad group of network experts.  A distinct economic advantage can 
   be gained from openness, because open protocols tend to encourage 
   competition around the quality of the implementation rather than 
   around comparisons of feature sets that may or may not be of benefit 
   to users.  We believe these properties will hold for the wireless 
   Internet as well. 
    
       Historically, RANs have been tightly coupled to the core cellular 
   network so that cellular equipment could not be easily replaced 
   without extensive modification to the core network as well.  The 
   existing 3G standards are propagating this architectural tendency 
Neumiller, et al.,      Expires December 2000             Page 3 of 3 

INTERNET-DRAFT Open Base Station Transport Requirements      June 2000 
   forward, but in a world where wireless options are multiplying, such 
   closed non-inter-networking solutions become less and less viable.  
    
       The OBAST architecture attempts to push "all" radio control and 
   knowledge to the base stations so that a common and universal inter-
   access point or inter-BTS mobility protocol can be created.  We 
   believe that this protocol is only useful if it gains critical mass 
   on the global Internet.  We feel it can evolve with the global 
   Internet in such a way as to someday abolish the need for core 
   networks and radio specific standards. 
 
OBAST is Forward Looking 
------------------------ 
   The momentum behind existing 3G standards may discourage deployment 
   of any OBAST protocols in existing cellular networks.  However, we 
   believe greenfield 3G markets and WPAN deployments and WLAN 
   investments could potentially benefit immediately from its adoption.  
   It is our ambition to make OBAST a protocol set supporting the most 
   advanced, scalable, and forward looking wireless Internet 
   architecture. 
 
OBAST is a Protocol Set, However, It Implies Architectural Change 
----------------------------------------------------------------- 
   For OBAST to meet its goals, it requires a change in the way wireless 
   networks have been classically designed.  The primary architectural 
   changes are (1) the BTS or AP becomes the one and only building block 
   of the radio access network, (2) All radio control terminates at the  
   BTS or AP and nothing radio specific creeps out above the BTS or AP.  
 
OBAST Promotes Seamless Mobility 
-------------------------------- 
   Having a common protocol for micro-mobility and macro-mobility, AAA, 
   and QoS, independent of access network type is OBAST's primary end 
   goal.  Facilitating the fixed to wireless network transition is also 
   part of the ultimate end goal, but not a primary focus.  OBAST will 
   focus first on a protocol set, borrowed from other standards as much 
   as possible and invent only where white spaces exist. 
 
OBAST Promotes Peer-to-Peer Protocols 
------------------------------------- 
   Peer-to-peer protocols imply that no master or slave is assumed.  
   OBAST will support the concept of elected call anchors that follow 
   the mobiles as they move through "a sea of BTSs or access points".  
   The call anchor has the responsibility of terminating the radio 
   portion of the call.  The call anchor is also responsible for 
   orchestrating handover requests for the mobile.  The call anchor is 
   the point of selection and distribution when macro-diversity is 
   required. 
Neumiller, et al.,      Expires December 2000             Page 4 of 4 

INTERNET-DRAFT Open Base Station Transport Requirements      June 2000 
 
OBAST Promotes IPv6 and MIPv6 Everywhere 
---------------------------------------- 
   OBAST could be made to run over IPv4.  However, being a new protocol 
   we wish to architect it to run over IPv6 primarily and this is what 
   we will focus on.  We will also promote the use of MIPv6 clients 
   everywhere to enable enhanced macro-mobility. 
    
OBAST Will not Re-invent or Invent AAA or QoS Mechanisms 
-------------------------------------------------------- 
   Every attempt to will be made to be agnostic to these protocols where 
   possible.  OBAST may eventually need to endorse or provide minimal 
   AAA and QoS mechanism negotiation to facilitate seamless handovers.  
   Much work is being done in this area, so OBAST will defer 
   incorporating AAA or QoS mechanisms into its protocol set until after 
   the seamless mobility issues have been resolved. 
 
OBAST Recognizes Other Important Standards 
------------------------------------------ 
   The pilc, mobileip, cnrp, slp, zeroconf, aaa, manet, diffserv,  
   intserv, rsvp, pint, sip, rohc, IETF working groups all contain work 
   useful to making OBAST happen.  OBAST does/ will not replace/ dilute/ 
   change efforts under way in 3GPP, 3GPP2, MWIF, or 3G.IP. 
    
OBAST shall be Air Interface Agnostic  
------------------------------------- 
   OBAST will enable seamless roaming between WLANs (eg 802.11), WPANs 
   (eg Bluetooth), and macro-cellular (eg EDGE, 3G-1X, etc).  As such, 
   OBAST must not favor any particular radio type over another.  OBAST 
   recognizes that there are going to be LOTS of competing radio 
   technologies making their debut over the next few years and many 
   portable devices will support multiple RF interfaces. 
 
OBAST Shall Work Diligently on Micro-mobility 
--------------------------------------------- 
   OBAST supports the ideas behind IAPP (but not necessarily the 
   implementation).  OBAST is looking critically at CellularIP, HAWAII, 
   EMA, and the work going on in the mobileip working group that will be 
   speeding up mobileip hand-overs. OBAST will be flexible enough to 
   support multiple negotiable micro-mobility schemes but may have to 
   choose one as a minimum required protocol set to support 
   "seamlessness". 
    
OBAST Shall Attempt To Remain Agnostic to Call Processing 
--------------------------------------------------------- 
   Session initiation methods like SIP must be somewhat transparent to 
   OBAST.   It is not clear how this can be best done and this is 
   considered a challenge. 
Neumiller, et al.,      Expires December 2000             Page 5 of 5 

INTERNET-DRAFT Open Base Station Transport Requirements      June 2000 
 
OBAST Shall Make the Most out of SCTP 
------------------------------------- 
   OBAST will support the use of SCTP (sigtran) for inter-radio node 
   signaling and possibly for transport applications (yet to be 
   determined). 
 
3.        Baseline OBAST Implied Architecture 
--------------------------------------------- 
   Using OBAST implies a new (at least to cellular and WLAN standards) 
   view of the "Wireless Internet architecture".  This architecture has 
   two component types: routers (that make up the global Internet), and  
   base stations / access points.  In this view, the edge routers 
   themselves could possibly have radio cards and be OBAST compliant.  
   We feel that the scalability for routers has been proven on the 
   global Internet.  Radios, as edge devices, must respect this 
   fundamental nature of the Internet architecture.  The figure below 
   shows the relationship between these simple components. 
    
   (Global Internet) 
     |   . . .   | 
     OBAST      OBAST 
     |           | 
     AP          BTS  <- OBAST enabled Radio Access Nodes 
    
   The radio coverage, for the OBAST BTS (shown above), may engulf that 
   of the AP, implying a vertical handover being required in this 
   scenario.  OBAST must facilitate vertical, horizontal, soft and hard 
   handovers at the radio and at the servicing network layer when 
   required or optimal. 
    
    
Neumiller, et al.,      Expires December 2000             Page 6 of 6 

