
     ROAMOPS Working Group                                    Bernard Aboba
     INTERNET-DRAFT                                   Microsoft Corporation
     <draft-ietf-roamops-roamreq-00.txt>                          Glen Zorn
     26 November 1996                                 Microsoft Corporation



                          Dialup Roaming Requirements



     1.  Status of this Memo

     This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working docu-
     ments of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF),  its  areas,  and
     its  working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute work-
     ing documents as Internet-Drafts.

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six  months
     and  may  be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
     time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as  reference  mate-
     rial or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

     To  learn  the  current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
     ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-Drafts  Shadow
     Directories   on   ds.internic.net   (US  East  Coast),  nic.nordu.net
     (Europe), ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast), or munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim).

     The  distribution  of  this memo is unlimited.  It is filed as <draft-
     ietf-roamops-roamreq-00.txt>, and  expires June 1, 1997.  Please  send
     comments to the authors.


     2.  Abstract

     This  document  describes  the  features required for the provision of
     "roaming capability" for dialup Internet users, as  well  as  offering
     some  suggestions  for future protocol standardization work.  "Roaming
     capability" may be loosely defined as the ability to use  any  one  of
     multiple  Internet  service providers (ISPs), while maintaining a for-
     mal, customer-vendor relationship with only one.   Examples  of  cases
     where  roaming  capability  might  be required include ISP "confedera-
     tions" and ISP-provided corporate network access support.


     3.  Introduction

     Considerable interest has arisen recently in a set  of  features  that
     fit  within  the  general  category of "roaming capability" for dialup
     Internet users.  Interested parties have included:

          Regional Internet Service Providers  (ISPs)  operating  within  a
          particular  state  or  province, looking to combine their efforts
          with those of other regional providers to  offer  dialup  service



     Aboba & Zorn                                                  [Page 1]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        26 November 1996


          over a wider area.

          National  ISPs  wishing to combine their operations with those of
          one or more ISPs in another nation to  offer  more  comprehensive
          dialup service in a group of countries or on a continent.

          Businesses  desiring  to  offer  their  employees a comprehensive
          package of dialup services on a global basis.  Those services may
          include  Internet  access  as  well as secure access to corporate
          intranets via a Virtual Private Network (VPN), enabled by tunnel-
          ing protocols such as PPTP, L2F, or L2TP.

     What are the elements of a dialup roaming architecture?  The following
     list is a first cut at defining the elements  for  successful  roaming
     among an arbitrary set of ISPs:

          Phone number presentation
          Phone number exchange
          Phone book compilation
          Phone book update
          Connection management
          Authentication
          NAS Configuration/Authorization
          Address Assignment/Routing
          Security
          Accounting

     These topics are discussed further in following sections.


     3.1.  Terminology

     This document frequently uses the following terms:

     phone book
               This is a database or document containing data pertaining to
               dialup access, including phone numbers  and  any  associated
               attributes.

     phone book server
               This  is  a  server that maintains the latest version of the
               phone book.  Clients communicate with phone book servers  in
               order to keep their phone books up to date.

     Network Access Server
               The  Network  Access Server (NAS) is the device that clients
               dial in order to get access to the network.

     RADIUS server
               This  is   a   server   which   provides   for   authentica-
               tion/authorization  via  the  protocol described in [3], and
               for accounting as described in [4].





     Aboba & Zorn                                                  [Page 2]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        26 November 1996


     RADIUS proxy
               In order to provide for the routing of RADIUS authentication
               and accounting requests, a RADIUS proxy may employed. To the
               NAS, the RADIUS proxy appears to act as a RADIUS server, and
               to  the  RADIUS server, the proxy appears to act as a RADIUS
               client.

     Network Access Identifier
               In order to provide for the routing of RADIUS authentication
               and accounting requests, the userID field used in PPP (known
               as the Network Access Identifier or NAI) and in  the  subse-
               quent  RADIUS  authentication  and  accounting requests, may
               contain structure. This structure provides a means by  which
               the  RADIUS  proxy  will locate the RADIUS server that is to
               receive the request.


     3.2.  Requirements language

     This specification uses the same words as RFC 1123  [4]  for  defining
     the significance of each particular requirement.  These words are:


     MUST      This word or the adjective "required" means that the item is
               an absolute requirement of the specification.


     SHOULD    This word or the adjective "recommended"  means  that  there
               may  exist  valid  reasons  in  particular  circumstances to
               ignore this item, but the full implications should be under-
               stood  and the case carefully weighed before choosing a dif-
               ferent course.


     MAY       This word or the adjective "optional" means that  this  item
               is truly optional. One vendor may choose to include the item
               because a particular marketplace requires it or  because  it
               enhances  the  product, for example; another vendor may omit
               the same item.

               An implementation is not compliant if it  fails  to  satisfy
               one  or  more  of the MUST requirements for the protocols it
               implements. An implementation that satisfies  all  the  MUST
               and all the SHOULD requirements for its protocols is said to
               be "unconditionally compliant"; one that satisfies  all  the
               MUST  requirements  but  not all the SHOULD requirements for
               its protocols is said to be "conditionally compliant."


     4.  Requirements for Dialup Roaming

     Suppose we have a customer, Fred,  who  has  signed  up  for  Internet
     access  with ISP A in his local area, through his company, BIGCO.  ISP
     A has joined  an  association  of  other  ISPs  (which  we  will  call



     Aboba & Zorn                                                  [Page 3]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        26 November 1996


     ISPGROUP)  in order to offer service outside the local area.  Now Fred
     travels to another part of the world, and wishes to dial into a  phone
     number offered by ISP B (also a member of ISPGROUP).  What is involved
     in allowing this to occur?


     Phone number presentation
          Fred must be able to find and select the phone number offered  by
          ISP B.

     Phone number exchange
          When  there is a change in the status of phone numbers (additions
          or deletions) from individual providers,  providers  in  ISPGROUP
          will typically notify each other and propagate the changes.

     Phone book compilation
          When  these  updates  occur,  a  new phone book will be compiled,
          based on the changes submitted by the  individual  ISPs  in  ISP-
          GROUP.

     Phone book update
          Once  a new phone book is compiled, there must be a way to update
          the phone books of customers such as Fred, so  that  the  changes
          are reflected in the user phone books.

     Connection management
          Fred's  machine  must  be able to dial the phone number, success-
          fully connect, and interoperate with the  Network  Access  Server
          (NAS) on the other end of the line.

     Authentication
          Fred must be able to secure access to the network.

     NAS configuration/authorization
          The Network Access Server (NAS) must receive configuration param-
          eters in order to set up Fred's session.

     Security
          If desired by BIGCO, additional security  measures  may  be  sup-
          ported for Fred's session.  These could include supporting use of
          token cards, or setting up Fred's account so that he is automati-
          cally  tunneled  to  the  corporate  PPTP, L2F or L2TP server for
          access to the corporate intranet.

     Address assignment/routing
          Fred must be assigned a routable IP address by the NAS.

     Accounting
          ISP B must keep track of what resources Fred used during the ses-
          sion.   Relevant  information  may include how long Fred used the
          service, what speed he connected at,  whether  he  connected  via
          ISDN or modem, etc.





     Aboba & Zorn                                                  [Page 4]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        26 November 1996


     Note  that  some of these requirements may not require standardization
     or lie outside the scope of the IETF; they are  all  listed  for  com-
     pleteness' sake.



     4.1.  Phone Number Presentation

     Phone number presentation involves the display of available phone num-
     bers to the user, and culminates in the choosing of a  number.   Since
     the  user  interface  and  sequence of events involved in phone number
     presentation is a function of the connection management software  that
     Fred  is using, it is likely that individual vendors will take differ-
     ent approaches to the problem.  These differences  may  include  vari-
     ances  in  the format of the client phone books, varying approaches to
     presentation, etc.  There is no  inherent  problem  with  this.  As  a
     result, phone number presentation need not be standardized.


     4.2.  Phone Number Exchange

     Phone  number  exchange  involves  propagation of phone number changes
     between providers in a roaming association. As described in  [2]  how-
     ever,  no current roaming implementations provide for complete automa-
     tion of the phone number exchange process. As a result,  phone  number
     exchange need not be standardized at this time.


     4.3.  Phone Book Compilation

     Once  an  ISP's phone book server has received its updates it needs to
     compile a new phone book and propagate this  phone  book  to  all  the
     phone  book  servers  operated by that ISP. Given that the compilation
     process does not affect protocol  interoperability,  it  need  not  be
     standardized.


     4.4.  Phone Book Update

     Once  the  phone  book  is compiled, it needs to be propagated to cus-
     tomers. Standardization of the phone book update  process  allows  for
     providers  to  update  the  phone books of users, independent of their
     client and operating system. As a result, roaming implementations pro-
     viding for phone book update MUST implement the standard update proto-
     col.


     4.4.1.  Phone book update protocol requirements

     What must a phone book update protocol do to be successful?


      Portability
          The update protocol must allow for updating of clients on a range



     Aboba & Zorn                                                  [Page 5]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        26 November 1996


          of  platforms  and operating systems. Therefore the update mecha-
          nism must not impose any operating system-specific  requirements.


      Authentication
          The  client  must  be  able  to determine the authenticity of the
          server sending the phone book update. The server should  also  be
          able to authenticate the client.


     Versioning
          The  update  protocol must provide for updating of the phone book
          from an arbitrary previous version to the latest  available  ver-
          sion.


      Integrity Checking
          The  client  must  be  able  to  determine  the  integrity of the
          received update before applying it, as well as the  integrity  of
          the newly produced phone book after updating it.


      Light weight transfers
          Since  the  client machine may in many cases be a low-end PC, the
          update protocol must be lightweight.


      Language support
          The phone book update  mechanism  must  support  the  ability  to
          request  that  the phone book be transmitted in a particular lan-
          guage and character set. For example, if the customer has a  Rus-
          sian  language  software package, then the propagation and update
          protocols must provide a mechanism for the user to request a Rus-
          sian language phone book.


     4.4.2.  Phone book format requirements

     What must a phone book format do to be successful?


      Phone number attributes
          The  phone  book format must support phone number attributes com-
          monly used by Internet service providers.  These  attributes  are
          required  in order to provide users with information on the capa-
          bilities of the available phone numbers.


      Provider attributes
          In addition to providing information relating to  a  given  phone
          number, the phone book must provide information on the individual
          roaming consortium members.  These  attributes  are  required  in
          order  to  provide  users  with  information about the individual
          providers in the roaming consortium.



     Aboba & Zorn                                                  [Page 6]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        26 November 1996


      Service attributes
          In addition to providing information relating to  a  given  phone
          number,  and service provider, the phone book must provide infor-
          mation relevant to configuration of the service. These attributes
          are  necessary to provide the client with information relating to
          the operation of the service.


      Extensibility
          Since it may be necessary to add phone book attributes, the phone
          book  format  must support the addition of phone number, provider
          and service attributes without modification to the update  proto-
          col  or  phone  book  format.  Registration  of  new  phone  book
          attributes will be handled by IANA. To  accommodate  growth,  the
          attribute space must be sufficiently large to allow for growth.


      Compactness
          Since phone book may be frequently updated, the phone book format
          must be compact so as to minimize the bandwidth used in  updating
          it.



     4.4.2.1.  Phone number attributes

     Examples of phone number attributes include:

          Unique identifier for the phone number
          City
          State or Region
          Country
          Area code
          Local phone number
          Minimum speed
          Maximum speed
          Modem protocols supported (V.32bis, V.34, etc.)
          ISDN protocols supported (V.110, V.120, etc.)
          Multicast capability
          Times of operation
          Priority level (for control of presentation order)
          External/internal flag (denoting whether the number has been imported)


     4.4.2.2.  Provider attributes

     Examples of provider attributes include:

          Provider name
          Provider address
          Provider voice phone number
          Provider fax phone number
          Customer support phone number
          Provider icon



     Aboba & Zorn                                                  [Page 7]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        26 November 1996


          Provider domain name
          Primary Domain Name Server
          Secondary Domain Name Server
          Dial-up IP Address
          News server
          Mail server
          Web page
          Maximum length of the user name for the provider
          Maximum length of the password for the provider



     4.4.2.3.  Service attributes

     Examples of service attributes include:

          The name of the service
          A description of the service
          The URL of the service phone book server
          The service phone book filename
          The service phone book version number


     4.5.  Connection Management

     Once  Fred  has  chosen  a number from his phone book, he will need to
     connect to ISP B via ISDN or modem, and bring up a dialup network con-
     nection.   In the case of a PPP session, this will include CHAP or PAP
     authentication.


     4.5.1.  Requirements

     To be successful, a roaming implementation must provide:


      PPP Support
          Given the current popularity and near ubiquity of PPP, a  roaming
          standard  must  provide support for PPP.  While an implementation
          may choose to support other framing protocols such as SLIP,  SLIP
          support  is  expected to prove difficult since SLIP does not sup-
          port negotiation of connection parameters and lacks  support  for
          protocols other than IP. Support for non-IP protocols (e.g., IPX)
          may be necessary for the provision of corporate  intranet  access
          via the Internet.


     4.6.  Authentication

     Authentication  may  be  seen as consisting of two parts: the claim of
     identity (or identification) and the proof of the claim (or  verifica-
     tion).





     Aboba & Zorn                                                  [Page 8]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        26 November 1996


     In  order  for  Fred to obtain network access from ISP B, he must have
     been assigned a user ID which identifies him as a customer of a member
     of  ISPGROUP (in this case, ISP A).  If a user ID suffix is used, Fred
     might identify himself as "fred@ispa.com"; if a  prefix  is  used,  he
     might identify himself as "ISPA/fred".  Note that some NAS vendors may
     need to modify their devices so as to  support  the  longer  user  IDs
     resulting from addition of prefixes or suffixes.

     After  obtaining Fred's user ID and other authentication data, the NAS
     device will then forward a RADIUS request packet to a RADIUS proxy  or
     server.  If  a proxy is being used, it must examine the user ID prefix
     or suffix, check whether it represents  an  authorized  authentication
     realm,   and  then  pass  the  request either to an appropriate RADIUS
     server, or to another proxy for further routing.


     4.6.1.  Identification

     As part of the authentication process, users  identify  themselves  to
     the  Network  Access  Server  (NAS) in a manner that allows the NAS to
     route the authentication request to its home destination.


     4.6.1.1.  Naming requirements

     What must an identification scheme have to do to be successful?


      Authentication routing
          A roaming standard must provide a mechanism for the remote ISP to
          efficiently  route the authentication request to the home authen-
          tication server. As part of this, there must be  a  way  for  the
          remote  ISP  to  determine  the  IP address of the authentication
          server that is to be contacted.


      Robustness
          Authentication routing must be  carried  out  in  a  manner  that
          allows  the  authentication request to reach its the destination,
          and for the response to be returned  to  the  querying  NAS,  all
          within  a  time  period  compatible  with  typical RADIUS timeout
          parameters.


     4.6.2.  Verification of Identity

     CHAP and PAP are the two authentication protocols used within the  PPP
     framework today. Some groups of users are requiring different forms of
     proof of identity (e.g., token or smart cards,  Kerberos  credentials,
     etc.)  for  special  purposes(such  as  acquiring  access to corporate
     intranets).






     Aboba & Zorn                                                  [Page 9]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        26 November 1996


     4.6.3.  Requirements

     A roaming standard must provide:


      Support for PAP and CHAP
          A successful roaming implementation must support  both  CHAP  and
          PAP authentication.


      RADIUS Support
          Given the current popularity and near ubiquity of RADIUS, a roam-
          ing standard must support RADIUS, as  defined  in  [2]  and  [3].
          Other protocols may be supported. However, it is the responsibil-
          ity of participating ISPs  and/or  software  vendors  to  produce
          gateways between those protocols and RADIUS.


      Security
          A roaming standard must provide a mechanism for the remote ISP to
          determine whether the home  authentication  server  has  a  valid
          business  relationship  with  the remote ISP. This implies either
          that the authenticating party is a member of the roaming associa-
          tion, or that the authenticating party has a valid business rela-
          tionship with a member of the roaming association.


      Scalability
          A roaming standard,  once  available,  is  likely  to  be  widely
          deployed  on the Internet. A roaming standard must therefore pro-
          vide sufficient scalability.  At a minimum,  a  roaming  standard
          must scale to accomodate no less
           than  20 ISPs within a roaming association. In addition, a roam-
          ing standard must support the use of at  least  10  "sub-domains"
          per  ISP.  These  subdomains may consist of ISP customers running
          their own authentication servers. Thus, the standard must be able
          to  deal with the possibility of 200 authentication servers oper-
          ating within a roaming association.



     4.7.  NAS Configuration/Authorization

     In order for Fred to be able to log in to ISP B, it is  necessary  for
     ISP  A's  RADIUS server to return the proper configuration information
     to ISP B's NAS.


     4.7.1.  Configuration/Authorization requirements

     In order to be successful, a roaming standard must provide:






     Aboba & Zorn                                                 [Page 10]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        26 November 1996


      Masking of heterogeneity
          ISP A and ISP B's NAS devices may be from different vendors; even
          if they are from the same vendor, ISP A and ISP B may use differ-
          ent NAS configurations.  As a result, the NASs may  each  require
          different parameters in order to properly configure them.  In the
          case of RADIUS, this problem can be solved through the use  of  a
          proxy which adds ISP- and NAS-specific attributes to the response
          returned by ISP A's RADIUS server, with the result being that ISP
          B's RADIUS proxy will provide the attributes necessary to config-
          ure ISP B's NAS device, while ISP A's RADIUS server will  perform
          the  actual user authentication.  In order to support heterogene-
          ity among providers within the roaming association, RADIUS  prox-
          ies must support attribute editing.


     4.8.  Address assignment/routing

     Given  that no existing roaming implementations support static address
     assignment, a roaming standard need only concern itself  with  dynamic
     address assignment.

     However,  static  address  assignment,  if it is to be supported, will
     most likely be accomplished via use of  tunneling  protocols  such  as
     PPTP,  L2F, or L2TP. These protocols hold great promise for the imple-
     mentation of Virtual Private  Networks  as  a  means  for  inexpensive
     access  to  remote  networks. Therefore proxy implementations must not
     preclude mandatory tunneling.


     4.9.  Security

     Although network security is a very broad subject, in  this  paper  we
     will limit our attention to the problems of secure proxying and shared
     secret management.


     4.9.1.  Requirements

     What must a roaming standard do to be successful?


      Secure proxying
          One of the problems which arises from the dependency on a proxied
          system  of  authorization is how to guarantee that the proxy will
          properly forward the security-related parameters returned by  the
          remote  server  and  that the NAS will enforce them. For example,
          the user must not be allowed to authenticate using only  CHAP  or
          PAP  if  the  remote authorization server had returned attributes
          indicating a requirement for token card use.  Similarly,  a  user
          must  not  be allowed access to the Internet if the remote autho-
          rization server had returned attributes indicating a  requirement
          for  a  mandatory  tunnel.   As a result, RADIUS proxies must not
          remove security-related parameters from responses.




     Aboba & Zorn                                                 [Page 11]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        26 November 1996


      Shared secret management
          A roaming standard must provide for efficient management of share
          secrets.  This  is  required since the RADIUS protocol requires a
          shared secret between the NAS and the RADIUS server.  This  along
          with  authentication  routing  and  timeout  constraints  are the
          issues most limiting the  scalability  of  roaming.  In  a  proxy
          implementation, this translates to shared secrets between the NAS
          devices and the ISP proxy, and  another  set  of  shared  secrets
          between  the  ISP  proxies  and  second  level  proxies or RADIUS
          servers. Note that the issue of shared secret management is inti-
          mately  connected  with authentication routing, since the routing
          scheme determines the number of hops that must be  traversed  for
          the authentication request to reach its destination. This in turn
          influences the number of shared secrets that must  be  maintained
          on each proxy or server.



     4.10.  Accounting

     Today  there  is no proposed standard for how NAS accounting should be
     accomplished, and there is wide variation in  the  protocols  used  by
     providers to communicate accounting information within their own orga-
     nizations. As a result, rather than requiring  the use of a particular
     accounting  protocol (RADIUS, TACACS+, SNMP, SYSLOG, etc.),  a roaming
     standard will require that accounting records be generated in a  stan-
     dardized format and transmitted in a standardized way.


     4.10.1.  Accounting requirements

     What must an accounting record format and transfer protocol do?


     Identification of the settlement agent
          Prior  to  setting up the accounting record transfer, the roaming
          implementation must be able to determine who the  records  should
          be sent to. .


     Tagging and bagging
          The transfer protocol must be able to tag and bag the transferred
          records so as to identify the version and type  of  record  being
          transferred.


     Accounting metrics
          The account record format must be able to encode metrics commonly
          used by Internet Service Providers to determine the user's  bill.


     Extensibility
          Since  these metrics change over time, the accounting record for-
          mat must be extensible so as to be able to add future metrics  as



     Aboba & Zorn                                                 [Page 12]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        26 November 1996


          they  come  along.  The  record format must support both standard
          metrics as well as vendor-specific metrics.


     Encryption
          For the sake of security, the record transfer protocol must  pro-
          vide  for  encrypted transfer of records via an encryption mecha-
          nism that can be legally deployed in at least a  minimal  set  of
          countries.


     Authentication
          Also  for the sake of security, the record must provide for sign-
          ing of the accounting records, so as to  assure  their  integrity
          and  authenticity.  In  addition, during the transfer process the
          sender and receiver must mutually authenticate.


     Compactness
          For the sake of efficiency, the record format must be compact.


     Robustness
          The accounting transfer protocol must be  capable  of  recovering
          from a variety of faults, including partially completed transfers
          and undecodable metrics.


     Non-repudiation
          Once an accounting record file has been transferred or processed,
          the sender must be able to secure a receipt from the receiver.


     4.10.1.1.  Example accounting metrics

     Examples of accounting metrics include:

          User Name (String; the user's ID, including prefix or suffix)
          NAS IP address (Integer; the IP address of the user's NAS)
          NAS Port (Integer; identifies the physical port on the NAS)
          Service Type (Integer; identifies the service provided to the user)
          NAS Identifier (Integer; unique identifier for the NAS)
          Delay Time (Integer; time client has been trying to send)
          Input Octets (Integer; in stop record, octets received from port)
          Output Octets (Integer; in stop record, octets sent to port)
          Session ID (Integer; unique ID identifying the session)
          Authentication (Integer; indicates how user was authenticated)
          Session Time (Integer; in stop record, seconds of received service)
          Input Packets (Integer; in stop record, packets received from port)
          Output Packets (Integer; in stop record, packets sent to port)
          Termination Cause (Integer; in stop record, indicates termination cause)
          Multi-Session ID (String; for linking of multiple related sessions)
          Link Count (Integer; number of links up when record was generated)
          NAS Port Type (Integer; indicates async vs. sync ISDN, V.120, etc.)



     Aboba & Zorn                                                 [Page 13]





     INTERNET-DRAFT                                        26 November 1996


     5.  Acknowledgements

     Thanks  to  Dr.  Thomas Pfenning and Don Dumitru of Microsoft for many
     useful discussions of this problem space.


     6.  References

     [1]  B. Aboba, L. Liu, J. Alsop, J. Ding.  "Review of  Roaming  Imple-
     mentations."  draft-ietf-roamops-imprev-00.txt,  Microsoft, Aimnet, i-
     Pass Alliance, Asiainfo, September, 1996.

      [2]  C. Rigney, A.  Rubens,  W.  A.  Simpson,  S.  Willens.   "Remote
     Authentication  Dial  In  User  Service  (RADIUS)." draft-ietf-radius-
     radius-05.txt, Livingston, Merit, Daydreamer, July 1996.

     [3]    C.    Rigney.     "RADIUS    Accounting."    draft-ietf-radius-
     accounting-05.txt, Livingston, July 1996.

     [4]   R.  Braden.   "Requirements for Internet hosts - application and
     support." STD 3, RFC 1123, IETF, October 1989.

     [5] G. Zorn.  "RADIUS Attributes for Tunnel Protocol Support."  draft-
     zorn-radius-tunnel-auth-00.txt,  Microsoft Corporation, October, 1996.

     [6] B. Aboba.  "Implementation of  Mandatory  Tunneling  via  RADIUS."
     draft-aboba-radius-tunnel-imp-01.txt,  Microsoft Corporation, October,
     1996.


     7.  Authors' Addresses

     Bernard Aboba
     Microsoft Corporation
     One Microsoft Way
     Redmond, WA 98052

     Phone: 206-936-6605
     EMail: bernarda@microsoft.com


     Glen Zorn
     Microsoft Corporation
     One Microsoft Way
     Redmond, WA 98052

     Phone: 206-703-1559
     EMail: glennz@microsoft.com









     Aboba & Zorn                                                 [Page 14]


