


DTN Research Group                                            S. Farrell
Internet-Draft                                    Trinity College Dublin
Expires: September 9, 2009                                S.F. Symington
                                                   The MITRE Corporation
                                                                H. Weiss
                                                               P. Lovell
                                                            SPARTA, Inc.
                                                           March 8, 2009


              Delay-Tolerant Networking Security Overview
                    draft-irtf-dtnrg-sec-overview-06

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 9, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.




Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.








































Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


Abstract

   This document provides an overview of the security requirements and
   mechanisms considered for delay tolerant networking security.  It
   discusses the options for protecting such networks and describes
   reasons why specific security mechanisms were (or were not) chosen
   for the relevant protocols.  The entire document is informative,
   given its purpose is mainly to document design decisions.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1.  This document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.2.  Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.  Threats  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.1.  Non DTN node threats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.2.  Resource consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.3.  Denial of service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.4.  Confidentiality and integrity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.5.  Traffic storms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     2.6.  Partial protection is just that. . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.  Security Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     3.1.  End-to-end-ish-ness  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     3.2.  Not-quite-at-the-end-ish-ness  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     3.3.  Confidentiality and integrity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     3.4.  Policy based routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   4.  Security Design considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     4.1.  Only DTN-friendly schemes need apply . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     4.2.  TLS is a good model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     4.3.  Fragmentation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     4.4.  Naming and identities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     4.5.  Placement of checksums . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     4.6.  Hop-by-hop-ish-ness  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   5.  Open Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     5.1.  Key management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     5.2.  Handling replays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     5.3.  Traffic analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
     5.4.  Routing protocol security  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
     5.5.  Multicast security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
     5.6.  Performance Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
   8.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29






Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


1.  Introduction

   This section places this document in its current context as one of a
   series of DTN documents.

1.1.  This document

   This document is a product of the IRTF (http://www.irtf.org/) Delay
   Tolerant Networking Research Group (DTRNG) and is being discussed on
   the dtn-security mailing list.  See the DRNRG site
   (http://www.dtnrg.org/) for details of the various DTN mailing lists.

   The intent is for this document to present a snapshot of the security
   analysis which has been carried out in the DTNRG.  The document is
   not normative in any sense but is intended to be a companion document
   which explains further the reasons for the design choices which are
   documented elsewhere.  The discussion includes updates based upon
   experience gained during implementation of the security protocol.

   The structure of the document is as follows:

      We first present a selection of threats which were considered
      during the analysis carried out so far.

      We then present some security requirements derived from that
      analysis or elsewhere.

      We next present some of the design considerations which were
      applied during the design of the security mechanisms.

      And we finally discuss some of the remaining open issues in DTN
      security.

   Given that this is simply an informative snapshot document, none of
   the above are intended to be exhaustive, nor should other documents
   be criticized because something is mentioned here, but not countered
   there.

   While this document is being prepared in parallel with the various
   protocol and security specifications, we will generally try not to
   refer to the specific fields used in those documents since the
   details may change and maintaining consistency at that level is not a
   goal here.  Where we do refer to such details, of course, the
   specification documents are normative.







Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


1.2.  Background

   The overall delay tolerant networking (DTN) architecture is described
   in [DTNarch].  A DTN is an overlay network on top of lower layer
   networks, which may vary from node to node.  Some of these are
   challenged by limitations such as intermittent loss of connectivity,
   long or variable delay, asymmetric data rates, or high error rates.
   The purpose of a DTN protocol is to support interoperability across
   such potentially stressed lower layer networks.  The DTN overlay
   network specifies a bundle protocol which is layered on top of a
   "convergence layer", which is itself on top of other lower layers.
   The DTN Bundle Protocol [DTNBP] describes the format of the messages
   (called bundles) passed between DTN bundle agents that participate in
   bundle communications to form the DTN store-and-forward overlay
   network.

   The Bundle Security Protocol Specification [DTNBPsec] defines the
   integrity and confidentiality mechanisms for use with the Bundle
   protocol together with associated policy options.

   Two other documents exists which are now somewhat outdated but remain
   worthwhile reading: A tutorial [DTNtutorial] about DTNs and an early
   DTN security model document [DTNSecModel].

   There is also a related lower layer protocol specifically designed
   for very long delay environments, called the Licklider Transmission
   Protocol (LTP), [LTPspec] and which is also being developed by the
   same group.  Even though the LTP protocol shares some security
   features [LTPsec] with the bundle protocol, we will mainly reference
   the bundle protocol here since its environment is much more complex
   and there is also a separate LTP motivation document [LTPmotiv].

   In this document we may refer to "messages" to mean either a bundle
   from the bundle protocol or a segment from the LTP protocol.  The
   context should make the meaning clear in each case.
















Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


2.  Threats

   This section describes some of the threats considered during the
   design process of the DTN security mechanisms.  In this
   discussion,and throughout the document, we try to highlight DTN-
   specific aspects, assuming the reader is generally familiar with
   basic networking security concepts.

2.1.  Non DTN node threats

   The first set of threats considered were those coming from network
   elements which aren't directly part of the DTN.  As an overlay
   network, bundles typically traverse multiple underlying network
   elements on each DTN "hop".  Any vulnerability in the bundle protocol
   can be exploited at any of those network elements.

   DTN security must take into account the usual range of such potential
   exploits (masquerading, bit flips, etc.) but in contrast to most
   network protocols, as an overlay protocol, the bundle protocol is
   possibly an easier target.  In particular, if it is possible to
   insert new bundles at such lower-layer "hops", then DTN nodes have to
   be capable of countering such insertions by where possible, detecting
   and quickly deleting such spurious bundles.

   Conversely, it is equally possible to take advantage of lower layer
   network security services, but this isn't be visible from the DTN
   layer, and requires coordinated administration in order to be really
   effective.

2.2.  Resource consumption

   Due to the resource-scarcity that characterizes DTNs, unauthorized
   access and use of DTN resources is a serious concern.  Specifically,
   the following can consume DTN resources and be considered threats
   against a DTN infrastructure:

   1.  access by unauthorized entities,

   2.  unauthorized applications controlling the DTN infrastructure,

   3.  authorized applications sending bundles at a rate or class of
       service for which they lack permission,

   4.  unauthorised bundle content modification,

   5.  compromised network elements, be they DTN nodes or not.

   In addition to these threats, DTN nodes can act to assist or amplify



Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


   such resource consuming behavior as follows:

   1.  forwarding bundles that were not sent by authorized DTN nodes

   2.  generating reports not originally requested (e.g. if a bundle has
       been modified).

   3.  not detecting unplanned replays or other mis-behaviors

2.3.  Denial of service

   In addition to the basic resource consumption threats mentioned above
   there is also a range of denial of service (DoS) attacks which must
   be considered in the DTN context.  DTNs are in this respect, in more-
   or-less the same position as other MANETs so all the problems with
   secure routing in ad-hoc networks [Zhou] exist for many DTNs too!

   DoS attacks can be mounted at any layer, from physical to
   application.  Generally when developing a new protocol we should
   attempt two things:-

   -  Make it hard to launch an "off-path" DoS attacks by making it hard
      to "guess" valid values for messages, e.g. through using random
      values instead of counters for identifying messages.

   -  Make it easier to withstand "on-path" DoS attacks by providing a
      way to choke-off DoS traffic, e.g. by changing to a mode of
      operation where only fresh, authenticated messages are accepted
      and all others are dropped.

   In a DTN environment, the generally longer latencies involved will
   probably act to make DoS attempts more effective, so protocol
   developers and deployments should explicitly consider DoS at all
   times.

   As with all networks, security mechanisms will themselves create new
   DoS opportunities.  Therefore whatever services and mechanisms are
   defined for DTN security should explicitly consider DoS.  For
   example, mechanisms which involve certificate status checking (via
   some protocol to a key server) based on received messages create new
   DoS opportunities since such lookups consume resources on both the
   receiving node and the key server.

2.4.  Confidentiality and integrity

   In addition to resource consuming threats, DTN applications can also
   be vulnerable to threats against confidentiality and integrity, such
   as:



Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


   1.  falsifying a bundle's source,

   2.  changing the intended destination,

   3.  changing a bundle's control fields,

   4.  changing other block or payload fields,

   5.  replay of bundles

   6.  copying or disclosing bundle data as it passes.

2.5.  Traffic storms

   Since DTN protocols generate traffic as an artifact of other traffic,
   manipulation of bundle content, genuine, forged or modified, can be
   used to create unwanted traffic.  In a DTN operating sufficiently
   "close to the wire", such traffic can have serious affects.

   The Bundle Protocol includes various messages containing
   administrative records (e.g. bundle status reports, custody signals)
   produced in response to original traffic.  The protocol
   specification, however, includes a constraint that the status report
   request flags must be zero on all bundles containing administrative
   records.  Although a bundle that is not a custody signal or status
   report may cause the generation of custody signals and/or status
   reports, bundles that are themselves custody signals or status
   reports are not permitted to cause the generation of custody signals
   or status reports.  This constraint is designed to prevent bundle
   storms and it does in the case when bundles can not be modified.  If
   a DTN node (or other network element) could modify a "forwarding
   report" by resetting its "Application Data Unit is an Administrative
   Record" bundle flag and setting its "forwarding report" request flag,
   then this could cause the forwarding of an additional status reports,
   and so on.  Traffic could continue to be generated in this manner for
   as long as the values of the bundle processing flags and the status
   report request flags can be modified.  While the constraint
   prohibiting bundles containing administrative records from generating
   other bundles containing administrative records helps prevent traffic
   storms, it may be best to entirely remove some of status reporting
   capabilities from the Bundle Protocol.

2.6.  Partial protection is just that.

   Not all DTN nodes need to protect all parts of all bundles.  Fr
   example, some DTN nodes won't be able to protect the integrity of the
   entire bundle including its payload.  Reasons range from lack of
   computing power to application (or lower) layer protection mechanisms



Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


   already applying integrity.  Alternatively, some DTN nodes may choose
   not to protect all parts of all bundles in order to permit reactive
   fragmentation.

   There are also cases when bundle blocks will be modified in transit
   (e.g. the dictionary in the primary block), or a "via" block which
   captures the route a bundle has followed.  As a result, integrity
   checking on anything more than a hop-by-hop basis becomes unwieldy
   other than for the payload.

   So it is possible that some fields of a bundle are strongly protected
   whilst others are effectively unprotected.  Whenever such a situation
   occurs, it will be still possible for network elements to use the
   bundle protocol as a communications channel, perhaps covert or
   perhaps overt.  Where such misuse is a concern, the DTN should either
   use different security options which cover the fields of concern, or
   else administrators must ensure that the bundles only traverse lower
   layers where the probability of such misuse is sufficiently small.

































Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


3.  Security Requirements

   This section describes some of the high-priority DTN security
   requirements.

3.1.  End-to-end-ish-ness

   Traditionally, protocols tend to provide security services which are
   used either (or both) on a hop-by-hop or end-to-end basis.  For DTN
   security though, we require that these services be usable also
   between nodes which are not endpoints but which can be in the middle
   of a route.

   For example, if a sensor network employs lower layer security and has
   some gateway sensor node which is more capable and is periodically
   connected to the Internet, we may use DTN security services to
   protect messages between that gateway node and the other DTN sources
   and destinations on the Internet-side of the gateway.  In the case of
   a confidentiality service, this is clearly useful since bundles which
   leave the sensor network could be encrypted (by the gateway node) for
   the final destination.  In the case of say a software download, new
   code might be integrity protected from the origin to the gateway
   which is able to check some relevant white or black lists or use some
   other software authorisation scheme which cannot practically be used
   from a sensor node.

   In order to define services which can be used in these ways we
   distinguish between the sender of a bundle and the security-sender
   for an application of one of these services.  Similarly, we can
   distinguish between the bundle recipient and the security-recipient
   (or security-destination) for a given application of a security
   service.  Basically, the security-sender is the DTN node that applied
   the security service, and the security-recipient (or security-
   destination) is the DTN node which is the target for the security
   service - say the node expected to decrypt or do integrity checking.

   The extent to which the various security services can be combined for
   the same or different security senders and destinations needs to be
   made clear in the relevant protocol definition.  However, this should
   be kept as simple as possible since unwanted complexity is highly
   likely to make a DTN harder to manage, and thereby less secure.

   Experience with fragmentation issues has shown that there is good
   reason to distinguish (at the protocol field level) between uses of
   these services which are intended to be hop-by-hop (i.e. between this
   and the next DTN node), as opposed to end-to-end, at least for
   integrity checking.  Equally, a protocol might not need to make this
   distinction and might only define e.g. one confidentiality service



Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


   which can be applied multiple times for a single bundle with
   different combinations of security-sender and security-recipient.

   There is another example in which DTN security services differ from
   more "normal" network security services.  (Indeed this mode of
   operation might be useful in non-DTNs too!).  When a message is
   authenticated using a digital signature, in principle any network
   element on the path can do some checking of that signature.  If the
   message contains sufficient information (the supposed signer's public
   key or a resolvable reference thereto) then any node can at least
   check the cryptographic correctness of the signature.

   Although useful, this is typically insufficient to decide how to
   process the message, since in many environments basically anyone
   could insert a public key and a signature, producing a message which
   passes this test.  In most real cases, there are some additional
   checks that the signer is authorised, either explicitly by checking
   that the signer's name or key is authorised for the purpose, or
   implicitly by using a PKI (e.g. via an extended key usage extension).
   It turns out that all practical ways to perform such authorisation
   checks are problematic in some DTN cases due either to the lack of an
   authorisation server (e.g. due to latency to/from from the verifier
   to the relevant authorisation server) or to restricted node
   capabilities, such as the case of a sensor node.

   In such cases, it may be sensible for some "bastion" node along the
   route to do the authorisation check and then to (again explicitly or
   implicitly) attest that the authorisation test has passed.
   Subsequent nodes, may however, for either data integrity or
   accountability reasons wish to also validate the cryptographic
   correctness of the signature.  The end result might be a mechanism
   whereby the message has a signature plus some meta-data which are
   fully processed by the "bastion" node, whereas the signature is only
   partly processed by all subsequent nodes.  (Note: The role of the
   "security-destination" concept in such cases is not yet clear.)

   These issues are not addressed by the current series of DTN
   specfications and it is likely that a new document [DTNAAA] will be
   required to deal with them.

3.2.  Not-quite-at-the-end-ish-ness

   A number of interesting DTN applications plan to use DTN's security
   mechanisms to secure information at rest.  The on-the-wire protocol
   format might not be fully suitable for some of these and additions
   may be needed.





Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


3.3.  Confidentiality and integrity

   Since most protocol designs use common elements to deal with all
   cryptographic based security services and mechanisms, they will all
   be dealt with in this section.

   DTN protocols should provide a means to encrypt protocol elements so
   that messages in transit cannot practically be read.  The bundle
   protocol itself provides no confidentiality for the source or
   destination endpoint addresses, or any other endpoints included in
   the dictionary.  This can be achieved using bundle-in-bundle
   encapsulation (BiB) if necessary.

   Clearly, calling for a confidentiality service implies a need for key
   management.  However, DTN key management remains an open issue, so we
   presently expect DTN protocols to support pre-shared-keys (and/or
   known irrevocable certificates).

   Even many of details of key management processing remain open for
   discussion, it is appropriate to separate the mechanism of key
   management from the internal details of ciphersuites.  This provides
   flexibility for implementations to adjust and change their key
   management systems without impact upon the core security processing.

   Similarly, DTN protocols should provide a means to apply an integrity
   check to a bundle so that the identity of the security-sender can be
   established and changes in sensitive parts of the message can be
   detected.  The bundle authentication block (BAB) and payload security
   block (PSB) have been specified to provide these services on a hop-
   by-hop and end-to-end basis respectively.  Again, this implies a need
   for key management which is not met so far.

   Clearly a protocol should allow a fairly flexible combination of
   applications of the confidentiality and integrity services, though
   hopefully disallowing insecure combinations (e.g. a plaintext
   signature which is out of scope of a confidentiality service allowing
   plaintext guesses to be verified).

   These services should allow sensible combinations of a range of
   standard cryptographic algorithms to be used and should also allow
   changes to be made over time to the set of acceptable algorithms.

3.4.  Policy based routing

   Since the DTN, as a piece of infrastructure, may be quite fragile, we
   require protocols to be cautious regarding their consumption of
   network resources.




Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


   We require that DTN protocols and implementations support mechanisms
   for policy-based routing.  In other words each DTN protocol
   specification should state the security-relevant policy variables
   upon which routing and forwarding decisions can be made.  While this
   is still a little vague, the expectation is that each DTN
   specification should, in its security considerations text, say which
   security issues may exist which require a routing or forwarding
   policy decision to be made.

   In particular, since forwarding even a single bundle will consume
   some network resources, every DTN node must implicitly incorporate
   some element of policy-based routing.  We do not expect that every
   DTN node will be able to handle complex policy decisions.  A DTN node
   can be programmed to forward all bundles received in a deterministic
   manner, (e.g. flooding the bundle to all peers other than then one
   from which it was received).  Even such a simple minded node is
   however, implicitly implementing a policy - in this case a simple
   flooding policy.  So, though we require all nodes to implement some
   policy, that policy can be very simple.

   Regardless of how simple or complex a node's support for policy based
   routing/forwarding might be, DTN implementers should document the
   relevant aspects of the implementation.  In the absence of such
   documentation a node might be deployed in an inappropriate context,
   potentially damaging an entire network.

   Some DTN nodes will however be on boundaries of various sorts,
   whether they be network topology related, administrative, networking
   technology related or simply a case where this node is the first
   which is capable of handling complex policy decisions.  At one stage
   these nodes were termed security policy routers, and were considered
   to be "special" nodes.  Our current view though, is that all nodes
   are in fact policy routers with some implementing policies which are
   more complex than others.

   All nodes implement policy to some extent but not all will be
   security-aware.  Setting a security-destination other than the bundle
   destination imposes a routing requirement which is expressed only in
   security extension blocks.  Some nodes will be unable to process
   these and might route bundles to their destination bypassing the
   security-destination(s).  The result would be that the bundle
   integrity cannot be verified or that the payload is unreadable
   because it had not been decrypted at the security-destination.

   We do not, at this stage, require that there be an interoperable way
   to transfer policy settings between DTN nodes.  Such a system could
   perhaps be developed (though it is an extremely complex task), but
   pragmatically, for now we consider the development of a DTN specific



Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


   policy language and distribution framework out of scope.

   DTNs themselves do not appear to generate many new types of policy
   based controls - the usual ingress, egress and forwarding types of
   control can all be applied in DTNs.  For example, some "bastion" node
   might insist that all inbound bundles be authenticated and might add
   an authentication element to all outbound elements.  So all the usual
   forms of control can, and should be, available for use in DTN nodes.

   The DTN specific policy controls identified thus far, and for which
   we would recommend support include:

   -  time-to-live (TTL) type controls where we consider the amount of
      time for which a bundle has been "in-flight"

   -  controls to do with "strange" routes, such as those that loop

   -  controls handling local or global information about resource
      constraints in the DTN (e.g. knowledge of a peer's storage
      capacity)

   -  controls related to special types of fragmentation (e.g. reactive
      fragmentation) which are defined in a DTN

   No doubt, more will be identified as DTN implementation and
   deployment experience is gained.

   DTN node implementations will also be required to control access to
   whatever DTN interface they provide so that only authorized entities
   can act as the source (or destination) of bundles.  Clearly this
   aspect of access control is an implementation, rather than a protocol
   issue.

   It must be noted that policy based routing, if not deployed
   appropriately, may inadvertently create bundle "sinkholes".  Consider
   the case in which a bundle is fragmented and one fragment of the
   bundle reaches a router whose policy requires it to see the entire
   bundle.  All fragments of that bundle must also pass through that
   same router and, if they do not, then eventually the fragment at our
   paranoid router will expire.  Ultimately the entire bundle never
   arrives at the intended destination.  This is clearly a case to avoid
   - doing so, may be difficult to arrange without good route control.









Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


4.  Security Design considerations

   This section discusses some of the security design considerations
   used during the development of the DTN security mechanisms

4.1.  Only DTN-friendly schemes need apply

   The high round-trip times and frequent and unpredictable
   disconnections that are characteristic of DTNs mean that security
   solutions which depend on ubiquitous online security services cannot
   generally be applied.  Therefore solutions requiring ubiquitous
   access to servers (e.g.  Kerberos, XKMS) are problematic.  This is
   more-or-less analogous to the way that TCP won't work in DTNs.  Such
   solutions might be usable from a range of DTN nodes within some
   security domain, although in that case what happens when a route
   spans more than one such domain remains to be researched.

   The long delays that may be inherent in DTNs mean that data may be
   valid (even in-transit) for days or weeks, so depending on message
   expiration alone to rid the network of unwanted messages will also be
   problematic.  How long is "too long" and how short is "too short",
   and how well are the clocks synchronized?

   The impact of this design consideration most obviously applies to key
   management, but it will also apply to other aspects of security
   including distribution of new policy settings.

4.2.  TLS is a good model

   The Transport Layer Security (TLS) specification [TLS] provides us
   with some useful design ideas, especially in its use of
   "ciphersuites".  In TLS, a ciphersuite is a single number that
   defines how all of the various cryptographic algorithms are to be
   used.  The ciphersuite number is used in TLS negotiation.  One of the
   more common ciphersuites is usually called
   "TLS_RSA_WITH_3DES_EDE_CBC_SHA" indicating that the TLS protocol is
   being used with RSA based key transport and with a variant of triple-
   DES as its bulk encryption algorithm and SHA-1 for various digesting
   tasks.

   DTN can use a ciphersuite value in the same way - to indicate which
   cryptographic algorithms are in use for what purpose.  This is how we
   can support both symmetric and asymmetric mechanisms for our
   cryptographic security services, and also allows us to extend DTN
   security in the future (e.g. use of identity based cryptography
   schemes).

   In DTNs, we won't be doing negotiations of the sort done in TLS that



Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


   require multiple round-trips, but we can still use the ciphersuite
   idea.  In fact, we extend it a little more to use the ciphersuite to
   also indicate which services are being applied (integrity or
   confidentiality) and also the set of input bits for the service.  In
   this way we can distinguish between an integrity service which only
   protects the blocks from one that also protects the payload.

   The DTN concept of ciphersuite also encompasses the idea of having
   different parts of the bundle protected by the relevant security
   service, as described in the next section.

4.3.  Fragmentation

   Fragmentation of a bundle is one of the more difficult DTN problems.
   There are many scenarios and what may work well for some may be
   useless for others.  The two major issues are:

   -  some DTN networks may have extraordinary long propagation delays,
      which may look more like two one-way links

   -  the bundle payload is a single block and not a sequence of packets

   The one-way-link issue is a severe handicap to the sending node, as
   it has little or no feedback on the progress or status of the
   transmission.  Cooperation between the sender and receiver is
   difficult or impossible.

   The payload is a single block but it can be split into smaller pieces
   as long as each becomes its own bundle, sometimes called a "fragment
   bundle".  These are treated individualy after the fragmentation event
   and can be sent separately to the destination, and with varying
   levels of security depending upon the paths taken.

   Fragmentation in DTN can happen in two ways.  "Proactive
   fragmentation" is the deliberate action of a node, which has an
   entire bundle, to break it into smaller pieces.  So-called "reactive
   fragmentation" is where we try to optimize retransmission after a
   connection failure of some kind.  It assumes some level of
   interaction between the sender and receiver, so that the sender can
   restart from the point of failure or thereabouts.  In this way, even
   very large bundles can be sent across intermittent or episodic links,
   piece by piece, and the fragments reassembled later.

   Proactive fragmentation is reasonably interoperable with security
   processing but reactive fragmentation does not work well.  As an
   example, consider the case of a node that has received the first 10
   MB of a 20 MB bundle when the link fails and cannot be recovered by
   the underlying transport layer.  The node has to decide whether to



Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


   forward the 10 MB fragment as a fragment-bundle.  However, it cannot
   be integrity checked since not all bytes are present, which clearly
   is a breach of integrity.

   The receiving node might request the sender to create and send a
   signature for the amount received, which would be faster than a
   complete bundle retransmission.  The first fragment with its
   integrity check could be forwarded, and the original sender could
   create another fragment-bundle containing the remainder of the
   initial bundle data.  This approach presupposes a high level of
   coordination, and also that a suitable link can be reestablished.

   An alternative discussed for handling this is to associate a number
   of checksums with the bundle - say one for every 100k in this case,
   so that the entire bundle would use 20 checksums to provide end-to-
   end integrity.  If the reactively forwarded fragment has the first 10
   checksums its integrity can be checked.  This comes at the expense of
   complexity and additional bytes of overhead (in this case perhaps 400
   or more bytes), so it won't be desirable in most cases.  Since each
   checksum protects a part of the payload, this scheme has been
   referred to as the "toilet paper" scheme - each forwardable fragment
   consisting of a number of sheets of payload-paper with its associated
   checksum.  In order to support this type of fragmentation, we would
   have to define the relevant toilet paper ciphersuites in the security
   protocol specification.  (At the time of writing, hopefully these
   schemes can be deprecated since they are clumsy and overly-complex
   for the benefit achieved.)

   In summary the DTN concept of ciphersuite is borrowed from TLS and
   slightly extended to allow different parts of the bundle to be
   protected by the relevant security service.  However, in general DTNs
   cannot support the use of the TLS handshake protocol as used in the
   terrestrial Internet.

   One additional problem has recently become apparent and is currently
   under investigation.  Various actions change the payload and the
   specific problem is that the payload length changes when encrypted
   using a block-mode cipher.  This creates ambiguity for custody-
   transfer and for fragment-reassembly.

4.4.  Naming and identities

   Most security mechanisms work well with only certain kinds of
   identity.  For example, Kerberos style security tends to go with
   domain-specific login names, PKI tends to work best with X.500 or
   LDAP-style names, and to a lesser extent with RFC822 addresses.  In
   bundles, endpoint identifiers are represented as URIs.  However,
   there is no well-defined URI scheme specifically required to be



Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


   supported.  As a result, there is work to be done to map URIs to the
   types of identity which are easily supported by whatever mechanisms
   being considered.

   In LTP, identities are flat octet strings, so again there is work to
   be done to map from these to e.g. user identities in a specific
   security mechanism.

4.5.  Placement of checksums

   As currently specified, the bundle protocol requires that the last
   block in the bundle be identified as such by setting its "Last block"
   block processing flag.  This bit enables security blocks to be placed
   either before or after the bundle payload block.  The ability to
   place a signature after the bundle payload block, at the end of the
   bundle, is important for integrity-protecting some bundles at nodes
   that have limited buffer space.  For example, if a node wishes to
   sign a 10Mb bundle, but it only has 1Mb of usable buffer, then
   creating a digital signature over the 10Mb and sending that out
   before the end of the payload is simply impossible.

   However, due to the properties of most hash functions, were the
   signature to be placed at the end of the bundle, then such a
   constrained node could in fact send out the signed bundle.  This is
   due to the fact that hash functions have a continuation property
   which allows the to-be-hashed data to be fed through the function in
   blocks with only a small amount of state information required to be
   stored.

   For this reason, DTN security protocols have the option of placing
   either a single block in the message or placing correlated blocks in
   the message, for example one at the start of the message which
   specifies the signature/hashing to be used (the ciphersuite in our
   case), and one (that contains the actual signature or MAC) at the end
   of the entire bundle.  The ability to place such correlated security
   blocks in the message allows even very memory-constrained nodes to be
   able to process the bundle and verify its security result.

4.6.  Hop-by-hop-ish-ness

   In the above we discussed how security services can be applied which
   are not "truly" end-to-end.  In the limit of course, we can use such
   a scheme to apply security just between this DTN node and the next
   hop.  In particular there is clearly benefit in many cases from
   applying integrity checks on such a hop-by-hop basis.

   There are two things worth noting about this particular case:




Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


   -  Even though the protocol data units involved in end-to-end-ish and
      hop-by-hop-ish applications of security services may be almost
      identical, there may be benefit in artificially distinguishing
      between them since one could imagine many nodes which would only
      ever require (and thus properly support) hop-by-hop security.  In
      fact, one could reasonably define ciphersuites which are only
      useful in such a hop-by-hop fashion.

   -  There doesn't seem to be much interest in making such an
      artificial distinction for confidentiality services, perhaps since
      the ability to use lower layer security is presumed to be much
      more common when the DTN nodes are "close" like this.

   In any case, the current version of the bundle security protocol does
   use different blocks for hop-by-hop vs. end-to-end integrity.




































Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


5.  Open Issues

   This section discusses some of the issues which are still very open,
   either due to a lack of consensus in the DTNRG, or due to there being
   areas (like DTN key management) where much basic research remains to
   be done.

   Where an issue has been discussed previously (e.g. source
   confidentiality), we will not include it here again.

5.1.  Key management

   The major open issue in DTN security is the lack of a delay-tolerant
   method for key management.  We are at the stage where we only really
   know how to use existing schemes, which ultimately require an on-line
   status checking service or key distribution service which is not
   practical in a high delay or highly disrupted environment.

   Note that even though some identity based cryptography (IBC) schemes
   superficially appear to solve this problem (once we assume that the
   originator has a name for the destination endpoint), this is in fact
   not the case.  The problem is that current IBC schemes effectively
   act only as a kind of "group certificate" where all of the nodes
   using a given private key generator can use a single "certificate",
   but the problem of validity for that "certificate" (which will
   contain the generator's parameters) is the same problem as verifying
   a CA certificate in a standard PKI.

   So, the only generally applicable schemes we currently have are
   basically equivalent to shared secrets or else irrevocable public key
   (or certificate based) schemes.  Clearly, this is an area where more
   research work could produce interesting results.

5.2.  Handling replays

   In most networking scenarios, we either wish to eliminate or else
   dramatically reduce the probability of messages being replayed.  In
   some DTN contexts this will also be the case - particularly as
   replaying a (e.g. authenticated, authorized) message can be a fairly
   straightforward way to consume scarce network resources.

   However, there are also DTN scenarios where we wish to deliberately
   replay messages, even to the extent of routing messages around a
   loop.  For example, if Bob is willing to act as a data mule for
   Alice, who has limited storage, then Bob might pick up a bundle as he
   passes Alice on his outbound journey from his Internet-connected home
   location.  As he goes on however, Bob also runs into storage
   problems, so he temporarily deposits the bundle with Charlie, who



Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 20]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


   he's passing now, and who he'll also pass on his way back home, in
   say, a week's time.  After a week, Bob indeed passes Charlie again
   and picks up that bundle for the second time, after which he goes on
   to successfully deliver the bundle via the Internet-connected node at
   home.  Now in this scenario, the same bundle is received by Bob
   twice, and so would likely trigger any replay detection algorithm
   that Bob is running, but of course, the behavior as described is
   nominal for the circumstances presented.

   In addition, there are some routing schemes which involve duplicating
   messages.  For example, a node might flood all its peers with a copy
   of a message to increase the probability that it will arrive at the
   destination before it expires.  Clearly such routing schemes are
   likely to result in nodes seeing the same message more than once, but
   it's not clear whether any such node would be correct to delete such
   apparent "duplicates".

   The element of delay in DTNs also complicates handling replays.
   Replay detection schemes generally depend on noting some unique
   aspect of messages (via digesting of some message fields) and then
   keeping a list of (the digests of) recently seen messages.  The
   problem in the DTN context is the "recently seen" part of such replay
   detection algorithms, since maintaining a list for say 30 days would
   be fairly resource intensive, but might be required if latencies are
   of that size.  So the most obvious ways to protect against replays
   are problematic.

   The result is that the extent to which we can, or should, define a
   generic DTN replay detection scheme is hard to determine and at this
   point remains an open DTN security issue.  It may be that this means
   that schemes need to be specified as part of a bundle routing
   algorithm.

   One aspect of replay handling where security can be enforced is
   setting the final destination bundle node to deliver each bundle only
   once to its application.  In this way, even though replays can
   consume network resources, they are less likely cause application
   layer damage.  An example of such damage would be a protocol which
   used a bundle to represent "Move the telescope 10 degrees left" -
   repeated replays of this message could result in damage if the
   telescope is pointed at the Sun. Of course, the application layer in
   this case ought also be detecting replays, e.g. by including a
   command number, but the example does demonstrate the point.

   Additional discussion relevant to at-most-once-delivery and a way to
   handle intentional resending of a bundle can be found in the DTN
   Retransmission Block specification [DTNRB].




Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 21]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


5.3.  Traffic analysis

   We do not currently define any security services for protecting
   against traffic analysis.  A general traffic analysis protection
   scheme is probably not, in any case, a realistic goal for DTNs, given
   their tendency to be resource-scarce and there have been no calls for
   a generic approach to this problem.  However, for some disruption
   tolerant networks, hiding traffic (e.g. the existence of a signal
   from a sensor net) may be a very important security requirement.

   So, the first open issue here is the extent to which there is a real
   need for a generic scheme for protection against traffic analysis.
   If there were, then the second open issue is how to define such a
   scheme to be delay and disruption tolerant and which also doesn't
   consume too many resources.

   Finally, traffic analysis protection may be left as a local matter
   for the underlying network layers, e.g. if a particular radio link
   were of concern, then total obscuration of that link may be required,
   and may in fact be the only way to hide such radio traffic.

5.4.  Routing protocol security

   Clearly whenever DTN routing protocols are defined they will
   introduce new security requirements, or at least change the emphasis
   to be properly placed on meeting the various requirements posited
   above.  For example, one could expect that a robust and scalable
   origin-authentication scheme would become more important.

   At the time of writing there are no well-documented DTN routing
   protocols, so DTN routing protocol security must clearly be in our
   list of open issues.  However, if a putative DTN routing protocol
   were to use either the Bundle protocol or LTP, it could clearly make
   use of their existing security features.

   The security mechanism proposed for metadata blocks has been
   generalized for other non-payload blocks and may provide a solution
   to some of these issues.

5.5.  Multicast security

   In a DTN, bundles are sent to destination endpoints, and any given
   endpoint consists of a set of zero or more bundle nodes.  A bundle
   that is sent to a given destination endpoint must be sent to all of
   the nodes that are in the minimum reception group of that endpoint.
   If an endpoint may contain multiple nodes and its minimum reception
   group is all of the nodes registered in that endpoint, then a bundle
   sent to that endpoint is functionally similar to "multicast"



Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 22]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


   operations in the Internet.  If an endpoint may contain multiple
   nodes and its minimum reception group is any given number of the
   nodes registered in that endpoint, then a bundle sent to that
   endpoint is functionally similar to "anycast" operations in the
   Internet.  Extensions to the bundle protocol for providing custodial
   transfer of bundles sent to multicast endpoints have been defined in
   [DTNMCT].

   Within DTN, there is currently no mechanism defined for restricting
   which nodes may register in a "multicast" or "anycast" endpoint.  The
   security architecture currently does not address the security aspects
   of enabling a node to register with a particular mutlicast or anycast
   EID.  Without a capability to restrict the registration of nodes in
   multicast or anycast endpoints, any node may register in such an
   endpoint and thereby receive traffic sent to that endpoint.  In
   addition, even though an endpoint may be a singleton endpoint,
   meaning that it is not permitted to contain more than one node, it
   may be possible for a second (or more) node to register in a
   singleton endpoint and receive bundles that are sent to that endpoint
   if the bundles are routed in such a way that they are forwarded to
   that node (e.g. using flood routing).

   The mandatory end-to-end(ish) confidentiality and authentication
   ciphersuites that are defined in the Bundle Security Protocol require
   that all destination nodes use the same key material to decrypt and
   authenticate the received bundle.  Modifications to the mandatory
   end-to-end(ish) ciphersuites or additional ciphersuites would need to
   be defined to provide the possibility that a bundle could be
   encrypted or authenticated differently for different nodes in its
   multicast or anycast endpoint.

   In addition, there are some new aspects to multicast endpoint
   membership security, given that most work to date has implicitly
   assumed that the signaling traffic (e.g. registering in the multicast
   endpoint) can occur in more-or-less "real" time.  In a DTN,
   registering in a multicast endpoint may be more akin to signing up to
   a mailing list, so that bundles that originated before the
   registration occurred may be received afterwards.  In principle, such
   a late registering node might get sent the entire mailing list
   archive either by design or in error.  Even if some sort of mechanism
   to authenticate registering nodes were to be defined, there are still
   issues that arise out of the fact that the endpoint registration
   process may itself be lengthy.  For example, if a registering node
   authenticates with some credential that has a notBefore time of
   January 1, 2007 (as an X.509 public key certificate might have), and
   some bundle created before that time is still to be delivered, should
   the notBefore time of the credential be part of the decision as to
   whether to route a given bundle to the registering node?  In this



Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 23]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


   case, probably the answer is "no", but in some contexts that could be
   the wrong answer, allowing new (cheap) identities access to old
   (expensively accrued) materials.

5.6.  Performance Issues

   Provision of security within a DTN imposes both bandwidth utilization
   costs on the DTN links and computational costs on the DTN nodes.

   The provision of DTN security will consume additional bandwidth.  The
   amount consumed depends on the way optional parameters are encoded,
   or not, and on thecryptographic algorithms used.  In addition, if
   more than one security service is used for the same bundle (e.g. a
   MAC to be removed by the next hop and a signature for the final
   destination) more of the possibly limited amount of bandwidth
   available for security purposes will be used.

   The use of DTN security also imposes computational costs on DTN
   nodes.  There may be limits regarding how much CPU can be devoted to
   security and the amount of computation will depend on the algorithms
   used and their parameters.






























Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 24]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


6.  Security Considerations

   Since this entire document is an informative description of how the
   DTNRG are approaching security, there is little to say in this
   section.

   However, implementers of DTN protocols must not take text here to be
   normative, in the case of conflict the relevant protocol
   specification takes precedence.










































Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 25]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


7.  IANA Considerations

   None.
















































Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 26]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


8.  Informative References

   [DTNAAA]   Farrell, S., "DTN Authentication, Authorization and
              Accounting",
              draft-irtf-dtnrg-bundle-aaa.-00.txt, work-in-progress.

   [DTNBP]    Scott, K. and S. Burleigh, "Bundle Protocol
              Specification", RFC 5050, November 2007.

   [DTNBPsec]
              Symington, S., Farrell, S., Weiss, H., and P. Lovell,
              "Bundle Security Protocol Specification",
              draft-irtf-dtnrg-bundle-security-07.txt, work-in-progress,
              March 2009.

   [DTNMCT]   Symington, S., "Delay-Tolerant Network Multicast Custodial
              Transfer", draft-irtf-dtnrg-bundle-multicast-custodial-
              00.txt, work-in-progress, May 2007.

   [DTNRB]    Symington, S., "Delay-Tolerant Network Retransmission
              Block",
              draft-irtf-dtnrg-bundle-retrans-00.txt, work-in-progress,
              April 2007.

   [DTNSecModel]
              Durst, R., "An Infrastructure Security Model for Delay
              Tolerant Networks", http://www.dtnrg.org/ , July 2002.

   [DTNarch]  Cerf, V., Burleigh, S., Durst, R., Fall, K., Hooke, A.,
              Scott, K., Torgerson, L., and H. Weiss, "Delay-Tolerant
              Network Architecture", RFC 4838, April 2007.

   [DTNtutorial]
              Warthman, F., "Delay-Tolerant Networks (DTNs) A Tutorial",
              http://www.dtnrg.org/ , March 2003.

   [LTPmotiv]
              Burleigh, S., Ramadas, M., and S. Farrell, "Licklider
              Transmission Protocol - Motivation",
              draft-irtf-dtnrg-ltp-motivation-05.txt, work-in-progress,
              October 2007.

   [LTPsec]   Farrell, S., Ramadas, M., and S. Burleigh, "Licklider
              Transmission Protocol - Extensions",
              draft-irtf-dtnrg-ltp-extensions-06.txt, work-in-progress,
              October 2007.

   [LTPspec]  Ramadas, M., Burleigh, S., and S. Farrell, "Licklider



Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 27]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


              Transmission Protocol",
              draft-irtf-dtnrg-ltp-09.txt, work-in-progress,
              January 2008.

   [TLS]      Dierks, T. and E. Rescorla, "The TLS Protocol - Version
              1.1", RFC 4346 , April 2006.

   [Zhou]     Zhou, L. and Z. Haas, "Securing Ad-Hoc Networks", IEEE
              network vol 13, no. 6, Nov-Dec 1999, pp 24-30.










































Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 28]

Internet-Draft            DTN Security Overview               March 2009


Authors' Addresses

   Stephen Farrell
   Trinity College Dublin
   Distributed Systems Group
   Department of Computer Science
   Trinity College
   Dublin
   Ireland

   Phone: +353-1-608-1539
   Email: stephen.farrell@cs.tcd.ie


   Susan Flynn Symington
   The MITRE Corporation
   7515 Colshire Drive
   McLean, VA  22102
   US

   Phone: 703 983 7209
   Email: susan@mitre.org
   URI:   http://mitre.org/


   Howard Weiss
   SPARTA, Inc.
   7110 Samuel Morse Drive
   Columbia, MD  21046
   US

   Phone: +1-443-430-8089
   Email: hsw@sparta.com


   Peter Lovell
   SPARTA, Inc.
   7110 Samuel Morse Drive
   Columbia, MD  21046
   US

   Phone: +1-443-430-8052
   Email: peter.lovell@sparta.com








Farrell, et al.         Expires September 9, 2009              [Page 29]

