

      IETF ENUM WG                                                         
      Internet Draft                                       Richard Shockey 
      Document:                                                NeuStar,Inc 
      draft-shockey-enum-privacy-security-00.txt 
      Expires: March 2003                                     October 2002 

       
       
                 Privacy and Security Considerations in ENUM 
       
       
   Status of this Memo 
       
      This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance 
      with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
       
      Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
      Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
      other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
      Drafts. 
       
      Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
      months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
      documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
      Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work 
      in progress." 
       
      The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
           http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
      The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
           http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
       
       
   Copyright Notice 
       
      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved. 
       
   Abstract 
       
      Many individuals and groups have expressed concerns about the 
      privacy and security of personal information to be established in 
      implementations of RFC 2916. This document discusses some of the 
      technical as well as security and privacy considerations national 
      implementations of ENUM should consider. 
       
      This is a work in progress. Input from security and privacy 
      experts is welcome. 
       


    
    
   <Shockey>                Expires - April 2003                 [Page 1] 
                                       
   draft-shockey-enum-privacy-security-00.txt                October 2002 
    
    
      Discussion of this document is welcomed on the IETF ENUM mailing 
      list.  
       
      General Discussion:enum@ietf.org 
      To Subscribe: enum-request@ietf.org 
      In Body: subscribe 
      Archive: ftp://ftp.ietf.org/ietf-mail-archive/enum/ 
       
       
   Conventions used in this document 
       
      The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL 
      NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and 
      "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in 
      RFC-2119 [2]. 
       
   Table of Contents 
       
      1)   Introduction...............................................2 
      2)   THE RATIONALE FOR ENUM.....................................3 
      3)   THREE VIEWS OF ENUM........................................4 
         3.1 NUMBER TRANSLATION DATABASE...............................4 
         3.2 CALLED PARTY CONTROL OF ENUM ENABLED COMMUNICAITONS.......5 
         3.2.1 THE USE OF REAL AND OR ALIAS NAMES IN A SIP ADDRESS-OF-
         RECORD........................................................6 
         3.3 CALLING PARTY CONTROL OF COMMUNICATIONS...................7 
         3.4 OBSERVATIONS ON CALLED PARTY VS CALLING PARTY CONTROL.....8 
      4)   WHAT INFORMATION IS NECESSARY FOR ENUM REGISTRATION?.......8 
      5)   PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION CONSIDERATIONS IN THE NORTH 
      AMERICAN CONTEXT.................................................9 
      6)   PRIVACY and DATA PROTECTIONS CONSIDERATIONS IN THE EUROPEAN 
      COMMUNITY CONTEXT...............................................10 
      7)   SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS IN ENUM...........................10 
         7.1 SECURITY OF THE DNS......................................10 
         7.2 SECURITY OF ENUM PROVISIONING INFRASTRUCTURE.............10 
      8)   References................................................10 
      9)   Acknowledgments...........................................11 
      10)  Author's Addresses........................................11 
       
   1) Introduction 
    
   Readers of this Internet Draft are expected to have a working knowledge of                                                                                                            the technology and 
   principals embodied in [RFC2916bis]. 
    
   Many individuals groups have expressed concerns about the privacy 
   and data security implications of ENUM as it moves forward toward 
   global deployment. In that context there are several different views 
    
    
   Shockey                  Expires û April 2003                 [Page 2] 
                                       
   draft-shockey-enum-privacy-security-00.txt                October 2002 
    
    
   of what ENUM is, what it does, and how a global ENUM system may 
   affect personal privacy and the security of data contained in the 
   global ENUM system. 
    
   It is important to note that ENUM is first and foremost the DNS. 
   Specifically ENUM is a system that translates E.164 phone numbers 
   [ITU-T] into Fully Qualified Domain Names that can be queried to 
   return a specific set of data (URIÆs)in the form of NAPTR records 
   [RFC 3403]. The global and distributed nature of the DNS means 
   delegation and control can occur at any point within the ENUM 
   defined FQDN. Many entities, service providers, enterprises and 
   indeed some consumers could, control their own DNS servers for ENUM 
   registered domain names. 
    
   There are two forms of data required for the ENUM system to work. 
   First is the actual data to be entered into the global ENUM DNS 
   system, the NAPTR records, that can be accessed by any IP end point 
   any where in the world, without restriction and second, the data 
   that will be required to maintain appropriate authentication, valid 
   registration, administrative and technical contact for DNS servers. 
   Issues involving domain name registration are well known to the 
   privacy and security communities and have continually surfaced in 
   context with the Domain Name Registration industry and ICANN 
   approved registry-registrar business practices.  
    
   The agreements between the IAB and the ITU over the management and 
   control of the e164.arpa namespace [RFC 3026] for those portions of 
   the E.164 global numbering plan clearly articulates that the 
   administration, management and control of the zones and 
   administrative portions of the E.164 plan are nation-state issues 
   governed by appropriate national laws and regulations, many of which 
   have yet to be determined. 
    
    
   2) THE RATIONALE FOR ENUM 
    
   Before a discussion of privacy and security issues can be applied to 
   various parts of the global ENUM system it is essential to note why 
   the IETF technical community developed ENUM, what applications it 
   was designed to serve and the implications of those applications for 
   privacy and security issues. 
    

    
    
   Shockey                  Expires û April 2003                 [Page 3] 
                                       
   draft-shockey-enum-privacy-security-00.txt                October 2002 
    
    
   Since Telephone Numbers are the global naming and addressing scheme 
   for Public Switched Telephony, ENUM was designed to map phone 
   numbers with the Internet DNS and its naming and addressing 
   conventions (IP numbers and Domain Names). Principally ENUM enables 
   the use of phone numbers as identifiers of services defined as URIÆs 
   on the Internet as well as facilitate the interconnection of systems 
   that rely on telephone numbers with those that use URIÆs to route 
   transactions.  
    
   It is well known that businesses and consumers are very comfortable 
   with using telephone numbers for PSTN communications. The E.164 
   numbering plan is a well organized and internationally recognized 
   system of naming and addressing that is essential to the proper 
   functioning of the PSTN. Phone Numbers have the additional advantage 
   of being easily understood, are a useful input mechanism on billions 
   of terminal devices (telephones) that do not have QWERTY like 
   keyboards and, significantly, are linguistically neutral, unlike 
   domain names. 
    
   Though it is clear that ENUM can and will be used for service 
   routing of applications other than voice, the principal focus of 
   attention on ENUM application development has, naturally, been voice 
   communications based on SIP [RFC 3261] and ITU developed H.323, and 
   the general concept of convergence in IP and PSTN networks. 
      
    
   3) THREE VIEWS OF ENUM 
    
   Even within the technical community there are different views of 
   what ENUM is and what it is designed to accomplish.  
    
    3.1 NUMBER TRANSLATION DATABASE 
       
   One view sees ENUM in the DNS as essentially a benign number 
   translation database that exposes on the minimal subset of data 
   necessary to establish a connection between two endpoints. This is 
   the model we essentially have in the DNS now.  DNS translates the 
   URI concept such as http://www.foobar.org to an IP number necessary 
   for a client to find a server running HTTP. No other intervention by 
   the DNS is necessary.  
    


    
    
   Shockey                  Expires û April 2003                 [Page 4] 
                                       
   draft-shockey-enum-privacy-security-00.txt                October 2002 
    
    
   This is also the function of the DNS in E-mail where the DNS is used 
   to locate an MX record for a SMTP server within a domain. No policy 
   or personal information is exposed in the DNS beyond a server name. 
    
   This concept is roughly analogous to the concept of a Service 
   Control Point within the architecture of the PSTN that provide 
   routing data to a circuit switch based on the numeric input of a 
   phone number. 
    
   3.2 CALLED PARTY CONTROL OF ENUM ENABLED COMMUNICAITONS 
    
   An emerging view of ENUM is that it enables an advanced form of 
   called party control of communications since it is presumed that the 
   communications servers at the edge of network are under the 
   administrative or operational control of the called party. Called 
   party control of those servers permits policy in some form to be 
   directly applied to inbound communications irrespective of the 
   wishes of the calling party. 
    
   This view is particularly relevant in the case of SIP based 
   communication [PETERSON et.al.]. The classic SIP model is based on 
   the use of proxies between end point client/user agents that can 
   then negotiate information about each other in order to establish a 
   session. The calling party has no need to discover the capabilities 
   of the called parties end point since those are established during 
   the signaling portion of a SIP session using Session Description 
   Protocol. 
    
   The called parties proxy can also be used to enforce policy about 
   sessions including how, when and from whom to establish sessions. 
   The presumption of this model is that only the minimum information 
   about an endpoint is necessary to expose in the global DNS, since 
   the proxies perform all other forms of session negotiation and 
   policy enforcement. 
    
   Consequently it is not necessary to expose in the DNS whether a 
   particular SIP endpoint supports voice, instant messaging, video or 
   fax or whether that endpoint operates on a wire line or wireless 
   connection. 
    
    

    
    
   Shockey                  Expires û April 2003                 [Page 5] 
                                       
   draft-shockey-enum-privacy-security-00.txt                October 2002 
    
    
   3.3.1 THE USE OF REAL AND OR ALIAS NAMES IN A SIP ADDRESS-OF-RECORD.  
    
   Because SIP can negotiate the session creation between end points, 
   it is not necessary expose in the global DNS specific personal 
   identification elements, such as a personal name, to establish a 
   successful end-to-end SIP connection.  
    
   Information, such as a personal name, is exposed only because an end 
   user chooses to do so by configuration of their entries into the 
   DNS. 
    
   For example, a classic example of a ENUM response with a SIP URI 
   using a personal name might be as follows: 
    
   $ORIGIN 4.3.2.1.6.7.9.8.6.4.e164.arpa. 
   IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+sip"      "!^.*$!sip:patrik.faltstrom@foobar.se!"      
    
   One alternative method of achieving the same result with out 
   exposing a real name is to configure the called parties ENUM DNS 
   entries to use other forms of names as aliases. In the following 
   example, the identification of the SIP endpoint is configured using 
   the generic format "sip:e164number@userdomain.foo" 
    
   $ORIGIN 4.3.2.1.6.7.9.8.6.4.e164.arpa. 
   IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+sip"      "!^.*$!sip:4689761234@foobar.se!"  
    
   OR  
    
   $ORIGIN 4.3.2.1.6.7.9.8.6.4.e164.arpa. 
   IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+sip"      "!^.*$!sip:anon5613@foobar.se!"  
    
   Where the user name "anon5616" is randomly selected. 
    
   Notice that the ENUM query only returns information that a SIP proxy 
   for the user "4689761234" or "anon5616" exists within the domain 
   foobar.se. No personal information is exposed in the global DNS 
   other than the domain to which a SIP proxy exists and a form of user 
   name. 
    
   From the perspective of the called parties SIP proxy, if properly 
   configured, there is no functional difference between 
   sip:patrik.faltstrom@foobar.se or 
   sip:4689761234@foobar.se or  
   sip:anon5651@foobar.se.  

    
    
   Shockey                  Expires û April 2003                 [Page 6] 
                                       
   draft-shockey-enum-privacy-security-00.txt                October 2002 
    
    
    
   All three could accurately describe a unique SIP client or user 
   agent and transactions could be routed equally among all three 
   names. 
    
   These examples illustrate an alternate view of what is necessary to 
   establish a connection between two parties using ENUM and SIP. This 
   concept of can easily be applied to many applications which can be 
   ENUM enabled. 
    
   An individual may choose give out a form of personal SIP URI using 
   their personal on their business card, but there is no practical 
   reason this must be entered into the global DNS. 
    
   Current discussion in the IETF ENUM WG have explored the concept of 
   indirect resolution to all forms of communications, not just SIP, 
   through the use of presence servers or a concept called a Service 
   resolution service. Once again the called party who is registering 
   their phone number in the global ENUM system would then have control 
   of how he or she could be contacted by any method. 
    
   The concept of a Service Resolution Service has not been defined in 
   the IETF, however it is within the realm of technical possibility. 
    
   TBD Examples 
    
   3.3 CALLING PARTY CONTROL OF COMMUNICATIONS 
    
   One other view of ENUM wishes to give the calling party the maximum 
   control and options over how they wish to contact someone else. The 
   preference here is for the maximum amount of information exposed in 
   the DNS to permit the calling party the choice of contact 
   methodology to the called party.  
    
   Not only are all potential communications endpoints exposed in the 
   global DNS but verbose hints to the nature and capabilities of those 
   endpoints are described in the NAPTR enumservice field.[BRADNER] 
    
   The ENUM DNS query returns all the available URIÆs listed, however 
   the in these examples the called party has chosen to display other 
   attributes about those services such as voice:home, sip:im , 
   voice:mobile,mailto, etc. 
    
    
   Shockey                  Expires û April 2003                 [Page 7] 
                                       
   draft-shockey-enum-privacy-security-00.txt                October 2002 
    
    
   A client application or service parses the NAPTR records and 
   displays the various options and the calling party then selects the 
   most appropriate option based on their preference and not that of 
   the called party. 
    
     
   $ORIGIN 4.3.2.1.6.7.9.8.6.4.e164.arpa. 
   IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+sip:voice:home"    "!^.*$!sip:patrik.faltstrom@foobar.se!"      
    
   IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+sip:voice:mobile"  " !^.*$!sip:faltstrom@carrier.se!" 
              
   IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+mailto"             "!^.*$!mailto:faltstrom@dorame.se!"      
    
   IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+sip:im"           "!^.*$!sip:patrik@hugesoftwareco.se!"      
    
   IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+sip:fax"           "!^.*$!sip:patrik@fasolaredo.se!"  
         
             
    
   3.4 OBSERVATIONS ON CALLED PARTY VS CALLING PARTY CONTROL 
    
   It would be unreasonable and inappropriate to conclude that either 
   view of ENUM enabled communications is right or wrong. There are 
   clearly circumstances where consumers or businesses, for various 
   reasons, might prefer each option. 
    
   A variety of businesses and enterprises my wish to expose and 
   individually describe the maximum number of contact points in the 
   global DNS order to facilitate communications by calling parties by 
   the most convenient means available.  
    
   Consumers may prefer information about them to be masked or aliases 
   in the DNS, in order to benefit from advanced IP communications, 
   such as SIP, while preserving personal preferences and privacy.  
    
   What is important is ENUM and the global ENUM system is flexible 
   enough to permit either concept. The choice is directly a function 
   of called parties registering their E.164 resources in the global 
   ENUM system and configuring their NAPTR resources appropriately to 
   their wishes.   
    
   4) WHAT OTHER INFORMATION IS NECESSARY FOR ENUM REGISTRATION? 
    


    
    
   Shockey                  Expires û April 2003                 [Page 8] 
                                       
   draft-shockey-enum-privacy-security-00.txt                October 2002 
    
    
   Various national ENUM groups have emerged with the task of 
   developing policies and procedures for administrating the ENUM 
   system within their various jurisdictions.  Many of these forums 
   have described a multi-tier model for ENUM registration and 
   provisioning that will require some forms of personal data to be 
   collected and stored as well as technical contact data on who is the 
   responsible party for the management of the authoritive name servers 
   that hold and manage ENUM records. 
    
   Many concepts and principals have been borrowed from domain name 
   registration where there are three distinct parties to the 
   transaction, Registrant, Registrar and Registry. 
    
   Various jurisdictions have different laws and regulations regarding 
   data acquisition and the protection of data acquired from consumers 
   (registrants). (See 5 and 6) 
    
   Unlike the ICANN administered domain name industry, the global ENUM 
   system has no requirement for a central WHOIS registry of 
   registrants. Information on whom or what entity is in administrative 
   control of a phone number is widely available as a part of normal 
   telephone service subscription. 
    
   What is different about the ENUM system is that it depends on the 
   security and stability of DNS servers to function properly. It is 
   necessary and prudent that this technical contact data for these 
   servers be widely available to network administrators so that they 
   can be contacted in the event there is a technical problem with 
   aspects of the DNS under their management and control. Consequently 
   it is suggested that national ENUM implementations SHOULD implement 
   a form of WHOIS for the technical contact data appropriate to the 
   registration of a E.164 number.  
    
    
    
       
   5) PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION CONSIDERATIONS IN THE NORTH AMERICAN 
      CONTEXT 
    
      TBD 



    
    
   Shockey                  Expires û April 2003                 [Page 9] 
                                       
   draft-shockey-enum-privacy-security-00.txt                October 2002 
    
    
    
    
   6) PRIVACY and DATA PROTECTIONS CONSIDERATIONS IN THE EUROPEAN 
      COMMUNITY CONTEXT 
       
      TBD 
       
    
   7) SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS IN ENUM 
       
   7.1 SECURITY OF THE DNS 
       
      The security issues surrounding the DNS are well understood. This 
      has enormous implications for emerging national ENUM 
      administrations. In particular a DNS request can be subject to 
      man-in-the-middle attacks where the response from the DNS may be 
      altered in transit. This has serious implications for the 
      accuracy and authentication of responses from the DNS to ENUM 
      formatted queries by applications. 
       
      The IETF has developed DNSSEC [ARENDS] to authenticate that the 
      responses from the DNS are indeed from the zone from which they 
      have been requested, however DNSSEC is still in early testing and 
      deployment and has not been deployed in a large scale environment 
      such as generic or country code Top Level Domain.[RFC 3130] 
       
      Consequently it is premature for emerging national ENUM 
      administrations to consider mandating DNSSEC for those Country 
      Code zones and administrative number ranges under their control 
      until such time as there is sufficient operational experience 
      with DNSSEC.  
       
   7.2 SECURITY OF ENUM PROVISIONING INFRASTRUCTURE. 
       
      TBD 
       
        
       
   8) References 
       
                        
    
    
      1. [RFC2916bis] Faltstrom, P.&  Mealling,M. ôThe E.164 to URI 
         DDDS Applicationsö,draft-ietf-enum-rfc2916bis-01.txt, (work in 
         progress), May 2002 
       
    
    
   Shockey                  Expires û April 2003                [Page 10] 
                                       
   draft-shockey-enum-privacy-security-00.txt                October 2002 
    
    
                                                                                                                                                 
      2. Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
         Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
       
       
      3. [ITU-T], "The International Public Telecommunication Number 
         Plan", Recommendation E.164, May 1997. 
    
      4. [RFC3026] Blaine, R. öLiaison to IETF/ISOC on ENUMö RFC 
         3026,January 2001 
       
      5. [RFC 3403] Mealling, M., "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System 
         (DDDS) Part Four: The URI Resolution Application", RFC 3403 
         October 2002. 
       
      6. [PETERSON]  Peterson, J. etal, ôUsing ENUM for SIP 
         Applicationsö, draft-ietf-sipping-e164.02.txt, (work in 
         progress), October 2002 
       
      7. [BRANDER] Brandner, R. et.al."Categorical enumservices", 
         draft-brandner-enum-categorical-enumservices-00.txt, (work in 
         progress, June 2002 
    
      8. [DNSEXT] Arends, R.,ôDNS Security Introduction and 
         Requirementsö, draft-ietf-dnsext-dnssec-intro-03.txt, (work in 
         progress) October 2002 
       
      9. [RFC 3130] Lewis, E. ôNotes from the State-Of-The-Technology: 
         DNSSECö RFC 3130, June 2001 
       
       
   9) Acknowledgments 
       
      The original suggestion for this document came from Allison 
      Mankin and Scott Bradner. 
       
       
   10)  Author's Addresses 
       
      Richard Shockey 
      NeuStar, Inc 
      46000 Center Oak Plaza 
      Sterling, VA  20166 
      Phone: +1 571 434 5651 
      Email: richard.shockey@neustar.biz 
       
       
    
    
   Shockey                  Expires û April 2003                [Page 11] 
                                       
   draft-shockey-enum-privacy-security-00.txt                October 2002 
    
    
   Full Copyright Statement 
    
      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved. 
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be   
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
   Acknowledgement 
    
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the   
   Internet Society. 
    
    
        








    
    
   Shockey                  Expires û April 2003                [Page 12] 
