Network Working Group                                Jeffrey I. Schiller
Internet Draft                                                       MIT

Expiration Date: January 2000                                August 1999

                 Cryptographic Algorithms for the IETF

                    draft-ietf-saag-aes-ciph-00.txt

1. Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

2. Abstract

   Today the IETF recommends, and in some places requires the
   implementation of the U.S. Data Encryption Standard (DES). This
   choice was made a number of years ago with the assumption that DES
   represented an unbreakable cipher.  Recent work has shown this
   assumption to no longer be the case. Therefore this document
   discusses what alternatives and directions are available to the IETF.

Schiller                                                [Page 1]

Internet Draft       draft-ietf-saag-aes-ciph-00.txt         August 1999

3. Introduction

   The design of encryption algorithms requires significant skill and
   training. It is beyond the scope and competence of the IETF to design
   such algorithms. Instead the IETF should and does make use of
   generally accepted algorithms in the industry. For many years the
   algorithm of choice for security was the U.S. Data Encryption
   Standard (DES). DES makes use of a 56 bit key and works on blocks of
   data which are 64 bits in length (8 bytes). The DES is a U.S.
   National Standard.

   Recent work in the cryptographic community, particularly the
   construction of "Deep Crack" by the Electronic Frontier Foundation
   has made it clear that a 56 bit cipher is no longer acceptable for
   strong security. The Deep Crack engine can recover a DES key in as
   little as 24 hours.

   In general a strong cipher, as used by the IETF, is one in which
   recovery of keys or enciphered data (without the key) is
   computationally infeasible with both existing technology, and
   technology that is projected to exist within approximately ten years
   of the selection of a suitable algorithm.

   Because DES no longer meets this requirement, we need to select an
   alternative set of ciphers.

4. The Advanced Encryption Standard

   The U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has
   undertaken the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) Project. This
   project called for cryptographers world-wide to submit ciphers to be
   considered as a replacement national (U.S.) standard for the DES. The
   AES project set out several criteria for consideration for the
   standard. Of particular interest to the IETF is that this new
   standard will operate on 128 bit blocks of data instead of the 64 bit
   blocks of data operated on by the DES and similar ciphers.

   As of this writing NIST has selected 5 candidate from an original set
   of 15 submissions. However it may not be until sometime in 2000 or
   2001 before a final algorithm, or set of algorithms is chosen.

   Submitters to the AES process had to agree that they would make their
   proposed cipher available free of charge if their proposal was
   selected as the final standard. However they are not required to do
   so if they are not selected nor are they required to do so prior to
   the final selection.

Schiller                                                [Page 2]

Internet Draft       draft-ietf-saag-aes-ciph-00.txt         August 1999

   However, several submitters have already stated their intention of
   making their cipher available for public use prior to the final NIST
   selection.

5. IETF Requirements

   The Security Area Advisory Group (SAAG) of the IETF has considered
   the requirements for IETF selected ciphers. They are:

   1. Strength: The IETF should standardize the use of "strong" ciphers
   which cannot be compromised either using today's best technology nor
   tomorrow's best technology (10 years, for example) based on
   reasonable projections of the evolution of computing technology.

   2. Key Length of at least 128 bits: This criteria is related to the
   strength of the cipher. However even strong ciphers may support
   several different key lengths. For the use of the IETF in a
   "mandatory to implement" [1] cipher keys of at least 128 bits must be
   supported.

   3. Is freely available: There should be no requirement for licensing
   or other intellectual property constraints.

   4. Performance: Many IETF protocols have to operate at high speed.
   Cryptographic processing may need to be quick.

6. Meeting the Requirements

   The obvious candidate from a security perspective is to use "Triple
   DES" (3DES). 3DES is the literal application of the DES cipher three
   time instead of simply once. Today the DES cipher has proven to be
   strong. Since its introduction in the 1970's it has been actively
   attacked without significant success. The primary problem with DES
   today is that its key length of 56 bits makes it vulnerable to the
   brute force search of all possible keys. This is what the Deep Crack
   engine performs.

   However, invoking the DES algorithm three times increases the
   effective key length from 56 bits to 168 bits. This eliminates the
   brute force attack.

   The advantage to this approach is that 3DES is fundamentally a
-----------
  [1] In order to foster interoperation the IETF requires
that at least one cipher be required to be implemented in a
standards conforming implementation of a protocol.

Schiller                                                [Page 3]

Internet Draft       draft-ietf-saag-aes-ciph-00.txt         August 1999

   version of DES and DES has been subject to over two decades of
   scrutiny by scores of cryptanalysts worldwide. No practical
   cryptanalytic attack has ever been published, leaving brute force as
   the only practical attack mechanism.

   In March of 1999 at the Minneapolis IETF meeting, the consensus of
   the SAAG was that we should use 3DES as the mandatory to implement
   cipher. Working groups in the Security Area of the IETF are advised
   to update working documents to specify 3DES as the mandatory cipher.

7. Should there be an additional Cipher?

   3DES has one significant problem, its performance is 3 times slower
   then DES and DES was never designed to be fast in software. The
   result is that our performance requirement is not being met in many
   compute-constrained environments.

   At the SAAG meeting in July of 1999 at the Oslo IETF meeting we
   discussed the notion of specifying an additional mandatory cipher.
   3DES would remain as the "safe but slow choice" and the additional
   cipher would primarily be used in areas where performance is an
   issue.

   However, selecting an additional cipher is a difficult problem at
   this time. If the AES project had already concluded, our choice would
   be easy, we would choose the AES selected cipher.  However the AES
   project has not yet completed, so we need to choose from the
   candidates.

   Today there are 5 candidates; the first round AES finalists. We could
   easily choose one of these five.

   However there was no consensus to do so at the meeting. For the time
   being, the IETF should not specify an additional mandatory cipher.

Schiller                                                [Page 4]

Internet Draft       draft-ietf-saag-aes-ciph-00.txt         August 1999

8. The Consensus

   We did have consensus that we would likely choose an additional
   cipher at some future time, perhaps after the AES cipher is selected.
   There was pretty clear consensus that we should choose an AES cipher.

9. Choosing an AES Cipher

   The AES program specifies that the successful cipher will operate on
   128 bit blocks instead of the 64 bit blocks that DES (and 3DES) makes
   use of today. Supporting this will likely require implementers to
   change their code. Therefore we conclude that given the likelihood of
   the IETF specifying an AES cipher as mandatory, that implementers
   would be wise to consider the necessary changes to their software to
   support 128 bit ciphers in the future.

10. Issues Relating to Key Length

   The AES program specifies a cipher that will operate on keys of
   length 128 bits, 192 bits and 256 bits. Although the IETF will likely
   only require the support of keys of 128 bits (which should be
   sufficient for the foreseeable future) it is likely that implementers
   will wish to make use of the longer key lengths possible with the
   AES.

   We had a brief discussion at the SAAG meeting about the implications
   that arise from this. Specifically if we start using keys longer then
   128 bits, we have to consider the impact that we have on the
   asymmetric key management ciphers and protocols that we are
   standardizing today. It is likely that these will need to be modified
   to provide additional cryptographic strength to match the additional
   cryptographic strength of an AES cipher using a key length of greater
   then 128 bits. [2]

-----------
  [2] Frankly we can easily use longer keys while NOT chang-
ing the key exchange algorithms and key lengths. However we
would not be offering the true security implied by the
longer symmetric algorithm key length as the asymmetric por-
tion of the protocol would become the weak link.

Schiller                                                [Page 5]

Internet Draft       draft-ietf-saag-aes-ciph-00.txt         August 1999

11. Conclusions

   We have IETF consensus that we should phase out the use of ciphers
   whose key lengths are less then 128 bits. This implies that we should
   deprecate the use of DES when possible. For most protocols this means
   that we will mandate the use of 3DES for the foreseeable future. We
   are discussing the addition of a second mandatory to implement
   cipher, but do not yet have consensus on this.

   Although we are deprecating the use of DES (and similar short key
   ciphers) we are not requiring that they must not be supported. DES
   and other algorithms can continue to be implemented in optional
   mechanisms and as optional additional ciphers.

12. Acknowledgments

   The author would like to thank Marcus Leech for detailed reading and
   editing. This document reflects a discussion held at the Security
   Area Advisory Group meeting at the 45th IETF meeting held in Oslo
   during July of 1999. I would therefore like to acknowledge the
   members of the SAAG who contributed to this discussion.

13. Author's Information

Jeffrey I. Schiller
MIT Room E40-311
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139-4307 USA
Phone: +1 (617) 253-0161
E-mail: jis@mit.edu

   Comments on this draft should be sent to: saag@lists.tislabs.com, the
   SAAG mailing list.

Schiller                                                [Page 6]
