Network Working Group                                       M. Wasserman
Internet-Draft                                                ThingMagic
Expires: April 17, 2005                                        L. Daigle
                                                                VeriSign
                                                        October 17, 2004



      Structure of the IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA)
                     draft-wasserman-iasa-bcp-00.txt


Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.


   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."


   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 17, 2005.


Copyright Notice


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).


Abstract


   This document describes the structure of the IETF Administrative
   Support Activity (IASA) as an IETF-controlled activity housed within
   the Internet Society (ISOC) legal umbrella.  It defines the roles and
   responsibilities of the IETF Administrative Oversight Committee
   (IAOC), the IETF Administrative Director (IAD) and the ISOC Board of
   Trustees in the fiscal and administrative support of the IETF




Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 17, 2005                 [Page 1]
Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004



   standards process.  It also defines how the IAOC will be comprised
   and selected.


Table of Contents


   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Structure of the IASA  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1   IAD Responsibilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.2   IAOC Responsibilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.3   Relationship of the IAOC to Existing IETF Leadership . . .  6
   3.  IAOC Membership, Selection and Accountability  . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  IASA Funding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  IASA Budget Process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  ISOC Responsibilities for IASA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   10.   Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   11.   References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   11.1  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   11.2  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 14





























Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 17, 2005                 [Page 2]
Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004



1.  Introduction


   This document describes the structure of the IETF Administrative
   Support Activity (IASA) as an IETF-controlled activity housed within
   the Internet Society (ISOC) legal umbrella.  It defines the roles and
   responsibilities of the IETF Administrative Oversight Committee
   (IAOC), the IETF Administrative Director (IAD) and the ISOC Board of
   Trustees in the fiscal and administrative support of the IETF
   standards process.  It also defines how the IAOC is comprised and
   selected.


   The IETF undertakes its technical activities as an ongoing, open,
   consensus-based process.  The Internet Society has long been a part
   of the IETF's standards process, and this document does not affect
   the ISOC-IETF working relationship concerning standards development
   or communication of technical advice.  The purpose of this memo is to
   define an administrative support activity that is responsive to the
   administrative needs of the IETF technical community, as well as
   consistent with ISOC's operational, financial and fiduciary
   requirements.


   The IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA) provides
   administrative support for the technical work of the IETF.  This
   includes, as appropriate, undertaking or contracting for the work
   described in (currently, [RFC3716] but the BCP will eventually
   include the detail as an appendix), covering IETF document and data
   management, IETF meetings, any operational agreements or contracts
   with the RFC Editor and IANA.  The IASA provides the administrative
   structure required to support the IETF standards process and to
   support technical activities of the IETF, including the IESG, the
   IAB, IETF working groups and the IRTF.  This includes the financial
   activities associated with IETF administrative support (collecting
   IETF meeting fees, payment of invoices, appropriate financial
   management, etc).  The IASA is responsible for ensuring that the
   IETF's administrative activities are done and done well; it is not
   the expectation that the IASA will undertake the bulk of this work
   directly, but rather that IASA will contract this work from others,
   and manage the contractual relationships in line with key operating
   principles such as efficiency, transparency and cost effectiveness.


   The IASA is distinct from other IETF-related technical functions,
   such as the RFC editor, the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority
   (IANA), and the IETF standards process itself.  The IASA has no
   influence on the technical decisions of the IETF or on the technical
   contents of IETF work.







Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 17, 2005                 [Page 3]
Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004



2.  Structure of the IASA


   The IASA will be structured to allow accountability and transparency
   of the IETF administrative and fiscal activities to the IETF
   community.  The IASA will be directed and overseen by the IETF
   Administrative Oversight Committee (IAOC).  The IAOC will consist of
   volunteers, all chosen directly or indirectly by the IETF community,
   as well as appropriate ex officio appointments from ISOC and IETF
   leadership.  The IAOC will be accountable to the IETF community for
   the effectiveness, efficiency and transparency of the IASA.


   The IASA will initially consist of a single full-time ISOC employee,
   the IETF Administrative Director (IAD).  The IAD will require a
   variety of financial, legal and administrative support, and it is
   expected that this support will be provided by ISOC support staff or
   consultants following an expense and/or allocation model determined
   by ISOC in consultation with the IAOC.


   Although the IAD will be a full-time ISOC employee, he will work
   under the direction of the IAOC.  The IAD will be selected and hired
   by a committee of the IAOC.  The members of this committee will be
   appointed by the IAOC, and will consist minimally of the ISOC
   President and the IETF Chair.  This same committee will be
   responsible for periodically reviewing the performance of the IAD and
   determining any changes to his employment and compensation.  In
   certain highly exceptional cases, such as cases where the IAD
   violates ISOC's documented employment policies, the ISOC President
   may make a unilateral decision regarding the IAD's employment status.
   Any such decision will be reviewed by the IAD selection and review
   committee as soon as practical.


   Unless explicitly delegated with the consent of the IAOC, the IAD
   will also fill the role of the IETF Executive Director, as described
   in various IETF process BCPs.


   All other administrative functions will be outsourced via
   well-defined contracts or equivalent instruments.  The IAD will be
   responsible for negotiating and maintaining those contracts, as well
   as providing any coordination that is necessary to make sure the IETF
   administrative support functions are properly covered.


2.1  IAD Responsibilities


   The IAD will be responsible for managing the IASA effort,
   establishing an operating budget, negotiating contracts with service
   providers, managing the business relationship with those providers
   and establishing mechanisms to track their performance.





Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 17, 2005                 [Page 4]
Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004



   The IAD will be responsible for running IASA in an open and
   transparent manner and for producing regular (monthly, quarterly and
   annual) financial and operational updates for IAOC and IETF community
   review.  The IAD may also manage ISOC support staff or other
   IASA-related contractors or employees, as necessary.


   The IAD will be responsible for administering the IETF finances,
   managing a separate financial account for the IASA, and establishing
   and administering the IASA budget.  While it is understood that ISOC
   will need to put some financial controls in place to protect ISOC's
   fiscal stability, the IAD (with IAOC approval, as appropriate) should
   have signing authority consistent with carrying out IASA work
   effectively, efficiently and independently.  Should the IAOC have
   concerns about the levels of approval that are granted to the IAD and
   IAOC, the IAOC and ISOC commit to working out a policy that is
   mutually agreeable.


   Service contracts will be negotiated by the IAD (with input from any
   other appropriate bodies), and reviewed, as appropriate, by the IAOC.
   It is expected that the IAOC will establish guidelines for what level
   of review is expected based on contract type, size, cost and/or
   duration.  The contracts will be executed by ISOC, on behalf of the
   IASA, after whatever review ISOC requires in order to ensure that the
   contracts meet ISOC's legal and financial requirements.


   Although the approval of the ISOC President/CEO or ISOC Board of
   Trustees may be required for some contracts, their review should be
   limited to protecting ISOC's liabilities and financial stability.
   The IAD and IAOC are responsible for making all business decisions
   regarding the IASA.  In particular, the ISOC Board of Trustees will
   not have direct influence over the choice of IASA contractors or IETF
   meeting sponsors.  This restriction is meant to enforce the
   separation between fund raising and the actual operation of the
   standards process.


   The IAD will prepare an annual budget, which will be reviewed and
   approved by the IAOC.  The IAD will be responsible for presenting
   this budget to the ISOC Board of Trustees, as part of ISOC's annual
   financial planning process.  In the budgeting process, the IAOC is
   responsible for ensuring the suitability of the budget for meeting
   the IETF community's administrative needs, but the IAOC does not bear
   fiduciary responsibility for ISOC.  Therefore, the ISOC Board also
   needs to review and understand the budget and planned activity in
   enough detail to properly carry out their fiduciary responsibility.
   Each year, the complete IASA budget will published to the IETF
   community.






Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 17, 2005                 [Page 5]
Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004



2.2  IAOC Responsibilities


   The role of the IAOC is to determine the administrative needs of the
   IETF, provide appropriate direction to the IAD, and oversee the IASA
   functions.  The IAOC is not expected to be regularly engaged in the
   day-to-day administrative work, but rather to provide appropriate
   direction, oversight and approval.


   Therefore, the IAOC's responsibilities are:


   o  Work with the IESG and other members of the IETF community to
      determine the IETF's administrative requirements and priorities,
      and communicate those requirements and priorities to the IAD in a
      structured and actionable manner.


   o  Track whether the IASA functions are meeting the IETF community's
      administrative needs, and work with the IAD to determine a plan
      for corrective action if they are not.


   o  Select and manage the IAD.  To avoid a "management by committee"
      effect, it is expected that this responsibility will be delegated
      to a sub-committee of the IAOC as described above.  The IAOC also
      has responsibility for determining the size and structure of IASA,
      and specifically for determine if/when additional IASA-specific
      staff is required, subject to appropriate ISOC staffing and budget
      approvals.


   o  Review the IAD's budget proposals to ensure that they will meet
      the IETF's needs, approve the IAD's budget proposals and review
      the IAD's regular financial reports.


   o  Ensure that the IASA is run in a transparent and accountable
      manner.  While the work may be delegated to the IAD and others,
      the IAOC is responsible for ensuring that IASA finances and
      operational status are appropriately tracked and that monthly,
      quarterly and annual financial and operational reports are
      published to the IETF community.


   The IAOC's role is to direct and review, not perform, the work of the
   IAD and IASA.  As such, it is expected the IAOC will have monthly
   teleconferences and periodic face to face meetings, probably
   coincident with IETF plenary meetings, as needed for efficient and
   effective operation.


2.3  Relationship of the IAOC to Existing IETF Leadership


   The IAOC will be directly accountable to the IETF Community.
   However, the nature of the IAOC's work will involve treating the IESG




Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 17, 2005                 [Page 6]
Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004



   and IAB as internal customers.  The IAOC should not consider its work
   successful unless the IESG and IAB are satisfied with the
   administrative support that they are receiving.


3.  IAOC Membership, Selection and Accountability


   The IAOC will consist of seven voting members who will be selected as
   follows:


   o  2 members chosen by the IETF Nominations Committee (NomCom)


   o  1 member chosen by the IESG


   o  1 member chosen by the IAB


   o  1 member chosen by the ISOC Board of Trustees


   o  The IETF Chair (ex officio)


   o  The ISOC President/CEO (ex officio)


   There will also be two non-voting, ex officio liaisons:


   o  The IAB Chair


   o  The IETF Administrative Director


   The voting members of the IAOC will choose their own chair each year
   using a consensus mechanism of their choosing.  Any appointed voting
   member of the IAOC may serve as the IAOC Chair (i.e., not the IETF
   Chair or the ISOC President/CEO).  The role of the IAOC Chair is to
   organize the IAOC.  The IAOC Chair has no formal duties for
   representing the IAOC, except as directed by IAOC consensus.


   The members of the IAOC will typically serve two year terms.
   Initially, the IESG and ISOC Board will make one-year appointments,
   the IAB will make a two-year appointment, and the NomCom will make
   one one-year appointment and one two-year appointment to establish a
   pattern where approximately half of the IAOC is selected each term.


   The two NomCom selected members will be selected using the procedures
   described in RFC 3777 [RFC3777].  For the initial selection, the IESG
   will provide the list of desired qualifications for these positions.
   In later years, this list will be provided by the IAOC.  The IESG
   will serve as the confirming body for IAOC appointments.


   While there are no hard rules regarding how the IAB and the IESG
   should select members of the IAOC, it is not expected that they will




Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 17, 2005                 [Page 7]
Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004



   typically choose current IAB or IESG members, if only to avoid
   overloading the existing leadership.  They should choose people with
   some knowledge of contracts and financial procedures who are familiar
   with the administrative support needs of the IAB, the IESG and/or the
   IETF standards process.  It is suggested that a fairly open process
   be followed for these selections, perhaps with an open call for
   nominations and/or a period of public comment on the candidates.  The
   IAB and IESG are encouraged to look at the procedure for IAB
   selection of ISOC Trustees for an example of how this might work.
   After we gain some experience with IAOC selection, these selection
   mechanisms should be more formally documented.


   Although the IAB, IESG and ISOC BoT will choose some members of the
   IAOC, those members will not directly represent the bodies that chose
   them.  All members of the IAOC are accountable directly to the IETF
   community.  To receive direct feedback from the community, the IAOC
   will hold an open meeting at least once per year at an IETF meeting.
   This may take the form of an open IAOC plenary or a working meeting
   held during an IETF meeting slot.  The form and contents of this
   meeting are left to the discretion of the IAOC Chair.  The IAOC
   should also consider open mailing lists or other means to establish
   open communication with the community.


   Decisions of IAOC members or the entire IAOC are subject to appeal
   using the procedures described in RFC 2026 [RFC2026].  Appeals of
   IAOC decisions will go to the IESG and continue up the chain as
   necessary (to the IAB and the ISOC Board).  The IAOC will play no
   role in appeals of WG Chair, IESG or IAB decisions.


   In the event that an IAOC member abrogates his duties or acts against
   the bests interests of the IETF community, IAOC members are subject
   to recall.  Any appointed IESG member, including those appointed by
   the IAB, IESG or ISOC Board of Trustees, may be recalled using the
   recall procedure defined in RFC 3777 [RFC3777].  IAOC members are not
   subject to recall by the body that appointed them.


4.  IASA Funding


   The IASA is supported financially in 3 ways:


   1.  IETF meeting revenues.  The IAD, in consultation with the IAOC,
       sets the meeting fees as part of the budgeting process.  All
       meeting revenues go into the IASA account.


   2.  Designated ISOC donations.  The IETF and IASA undertake no fund
       raising activities; this maintains separation between fund
       raising and standards activities.  Any organization interested in
       supporting the IETF activity will continue to be directed to




Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 17, 2005                 [Page 8]
Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004



       ISOC, and any funds ISOC receives specifically for IETF
       activities (as part of any ISOC program that allows for specific
       designations) will also be put into the IASA account.


   3.  Other ISOC support.  ISOC will deposit in the IASA account, each
       quarter, other funds that ISOC has committed to providing as part
       of the IASA budget (where the meeting revenues and specific
       donations do not cover the budget).


   Note that the goal is to achieve and maintain a viable IETF support
   function based on meeting fees and specified donations, and the IAOC
   and ISOC are expected to work together to attain that goal.  (I.e.,
   dropping the meeting fees to $0 and expecting ISOC to pick up the
   slack is not desirable; nor is raising the meeting fees to
   prohibitive levels to fund all non-meeting-related activities).


   In normal operating circumstances, the IASA would look to have a
   operating reserve for its activities sufficient to cover 6-months of
   non-meeting operational expenses, plus twice the recent average for
   meeting contract guarantees.  Rather than having the IASA attempt to
   accrue that reserve in its separate account, the IASA looks to ISOC
   to build and provide that operational reserve (through whatever
   mechanisms ISOC deems appropriate -- line of credit, financial
   reserves, meeting cancellation insurance, etc).  Such reserves do not
   appear instantaneously; the goal is to reach this level of reserves
   by 3 years after the creation of the IASA.  It is not expected that
   any funds associated with such reserve will be held in the IASA
   account, just that ISOC will have them on-hand for use in the event
   of IETF meeting cancellation or other unexpected fiscal emergencies.


5.  IASA Budget Process


   While the IASA sets a budget for the IETF's administrative needs, its
   budget process clearly needs to be closely coordinated with ISOC's.
   The specific timeline will be established each year.  A general
   annual timeline for budgeting will  be:


   July 1: The IAD presents a budget proposal (for the following fiscal
      year, with 3 year projections) to the IAOC.


   August 1: The IAOC approves the budget proposal for IETF purposes,
      after any appropriate revisions.  As the ISOC President is part of
      the IAOC, the IAOC should have a preliminary indication of how the
      budget will fit with ISOC's own budgetary expectations.  The
      budget proposal is passed to the ISOC Board of Trustees for review
      in accordance with their fiduciary duty.






Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 17, 2005                 [Page 9]
Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004



   September 1: The ISOC Board of Trustees approves the budget proposal
      provisionally.  During the next 2 months, the budget may be
      revised to be integrated in ISOC's overall budgeting process.


   November 1: Final budget to the ISOC Board for approval.


   The dates described above are subject to change, and will most likely
   be modified based on the dates of the summer and fall IETF meetings.


   The IAD will provide monthly accountings of expenses, and will update
   forecasts of expenditures quarterly.  This may necessitate the
   adjustment of the IASA budget.  The revised budget will need to be
   approved by the IAOC, the ISOC President/CEO and, if necessary, the
   ISOC Board of Trustees.


6.  ISOC Responsibilities for IASA


   Within ISOC, support for the IASA should be structured to meet the
   following goals:


   Transparency: The IETF community should have complete visibility into
      the financial and legal structure of the ISOC standards activity.
      In particular, the IETF community should have access to a detailed
      budget for the entire standards activity, quarterly financial
      reports and audited annual financials.  In addition, key contract
      material and MOUs should be publicly available.  Most of these
      goals are already met by ISOC today.  The IAOC will be responsible
      for providing the IETF community with regular overviews of the
      state of affairs.


   Unification: As part of this arrangement, ISOC's sponsorship of the
      RFC Editor, IAB and IESG will be managed as part of the IASA under
      the IAOC.


   Independence: The IASA should be financially and legally distinct
      from other ISOC activities.  IETF meeting fees should be deposited
      in a separate IETF-specific financial account and used to fund the
      IASA under the direction and oversight of the IAOC.  Any fees or
      payments collected from IETF meeting sponsors should also be
      deposited into this account.  This account will be administered by
      the IAD and used to fund the IASA in accordance with a budget and
      policies that are developed as described above.


   Support: ISOC may, from time to time, choose to transfer other funds
      into this account to fund IETF administrative projects or to cover
      IETF meeting revenue shortfalls.  There may also be cases where
      ISOC chooses to loan money to the IASA to help with temporary cash
      flow issues.  These cases should be carefully documented and




Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 17, 2005                [Page 10]
Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004



      tracked on both sides.  ISOC will work to provide the operational
      reserve for IASA functioning described above.


   Removability: While there is no current plan to transfer the legal
      and financial home of the IASA to another corporation, the IASA
      should be structured to enable a clean transition in the event
      that the IETF community decides, through BCP publication, that
      such a transition is required.  In that case, the IAOC will give
      ISOC a minimum of six-months notice before the transition formally
      occurs.  During that period, the IAOC and ISOC will work together
      to create a smooth transition that does not result in any
      significant service outages or missed IETF meetings.  All
      contracts that are executed by ISOC as part of the IASA should
      either include a clause allowing termination or transfer by ISOC
      with six months notice, or should be transferrable to another
      corporation in the event that the IASA is transitioned away from
      ISOC in the future.  Any accrued funds, and IETF-specific
      intellectual property rights (concerning administrative data
      and/or tools) would also be expected to be transitioned to the new
      entity, as well.


   Within the constraints outlined above, all other details of how to
   structure this activity within ISOC (e.g.  as a cost center, a
   department or a formal subsidiary) shall be determined by ISOC in
   consultation with the IAOC.


7.  Security Considerations


   This document describes the structure of the IETF's administrative
   support activity.  It introduces no security considerations for the
   Internet.


8.  IANA Considerations


   This document has no IANA considerations in the traditional sense.
   However, some of the information in this document may affect how the
   IETF standards process interfaces with IANA, so IANA may be
   interested in the contents.


9.  Acknowledgements


   The authors would like to thank the following people for their
   feedback on the original "Scenario O" e-mail message and/or
   intermediate versions of this document: Harald Alvestrand, Brian
   Carpenter, Dave Crocker, Tony Hain, Joel Halpern, Eliot Lear, Bert
   Wijnen


   This document was written using the xml2rfc tool described in RFC




Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 17, 2005                [Page 11]
Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004



   2629 [RFC2629].


10.  Change Log


   We are using an issue tracker to track the editorial and substantive
   feedback on this document.  It can be found at:


   https://rt.psg.com (user: ietf, password: ietf, queue: scenario-o).


   Origination of the -00 Version:


   This document is derived from an e-mail message written by the
   authors and posted to the IETF by Leslie Daigle.  The original
   message can be found at:


   http://www1.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/ietf/current/msg31326.html


   This document was derived from the "Draft BCP" portion of that
   message and has been updated based on comments received.


11.  References


11.1  Normative References


   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.


   [RFC3716]  Advisory, IAB., "The IETF in the Large: Administration and
              Execution", RFC 3716, March 2004.


   [RFC3777]  Galvin, J., "IAB and IESG Selection, Confirmation, and
              Recall Process: Operation of the Nominating and Recall
              Committees", BCP 10, RFC 3777, June 2004.


11.2  Informative References


   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.


   [RFC3667]  Bradner, S., "IETF Rights in Contributions", BCP 78, RFC
              3667, February 2004.


   [RFC3668]  Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF
              Technology", BCP 79, RFC 3668, February 2004.








Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 17, 2005                [Page 12]
Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004



Authors' Addresses


   Margaret Wasserman
   ThingMagic
   One Broadway, 14th Floor
   Cambridge, MA  02142
   USA


   Phone: +1 617 758-4177
   EMail: margaret@thingmagic.com
   URI:   http://www.thingmagic.com



   Leslie Daigle
   VeriSign
   21355 Ridgetop Circle
   Dulles, VA  20176
   USA


   EMail: leslie@verisignlabs.com, leslie@thinkingcat.com
































Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 17, 2005                [Page 13]
Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004



Intellectual Property Statement


   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.


   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.


   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.



Disclaimer of Validity


   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



Copyright Statement


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.



Acknowledgment


   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.





Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 17, 2005                [Page 14]