


Network Working Group                                        J. Peterson
Internet-Draft                                                   NeuStar
Expires: August 10, 2006                                       A. Mankin
                                                                  Lucent
                                                            M. Wasserman
                                                              ThingMagic
                                                        February 6, 2006


                    DISCUSS Criteria in IESG Review
                     draft-iesg-discuss-criteria-02

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 10, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document describes the role of the 'DISCUSS' position in the
   IESG review process.  It gives some guidance on when a DISCUSS should
   and should not be issued.  It also discusses procedures for DISCUSS
   resolution.




Peterson, et al.         Expires August 10, 2006                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       DISCUSS Criteria in IESG Review       February 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Document Classes Reviewed by the IESG  . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Protocol Action Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  DISCUSS Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.2.  DISCUSS Non-Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.3.  Saying No to A Document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  DISCUSS Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 11



































Peterson, et al.         Expires August 10, 2006                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       DISCUSS Criteria in IESG Review       February 2006


1.  Introduction

   The Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG) is responsible for the
   final review of IETF documents.  Members of the IESG have the option,
   when they review a document, of stating a 'DISCUSS' position.  The
   DISCUSS identifies one or more issues that must be discussed in
   relation to the document before the document can become an RFC.  As
   such, 'DISCUSS' is a blocking position; the document cannot proceed
   until any issues are resolved to the satisfaction of the Area
   Director who issued the DISCUSS.  For cases where the reasoning for
   an unresolved DISCUSS does not reflect the consensus of the IESG,
   override procedures can be invoked to unblock documents.

   The criteria set forward in this document are intended to serve two
   purposes: to educate and to improve consistency.  When new members
   join the IESG, it might not be immediately clear when it is
   appropriate to issue a DISCUSS and when a non-blocking comment should
   be preferred.  Even among the standing IESG (at the time this
   document was written), it is clear that different Area Directors use
   different criteria for issuing a DISCUSS.  While this is not innately
   problematic, greater consistency in evaluating the severity of an
   issue would reduce unnecessary document delays and blockages.

   This document approaches IESG review of Proposed Standard documents
   as a review of "last resort".  Most such documents reviewed by the
   IESG are produced and reviewed in the context of IETF working groups.
   In those cases, the IESG cannot overrule working group consensus
   without good reason; informed community consensus should prevail.

   While this document serves as commentary on the way the IESG applies
   the IETF process rules, it is not intended to change any of the
   underlying principles, including RFC2026 [1].  These criteria are not
   intended to constrain the IESG from issuing DISCUSSes on documents
   that are genuinely problematic, but rather to set reasonable
   expectation among the IESG and the community about the propriety of
   and justification for blocking IETF documents.  The IESG would
   welcome comments on this document, which is expected to end up as an
   informational web page.  Comments can be sent to iesg@ietf.org.


2.  Document Classes Reviewed by the IESG

   The IESG reviews several classes of document, and applies different
   criteria to each of these document types.  The exemplary questions
   that follow appear on each IESG agenda to remind the Area Directors
   of the appropriate level of review for these classes:





Peterson, et al.         Expires August 10, 2006                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       DISCUSS Criteria in IESG Review       February 2006


   Protocol Actions "Is this document a reasonable basis on which to
      build the salient part of the Internet infrastructure?  If not,
      what changes would make it so?"
   Document Actions (WG) "Is this document a reasonable contribution to
      the area of Internet engineering which it covers?  If not, what
      changes would make it so?"
   Document Actions (Individual) "Is this document a reasonable
      contribution to the area of Internet engineering which it covers?
      If not, what changes would make it so?"
   Document Actions (from RFC-Editor) "Does this document represent an
      end run around the IETF's working groups or its procedures?  Does
      this document present an incompatible change to IETF technologies
      as if it were compatible?"

   Of these document classes, the fundamental distinction between
   "Protocol Actions" and "Document Actions" involves the relation of
   these documents to the IETF Standards Track.  Only Standards Track
   and Best Common Practice documents are considered for "Protocol
   Action"; Informational and Experimental documents are considered for
   "Document Action".

   Protocol Actions are naturally subject to greater scrutiny than
   Document Actions; Area Directors are not even required to state a
   position on a Document Action (the default being "No Objection").
   Accordingly, the exact criteria used to evaluate Protocol Actions
   would benefit from greater scrutiny.  The remainder of this document
   focuses on the use of DISCUSS for standards-trakc and BCP documents.


3.  Protocol Action Criteria

3.1.  DISCUSS Criteria

   The following are legitimate reasons that an Area Director might
   state a DISCUSS position on a Protocol Action.  This cannot be an
   exhaustive list, but this set should be taken as exemplary of the
   common causes for DISCUSSes seen by the IESG in the past.
   o  The specification is impossible to implement due to technical or
      clarity issues.
   o  The protocol has technical flaws that will prevent it from working
      properly, or the description is unclear in such a way that the
      reader cannot understand it without ambiguity.
   o  It is unlikely that multiple implementations of the specification
      would interoperate, usually due to vagueness or incomplete
      specification.
   o  Widespread deployment would be damaging to the Internet or an
      enterprise network for reasons of congestion control, scalability,
      or the like.



Peterson, et al.         Expires August 10, 2006                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       DISCUSS Criteria in IESG Review       February 2006


   o  The specification would create serious security holes, or the
      described protocol has self-defeating security vulnerabilities
      (e.g. a protocol that cannot fulfill its purpose without security
      properties it does not provide).
   o  It would present serious operational issues in widespread
      deployment, by for example neglecting network management or
      configuration entirely.
   o  Failure to conform with IAB architecture (e.g., RFC1958 [2], or
      UNSAF [3]) in the absence of any satisfactory text explaining this
      architectural decision.
   o  The specification was not properly vetted against the I-D
      Checklist.  Symptoms include broken ABNF or XML, missing Security
      Considerations, and so on.
   o  The draft omits a normative reference necessary for its
      implementation, or cites such a reference merely informatively
      rather than normatively.
   o  The document does not meet criteria for advancement in its
      designated standards track, for example because it is a document
      going to Full Standard that contains 'down references' to RFCs at
      a lower position in the standards track, or a Standards Track
      document that contains only informational guidance.
   o  IETF process related to document advancement was not carried out;
      e.g., there are unresolved and substantive Last Call comments
      which the document does not address, the document is outside the
      scope of the charter of the WG which requested its publication,
      and so on.
   o  The IETF as a whole does not have consensus on the technical
      approach or document.  There are cases where individual working
      groups or areas have forged rough consensus around a technical
      approach which does not garner IETF consensus.  An AD may DISCUSS
      a document where she or he believes this to be the case.  While
      the Area Director should describe the technical area where
      consensus is flawed, the focus of the DISCUSS and its resolution
      should be on how to forge a cross-IETF consensus.

3.2.  DISCUSS Non-Criteria

   None of the following are criteria for which the IESG should DISCUSS
   a document; though they might reasonably form the basis of a non-
   blocking comment on a document.
   o  Disagreement with informed WG decisions that do not exhibit
      problems outlined in Section 3.1.  In other words, disagreement in
      preferences among technically sound approaches.
   o  Reiteration of the issues that have been raised and discussed as
      part of WG or IETF Last Call, unless the AD believes they have not
      been properly addressed.





Peterson, et al.         Expires August 10, 2006                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       DISCUSS Criteria in IESG Review       February 2006


   o  Pedantic corrections to non-normative text.  Oftentimes, poor
      phrasing or misunderstandings in descriptive text are corrected
      during IESG review.  However, if these corrections are not
      essential to the implementation of the specification, these should
      not be blocking comments.
   o  Stylistic issues of any kind.  The IESG are welcome to copy-edit
      as a non-blocking comment, but this should not obstruct document
      processing.
   o  The motivation for a particular feature of a protocol is not clear
      enough.  At the IESG review stage, protocols should not be blocked
      because they provide capabilities beyond what seems necessary to
      acquit their responsibilities.
   o  There are additional, purely informational references that might
      be added to the document, such as pointers to academic papers or
      new work.  Although the cross-area perspective of the IESG invites
      connections and comparison between disparate work in the IETF,
      IESG review is not the appropriate time to append external sources
      to the document.
   o  The document fails to cite a particular non-normative reference.
      This is an appropriate non-blocking comment, but not a blocking
      comment.
   o  Unfiltered external party reviews.  While an AD is welcome to
      consult with external parties, the AD is expected to evaluate, to
      understand and to concur with issues raised by external parties.
      Blindly cut-and-pasting an external party review into a DISCUSS is
      inappropriate if the AD is unable to defend or substantiate the
      issues raised in the review.
   o  New issues with unchanged text in documents previously reviewed by
      the AD in question.  Review is potentially an endless process; the
      same eyes looking at the same document several times over the
      course of years might uncover completely different issues every
      time.
   o  "IOU" DISCUSS.  Stating "I think there's something wrong here, and
      I'll tell you what it is later" is not appropriate for a DISCUSS;
      in that case, the AD should state the position DEFER (or, if the
      document has already been DEFERed once, "No Objection").

3.3.  Saying No to A Document

   In some cases an AD may believe that a document has fundamental flaws
   that cannot be fixed.  Normally in such cases the AD will write up a
   description of these flaws and enter an "Abstain" position on the
   ballot.  Such a position does not support publication of the document
   but also does not block the rest of the IESG from approving the
   document.  Normally, entering an Abstain position is a sufficient
   mechanism for an AD to voice his or her objections.

   However, there may be cases where an AD believes that the mechanisms



Peterson, et al.         Expires August 10, 2006                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       DISCUSS Criteria in IESG Review       February 2006


   described in a document may cause significant damage to the Internet
   and/or that the mechanisms described in a document are sufficiently
   incompatible with the Internet architecture that a document must not
   be published, despite the fact that the document is within scope for
   the WG and represents WG consensus.  This situation should be
   extremely rare, and an AD should not take this position lightly, but
   this does represent an important cross-area "back-stop" function of
   the IESG.

   In this situation, the AD will enter a "DISCUSS" position on the
   ballot and explain his or her position as clearly as possible in the
   tracker.  The AD should also be willing to explain his or her
   position to the other ADs and to the WG.

   It is possible in such a situation that the WG will understand the
   AD's objections and choose to withdraw the document, perhaps to
   consider alternatives, and the situation will be resolved.

   Another possibility is that the WG will disagree with the AD, and
   will continue to request publication of the document.  In those cases
   the responsible AD should work with both the WG and the AD holding
   the DISCUSS to see of a mutually agreeable path can be found.


4.  DISCUSS Resolution

   The traditional method of DISCUSS resolution is the initiation of a
   discussion about the issues in question.  This discussion may include
   only the IESG, particularly if the DISCUSS is resolved quickly during
   or following the IESG agenda when the document is presented.  Usually
   the discussion extends to document editors and working group chairs,
   and entire working groups, as necessary.  Increasingly, one of the
   working group chairs may coordinate the resolution of the DISCUSS
   (see [4]).

   As the conclusion of this discussion, revisions to the document may
   or may not be required.  If revisions are required, it is customary
   for the Area Director to clear their DISCUSS only when the revision
   containing the necessary emendations has been published in the
   Internet-Drafts repository.

   While in many cases, DISCUSSes are resolved expeditiously, there are
   common cases where a DISCUSS can take weeks or months to resolve,
   given that revisions are frequently required, and such revisions need
   to be checked by the AD that issued the DISCUSS.  Accordingly,
   DISCUSSes should be used sparingly.

   If a DISCUSS cannot be resolved by the working group, and the AD



Peterson, et al.         Expires August 10, 2006                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       DISCUSS Criteria in IESG Review       February 2006


   continues to hold his or her DISCUSS, the IESG has an alternative
   balloting procedure that can be used to override a single discuss
   position.  In the alternative procedure, all ADs are required to
   enter a "yes" or "no" position on the document.  A document will be
   published if two-thirds of the IESG state a position of "yes", and no
   more than two ADs state a "no" position.  Two-thirds of the IESG is
   formally defined as two-thirds of the sitting ADs (current 9), except
   for those who are recused from voting on the document in question,
   rounded up to the next whole number.  If three or more ADs hold a
   "no" position on a document using the alternative balloting
   procedure, or if a document fails to gather the required number of
   "yes" positions, the document will be returned to the WG with a "no"
   answer, which is one of the options described in RFC 2026.

   When an AD is replaced for any reason, the successor should promptly
   evaluate DISCUSS ballots left by his or her predecessor, and either
   re-assert them, if they still meet the criteria of Section 3.1, or
   register "No Objection" if they do not.  The successor AD is
   responsible for handling such DISCUSS ballots just as if they were
   his or her own.

   The criteria provided in this document are intended to help the IESG
   to restrict the usage of a DISCUSS to cases where it is necessary.


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document contains no considerations for the IANA.


6.  Security Considerations

   This is a procedural document without security implications.
   However, the ability of the IESG to review the security properties of
   the submitted protocol specifications, point out and help resolve
   security flaws in them is vital for Internet security.


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3",
        RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [2]  Carpenter, B., "Architectural Principles of the Internet",
        RFC 1958, June 1996.




Peterson, et al.         Expires August 10, 2006                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       DISCUSS Criteria in IESG Review       February 2006


   [3]  Daigle, L., "IAB Considerations for UNilateral Self-Address
        Fixing (UNSAF) Across Network Address Translation", RFC 3424,
        November 2002.

   [4]  Falk, A., Levkowetz, H., and D. Meyer, "The PROTO Process:
        Working Group Chair Document Shepherding",
        draft-ietf-proto-wgchair-doc-shepherding-05 (work in progress),
        March 2005.

7.2.  Informative References









































Peterson, et al.         Expires August 10, 2006                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       DISCUSS Criteria in IESG Review       February 2006


Authors' Addresses

   Jon Peterson
   NeuStar, Inc.
   1800 Sutter St
   Suite 570
   Concord, CA  94520
   USA

   Phone: +1 925/363-8720
   Email: jon.peterson@neustar.biz
   URI:   http://www.neustar.biz/


   Allison Mankin
   Lucent Bell Labs

   Email: mankin@psg.com


   Margaret Wasserman
   ThingMagic
   One Broadway
   14th Floor
   Cambridge, MA  02142
   USA

   Phone: +1 617 758 4177
   Email: margaret@thingmagic.com
   URI:   http://www.thingmagic.com/





















Peterson, et al.         Expires August 10, 2006               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       DISCUSS Criteria in IESG Review       February 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Peterson, et al.         Expires August 10, 2006               [Page 11]

