



Network Working Group                                         P. Pfister
Internet-Draft                                             Cisco Systems
Intended status: Standards Track                        October 31, 2016
Expires: May 4, 2017


                Special Use Top Level Domain '.homenet'
                      draft-pfister-homenet-dot-00

Abstract

   This document specifies the behavior that is expected from the Domain
   Name System with regard to DNS queries for names ending with
   '.homenet.', thereby defining this top-level domain as a special-use
   domain name [RFC6761].  The '.homenet' top-level domain intends to
   replace '.home' which was originally proposed in [RFC7788] as default
   domain-name for home networks.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 4, 2017.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of




Pfister                    Expires May 4, 2017                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 dot homenet                  October 2016


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  General Guidance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Domain Name Reservation Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   6.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5

1.  Introduction

   Users and devices within a home network require other devices to be
   identified by names that are unique within the boundaries of the home
   network [RFC7368].  The naming mechanism also needs to function
   without configuration from the user, and keep functioning in case of
   upstream connexion failure.  It is therefore expected that home
   network routers and devices will derive their own names from one or
   multiple domain-names that are assigned to the home network.  Such
   domain names could be assigned by the service providers, although
   this would certainly lead to complicated names (e.g., 'cstmr6372514
   .isp-foo.com.'), or be reserved and configured by an educated user.
   But in the case of upstream connexion failure, or when the user
   ignores how to reserve and configure a domain name, or does not care
   enough to do it, a default name with local scope needs to be used.

   The '.homenet' top-level domain intends to replace '.home' which was
   originally proposed in [RFC7788] as default domain-name for home
   networks. '.home' would certainly be the most user-friendly option,
   but evidence indicates that '.home' queries frequently leak out and
   reach the root name servers [ICANN1] [ICANN2].  This document is to
   be bundled with another internet draft updating [RFC7788] and
   deprecating the use of the '.home' TLD, replaced by '.homenet'.

   This document registers the top-level domain '.homenet.' as a
   special-use domain name [RFC6761] and specifies the behavior that is
   expected from the Domain Name System with regard to such DNS queries.
   Records for names ending with '.homenet.' are of local significance
   within a home network, meaning that identical queries may result in
   different results from one home network to another.





Pfister                    Expires May 4, 2017                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 dot homenet                  October 2016


2.  General Guidance

   The top-level domain name '.homenet.' is to be used for naming within
   a home network.  Names ending with '.homenet.'  MUST refer to
   services that are either located within a home network (e.g., a
   printer, or a toaster), or only reachable from within the home
   network (e.g., a web server hosted by the service provider and
   providing a service that is specific to the home).

   DNS queries for names ending with '.homenet.'  MUST NOT be sent
   outside of the logical boundaries of the home network.  Which means
   that, by default, such queries MUST NOT be sent outside of the
   network boundaries of the home network, but home network devices MAY
   be configured in order to send such queries to DNS servers located
   outside of the home network when the DNS server is capable of
   responding with values that are specific to the network where the
   query is coming from.

   Although home networks most often provide one or multiple service
   discovery mechanisms, it is still expected that some users will see,
   remember, and sometimes even type, names ending with '.homenet'.  It
   is therefore desireable that users identify the top-level domain and
   associate it with the fact that the service they are connected to is
   specific to the home network they are connected in.  But, the
   presence of this top-level domain name MUST NOT be considered as
   improving the security of the connexion in any way.

3.  Domain Name Reservation Considerations

   This section defines the behavior of systems involved in domain name
   resolution when serving queries for names ending with '.homenet.' (as
   per [RFC6761]).

   1.  Users MAY use, type or remember names ending with '.homenet.'
       just like any other fully qualified domain names.  Users SHOULD
       recognize the top-level domain and understand that its presence
       at the end of a Fully Qualified Domain Name (FQDN) imply that the
       service they are reaching is associated with the home network
       they are connected in.  In particular, users SHOULD understand
       that a single name (e.g. www.homenet) may connect them to
       different services when connected within different homes.

   2.  Applications SHOULD treat domain names ending with '.homenet.'
       just like any other FQDN, and MUST NOT make any assumption on the
       level of additional security implied by its presence.

   3.  Name resolution APIs and libraries SHOULD NOT recognize names
       ending with '.homenet.' as special and SHOULD NOT treat them



Pfister                    Expires May 4, 2017                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 dot homenet                  October 2016


       differently.  Name resolution APIs SHOULD send queries for such
       names to their configured caching DNS server(s).

   4.  Cachine DNS Servers SHOULD recognize such names as special use
       and SHOULD NOT, by default, attempt to look up NS records for
       them, or otherwise query authoritative DNS servers in an attempt
       to resolve these names.  Instead, recursive/caching DNS servers
       that are not part of a home network SHOULD generate immediate
       NXDOMAIN response.  Caching DNS Servers that are part of a home
       network MAY be configured manually or automatically (e.g., for
       auto-configuration purposes) to act differently, e.g., by
       querying another name server configured as authoritative for part
       of the domain, or proxying the request through a different
       mechanism.

   5.  Authoritative DNS Servers SHOULD recognize such names as special-
       use and SHOULD NOT, by default, attempt to look up NS records for
       these names.  Servers that are part of a home network or
       providing name resolution services for a home network MAY be
       configured to act as authoritative for the whole top-level domain
       or a part of it.

   6.  DNS server operators SHOULD NOT attempt to configure DNS servers
       to act as authoriative for any of these names.  Internet service
       providers or, by extension, entities providing name resolution
       services to home networks MAY configure their DNS servers to
       answer such requests in a way which ensures total isolation
       between different home networks.

   7.  DNS Registries and Registrars MUST NOT assign any sub-domain from
       '.homenet.'.

4.  Security Considerations

   Although a DNS record returned as a response to a query ending with
   '.homenet.' is expected to have local significance and be returned by
   a server involved in name resolution for the home network the device
   is connected in, such response MUST NOT be considered more
   trustworthy than would be a similar response for any other DNS query.

5.  IANA Considerations

   [Once published, this should say] IANA has recorded the top-level
   domain ".homenet" in the Special-Use Domain Names registry [SUDN].







Pfister                    Expires May 4, 2017                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 dot homenet                  October 2016


6.  Acknowledgments

   The author would like to thank Stuart Cheschire for his prior work on
   '.home', as well as the homenet chairs: Mark Townsley and Ray Bellis.

7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC6761]  Cheshire, S. and M. Krochmal, "Special-Use Domain Names",
              RFC 6761, DOI 10.17487/RFC6761, February 2013,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6761>.

7.2.  Informative References

   [RFC7368]  Chown, T., Arkko, J., Brandt, A., Troan, O., and J. Weil,
              "IPv6 Home Networking Architecture Principles", RFC 7368,
              October 2014.

   [RFC7788]  Stenberg, M., Barth, S., and P. Pfister, "Home Networking
              Control Protocol", RFC 7788, DOI 10.17487/RFC7788, April
              2016, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7788>.

   [ICANN1]   "New gTLD Collision Risk Mitigation", October 2013,
              <https://www.icann.org/en/system/files/files/resolutions-
              new-gtld-annex-1-07oct13-en.pdf>.

   [ICANN2]   "New gTLD Collision Occurence Management", October 2013,
              <https://www.icann.org/en/system/files/files/resolutions-
              new-gtld-annex-1-07oct13-en.pdf>.

   [SUDN]     "Special-Use Domain Names Registry", July 2012,
              <http://www.iana.org/assignments/special-use-domain-names/
              special-use-domain-names.xhtml>.

Author's Address

   Pierre Pfister
   Cisco Systems
   Paris
   France

   Email: pierre.pfister@darou.fr








Pfister                    Expires May 4, 2017                  [Page 5]
