
Internet Draft                                                 R. Rader 
Document: draft-rader-dn-defn-00                            Tucows Inc. 
Category: Informational                                      June, 2003 
                                                                        
 
 
                  Domain Name and Related Definitions 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026 [1].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress."  
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
1. Abstract 
    
   A number of policy and technical development efforts related to the 
   DNS are underway within the engineering community, ICANN-circles and 
   elsewhere due to the evolving scope and utility of DNS, domain name 
   registries and related entities. It is important that accepted 
   definitions act as the foundation for this work. This document is an 
   attempt to create an optional starting point for the requisite 
   dialogue that will ultimately foster the determination and 
   acceptance of these new technical and contractual protocols. This 
   document obsoletes <draft-rader-dnwhois-defn-00.txt>, <draft-ietf-
   provreg-dn-defn-01.txt> and <draft-rader-dn-defn-00>. 
    
    
2. Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [3]. 
    
    
3. Definitions 
    
   ccTLD: See "Top Level Domain, Country Code". 
    
  
Rader                 Informational - June, 2003                     1 
                     Domain Name & Related Def'n           June, 2003 
 
 
   Contact: In the domain name and Whois context, Contacts are 
   individuals or entities associated with domain name records. 
   Typically, third parties with specific inquiries or concerns will 
   use contact records to determine who should act upon specific issues 
   related to a domain name record. There are typically three contact 
   types associated with a domain name record, the Administrative 
   contact, the Billing contact and the Technical contact. Other 
   contact types may exist at the discretion of the implementer. 
   Contacts may be related to any network resource and may not 
   necessarily be associated specifically with domain name records in 
   other contexts.  
     
   Contact, Administrative: The administrative contact is an 
   individual, role or organization authorized to interact with the 
   registry or registrar on behalf of the Domain Holder. The 
   administrative contact should be able to answer non-technical 
   questions about the domain name's registration and the Domain 
   Holder. In all cases, the Administrative Contact is viewed as the 
   authoritative point of contact for the domain name, second only to 
   the Domain Holder. 
         
   Contact, Billing: The billing contact is the individual, role or 
   organization designated to receive the invoice for domain name 
   registration and re-registration fees. 
         
   Contact, Technical: The technical contact is the individual, role or 
   organization who is responsible for the technical operations of the 
   delegated zone. This contact likely maintains the domain name 
   server(s) for the domain. The technical contact should be able to 
   answer technical questions about the domain name, the delegated zone 
   and work with technically oriented people in other zones to solve 
   technical problems that affect the domain name and/or zone. 
    
   CRISP: See "Cross Registry Information Service Protocol Working 
   Group". 
    
   Cross Registry Information Service Protocol Working Group: An IETF 
   working group engaged in defining a standard mechanism that can be 
   used for finding authoritative information associated with a label, 
   a protocol to transport queries and responses for accessing that 
   information, and a first profile (schema & queries) to support 
   commonly-required queries for domain registration information. 
   Backwards compatibility with existing administrative directory 
   services such as WHOIS is not a goal of this effort. (source: CRISP 
   Working Group Description, http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/crisp-
   charter.html.) 
    
   DNS: See "Domain Name System". 
    
   Domain Holder: The individual or organization that registers a 
   specific domain name. This individual or organization holds the 
   right to use that specific domain name for a specified period of 
  
Rader           Informational - Expires December, 2003               2 
                     Domain Name & Related Def'n           June, 2003 
 
 
   time, provided certain conditions are met and the registration fees 
   are paid. This person or organization is the "legal entity" bound by 
   the terms of the relevant service agreement with the registry 
   operator for the TLD in question. The "Domain Holder", a termed 
   originally coined by ICANN in its various operating contracts, is 
   more widely referred to as the "Registrant". 
    
   Domain Name System: The domain name system is a distributed database 
   arranged hierarchically. Its purpose is to provide a layer of 
   abstraction between other Internet services (web, email, etc.) and 
   the numeric addresses (IP addresses) used to uniquely identify any 
   given machine on the Internet. 
 
   Exclusive Registration System: A domain name registration system in 
   which registry services are limited to a single registrar. Exclusive 
   Registration Systems may be either loosely coupled (in which case 
   the separation between Registry and Registrar systems is readily 
   evident), or tightly coupled (in which case the separation between 
   registry and registrar systems is obscure). 
    
   Federated Internet Registry Service: a proposed distributed service 
   for storing, locating and transferring information about Internet 
   resources using LDAPv3. (source: "The Federated Internet Registry 
   Service: Core Elements", < http://www.ietf.org/internet-
   drafts/draft-ietf-crisp-firs-core-01.txt>). 
    
   FIRS: See "Federated Internet Registry Service". 
    
   GTLD: See "Top Level Domain, Generic". 
    
   Glue Record: A Glue Record is an A record that is created as part of 
   a delegation.  
    
   IANA: Internet Assigned Numbers Authority. The organization that was 
   tasked with responsibility for IP address space assignment, protocol 
   parameter assignment, domain name system management and root server 
   system management prior to ICANN. Now limited to performing the 
   technical delegation of TLDs and address space and managing protocol 
   parameter assignments under ICANN. 
    
   ICANN: Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers. A non-
   profit organization founded to assume responsibility for IP address 
   space assignment, protocol parameter assignment, domain name system 
   management and root server system management. 
    
   Internet Registry Information Service: a proposed application layer 
   client-server protocol for a framework of representing the query and 
   result operations of the information services of Internet 
   registries. (source: "IRIS - The Internet Registry Information 
   Service (IRIS) Core Protocol draft-ietf-crisp-iris-core-02", 
   <http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-crisp-iris-core-
   02.txt> 
  
Rader           Informational - Expires December, 2003               3 
                     Domain Name & Related Def'n           June, 2003 
 
 
    
   InterNIC: The InterNIC, a registered service mark of the U.S. 
   Department of Commerce, is a concept for an integrated network 
   information center that was developed by several companies, 
   including Network Solutions, in cooperation with the U.S. 
   Government. Until recently, the term InterNIC is being used in 
   conjunction with a neutral, stand alone web page (located at 
   http://www.internic.net) that has been established to provide the 
   public with information regarding Internet domain name registration. 
   ICANN has recently undertaken an agreement with the United States 
   Department of Commerce to undertake operation of the effort. The 
   InterNIC was originally created by NSF to provide specific Internet 
   services; directory & database services (by AT&T), registration 
   services (by Network Solutions) and information services (by General 
   Atomics/CERFnet). [4] 
    
   IP Address: Either or both IPv4 or IPv6 address 
    
   IRIS: See "Internet Registry Information Service". 
    
   ISO-3166-1: A document maintained by the International Standards 
   Organization that gives coded representations of more than 230 names 
   of countries or areas independent from countries. This document 
   contains two-letter (Alpha-2-code), a three-letter code (Alpha-3-
   code) and a three-digit numeric code (Numeric-3-code) for every 
   entry in its list of country names. This has been typically the 
   document that IANA uses to create ccTLD entries in the root-zone 
   system. [5] 
 
   Nameserver: A computer running software that authoritatively looks 
   up the numeric equivalent (IP Address) of a record in a zone file, 
   usually for the purpose of allowing remote client access to remote 
   server resources over a network.  
    
   Namespace: In the domain name and Whois contexts, this is taken to 
   mean all combinations of Domain Names and Top Level Domains, 
   registered and otherwise, existing below the Root System. The term 
   has different meanings in other contexts such as computer 
   programming and others. 
    
   NIC: Network Information Center. 
    
   NIC Handle: A NIC Handle is an identifier in use by some registrars 
   and registries that is assigned to various records in the domain 
   name database. Globally, they do not have a common format or 
   application. Further, they are not globally unique. 
    
   NSF: National Science Foundation. 
    
   Object: A generic term used to describe entities that are created, 
   updated, deleted, and otherwise managed by a generic registry-

  
Rader           Informational - Expires December, 2003               4 
                     Domain Name & Related Def'n           June, 2003 
 
 
   registrar protocol. This includes nameserver objects, contact 
   objects and other similar entities. 
    
   Registrant: See Domain Holder. 
    
   Registrar: A person or entity that, via contract with Domain Holders 
   and a Registry, provides front-end domain name registration services 
   to registrants, providing a public interface to registry services. 
    
   Registrar, Accredited: A Registrar that has been certified as 
   meeting certain minimal criteria to act as a Registrar for a 
   specific TLD. This term is almost solely used when referring to 
   Registrars that have been certified by ICANN. ccTLD Registries also 
   accredit registrars, and though they may use differing terms, the 
   concepts are largely the same. 
    
   Registrar, Sponsoring: The Registrar responsible for the submission 
   of the domain name to the Registry. 
    
   Registrar Operator: A term used to denote the entity providing the 
   technical services to a Registrar in support of their registration 
   services. Also referred to as a "Registrar Outsourcer" or "Registrar 
   Provider".  
    
   Registration Authority: The policy making body for any given TLD. 
   Examples include the Canadian Internet Registration Authority, 
   Nominet and MuseDoma. 
    
   Registry: A Registry is the person(s) or entity(ies) responsible for 
   providing registry services. Registry services include customer 
   database administration, zone file publication, DNS operation, 
   marketing and policy determination in accordance with the general 
   principles outlined in RFC 1591 [5]. A Registry may outsource some, 
   all, or none of these services. 
    
   Registry Provisioning Protocol: the protocol that a Registry and 
   Registrar use to communicate domain name specific details between 
   one another for the purpose of registering and maintaining domain 
   names. There are two protocols in primary use, RRP (Registry 
   Registrar Protocol) and EPP (Extensible Provisioning Protocol). 
   Registry Registrar Protocol (RRP) was developed by Network Solutions 
   (NSI) in 1998 and 1999 to allow multiple registrars to provide 
   second level Internet domain name registration services in the top 
   level domains (TLDs) administered by the NSI TLD registry. Version 
   1.1.0 of the NSI RRP was published as Informational RFC 2832 in May 
   2000[refno]. VeriSign Global Registry Services (VGRS) updated the 
   RRP specification with its publication of the Internet Draft 
   entitled "VeriSign RRP v2.0.0" [refno]. The Extensible Provisioning 
   Protocol (EPP) is the work product of the IETF 
   Provisioning/Registration (provreg) Working Group. EPP is a text/XML 
   protocol that permits multiple service providers to perform object 
   provisioning operations using a shared central object repository. 
  
Rader           Informational - Expires December, 2003               5 
                     Domain Name & Related Def'n           June, 2003 
 
 
   Specific implementations of EPP may have slight variances from one 
   another due to the use of the EPP extension mechanisms that allow 
   for implementation specific features and other object management 
   capabilities. EPP is in production use by most gTLD Registry 
   Operators with the exception of Verisign. Verisign has made a 
   contractual commitment to migrate the .com and .net registry system 
   to whichever protocol is adopted as a standard by the IETF 
   community. 
    
   Registry, Thick: A registry in which all of the information 
   associated with registered entities, including both technical 
   information (information needed to produce zone files) and social 
   information (information needed to implement operational, business, 
   or legal practices), is stored within the registry repository. 
    
   Registry, Thin: A registry in which some element of the social 
   information associated with registered entities is distributed 
   between a shared registry and the registrars served by the registry. 
    
   Registry Operator: Usually synonymous with the term Registry, 
   however a Registry Operator may also be an organization or 
   individual acting operating the Registry under an outsourced 
   technical services management contract. 
    
   Root System: The aggregate of all DNS activities, Top Level Domains 
   and Domain Names existing in the Namespace.  
    
   RWhois: RWhois (Referral Whois) extends and enhances the Whois 
   concept in a hierarchical and scaleable fashion. In accordance with 
   this, RWhois focuses primarily on the distribution of "network 
   objects", or the data representing Internet resources or people, and 
   uses the inherently hierarchical nature of these network objects 
   (domain names, Internet Protocol (IP) networks, email addresses) to 
   more accurately discover the requested information. [6] 
    
   SLD: An "SLD" is a second-level domain of the DNS 
    
   SLD, Functional: A reasonable equivalent to an SLD in a namespace 
   where second level domains are not permitted for policy reasons. An 
   example of a Functional SLD would be foo.com.au. While .com is the 
   actual SLD, .au policy does not permit the widespread registration 
   of second level domains, thereby creating a proliferation of 
   Functional SLDs (in this case .foo) in the .au namespace. 
    
   SLD Holder: See "Domain Holder" 
         
   SLD Sponsor: See "Registrar, Sponsoring". 
    
   Shared Registration System: A domain name registration system in 
   which registry services are shared among multiple independent 
   registrars. Shared Registration Systems require a loose coupling 
   between registrars and a registry. 
  
Rader           Informational - Expires December, 2003               6 
                     Domain Name & Related Def'n           June, 2003 
 
 
    
   TLD: Top Level Domain.  A generic term used to describe both gTLDs 
   and ccTLDs that exist under the top-level root of the domain name 
   hierarchy. 
    
   Top Level Domain: See "TLD". 
    
   Top Level Domain, Country Code: A TLD that corresponds to an entry 
   in the ISO-3166-1 list. .UK, .GG, .JE are also ccTLDs despite the 
   lack of a corresponding entry in the ISO-3166-1 list. 
    
   Top Level Domain, Generic: A TLD created to act as a globally 
   relevant resource. Examples of these include .COM, .NET, .ORG, 
   .INFO, .BIZ and .AERO amongst others. 
    
   Whois: WHOIS was originally described in RFC 812 (NICNAME/WHOIS), 
   dated 1982 and subsequently updated in RFC 954 (NICNAME/WHOIS), 
   dated 1985.  The original intent of the WHOIS protocol was to enable 
   network users to obtain directory information about other users on 
   the network using application programs such as NICNAME.  The 
   required information for this directory was defined by the Defense 
   Communications Agency (DCA).  As noted in RFC 954 the term WHOIS was 
   generically used to refer to this directory service.  The original 
   directory service was like a small community phone book that 
   provided researchers and developers with contact information.  Over 
   time other "objects" besides users were "registered" in this 
   directory resulting in a directory service that is used by 
   registries and registrars to record information about and for their 
   customers, constituents, and stakeholders.  This was done by 
   following the same basic instructions originally issued by DCA 
   without regard for the foreseeable use by the various parts of the 
   internet community.  There are several uses of this directory 
   service that have evolved or been developed.  These include 
   information relating to the registrant of a DNS name, the operation 
   of the DNS (identification of name servers), allocation and 
   assignment of IP addresses, and routing policy.  There are several 
   types of registries that provide these services.  In all cases, they 
   are using the well known port, port 43. Whois is sometimes 
   colloquially referred to using the terms "Socket-based Whois" and 
   "Port 43 Whois" to denote client/server TCP/IP transactions as 
   described in RFC 954. 
    
   Whois++: A circa 1995 extension to the trivial WHOIS service 
   described in RFC 954 to permit WHOIS-like servers to make available 
   more structured information to the Internet. Whois++ is not in 
   widespread use and is specified in RFC 1835 
   <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1835.txt> 
    
   Whois, Bulk: A data retrieval mechanism required by ICANN that 
   specifies that all ICANN accredited Registrars must make their Whois 
   dataset available t third parties. Thick Registries also may provide 

  
Rader           Informational - Expires December, 2003               7 
                     Domain Name & Related Def'n           June, 2003 
 
 
   a similar service in allowing entities to retrieve the Registry 
   Whois dataset. 
         
   Whois, Command-line: A Whois query executed from the command line of 
   an operating system such as Linux or MS-DOS. 
    
   Whois, LDAP: an experimental project launched by VeriSign, Inc., to 
   explore the use of LDAP and LDAP-related technologies for use as a 
   directory service of administrative domain registration information. 
   Also referred to as "Referral LDAP Whois". (source: "Whois Domain 
   Data using the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol(LDAP) draft-
   newton-ldap-whois-02", 
   <http://www.dfn.pca.de/bibliothek/standards/ietf/none/internet-
   drafts/draft-newton-ldap-whois-02.txt> 
    
   Whois Record: The sum of information pertaining to a specific domain 
   name as contained in the relevant Whois database. 
         
   Whois, Referral: An ad hoc process that allows a Whois server to 
   retrieve data from a third party Whois server and provide a response 
   to a Whois query for information that the queried server is not 
   authoritative for.  
         
   Whois, Registrar: Whois services made available by specific 
   registrars for the domain names that they sponsor at the Registry. 
         
   Whois, Registry: Whois services made available by specific 
   registries for the domain names that they are authoritative for. 
   Registry Whois often do not provide the comprehensive contact 
   information that Registrar Whois services do, but they usually 
   contain contact information for the Sponsoring Registrar. Note that 
   the payload provided to the client by the Registry is not 
   standardized between Registries and may vary based on the model 
   employed by the Registry. 
         
   Whois, Web based: A World Wide Web interface to Registrar or 
   Registry Whois services. 
    
   Zone: A portion of the total domain namespace that is represented by 
   the data stored on a particular nameserver. The nameserver has 
   authority over the zone û or the particular portion of the domain 
   namespace û described by that data.   
    
   Zone File: A file that contains data describing a portion of the 
   domain name space. Zone files contain the information needed to 
   resolve domain names to Internet Protocol (IP) numbers. 
     
   Zone Transfer: The process by which nameservers request and 
   replicate Zone File data from remote nameservers. 
         
         
4. Security Considerations 
  
Rader           Informational - Expires December, 2003               8 
                     Domain Name & Related Def'n           June, 2003 
 
 
    
   This memo provides definitions for administrative terms related to 
   DNS and does not raise or address security issues. 
    
    
5. References 
    
   [1]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", 
      BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   [2]  Harrenstein, Stahl & Feinler, "NICName/Whois", RFC 954, October     
      1985.  
    
   [3]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
   [4]  Kristula, D., "History of the Internet", 
      http://davesite.com/webstation/net-history.shtml, 1996. 
    
   [5]  DIN Deutsches Institut f’r Normung, "Scope and applications of 
      ISO 3166-1", 
      http://www.din.de/gremien/nas/nabd/iso3166ma/scopappl.html, 2001. 
    
   [5]  Postel, J., "Domain Name System Structure and Delegation", RFC 
      1591, March, 1994. 
    
   [6]  Williamson, Kosters, Blacka, Singh & Zeilstra, "Referral Whois 
      (Rwhois) Protocol V1.5", RFC 2167, June 1997. 
    
    
6. Acknowledgments 
    
   This document is the result of input and motivation from a wide 
   variety of individuals and entities. Rick Wesson, Scott Allan and 
   Tim Jung provided the primary motivators with ICANN, IANA and 
   Network Solutions providing the history and context. Additionally, 
   the various terms and conditions, operating contracts and frequently 
   asked questions documents produced by various Registries and 
   Registrars were instrumental in the production of this document. 
   Where appropriate, these contributions will be specifically 
   acknowledged in the References portion of future iterations of this 
   draft. 
    
   Other portions of this document have assumed definitions from " 
   Generic Registry-Registrar Protocol Requirements" (draft-hollenbeck-
   grrp-reqs-06.txt, January, 2001), by Scott Hollenbeck, at the 
   author's request. 
    
   Certain definitions have been reproduced, in part and without 
   permission from the Network Solutions DNS Glossary that can be found 
   at http://www.networksolutions.com/cgi-bin/glossary/lookup. 
    
  
Rader           Informational - Expires December, 2003               9 
                     Domain Name & Related Def'n           June, 2003 
 
 
   Thanks to Ray Plzak for providing a most wonderful (and 
   comprehensive) definition of "Whois" and to Andy Newton for pointing 
   out (what felt like) a thousand and two nits. 
                      
    
7. Author's Address 
    
   Ross Wm. Rader 
   Tucows Inc. 
   96 Mowat Avenue 
   Toronto, Ontario 
   M6K 3M1 
   t. 416.538.5492 
   f. 416.531.2516 
   e. ross@tucows.com 
    
    



































  
Rader           Informational - Expires December, 2003              10 
                     Domain Name & Related Def'n           June, 2003 
 
 
    
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society 2001. All Rights Reserved. This 
   document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
























  
Rader           Informational - Expires December, 2003              11 

