INTERNET DRAFT                                  J.M.Pullen
                                                  George Mason U.
                                                M.Myjak
                                                  U.of Central Florida
                                                C.Bouwens
                                                  SAIC, Inc.
                                                20 September 1996
                                                Expire in six months


    Limitations of Internet Protocol Suite for Distributed Simulation
               in the Large Multicast Environment
                   <draft-pullen-lame-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

     This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
     documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its
     areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also
     distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
     documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
     Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
     ``work in progress''

     To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check
     the ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-
     Drafts Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa),
     nic.nordu.net (Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim),
     ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).


Abstract

     The characteristics of distributed simulation in the Large 
     Multicast Environment are described.  Mechanics and rates
     of data exchange are elaborated.  Required network
     characteristics are described.  Using this information,
     additional capabilities needed to use the Internet Protocol 
     Suite for support of large-scale distributed simulation
     are enumerated.





1.  The Large Multicast Environment

     The Large Multicast User's Group (LAMUG) was formed to create a 
     consensus-based requirement for Internet Protocols to support
     Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS), its successor the High 
     Level Architecture for simulation (HLA), and related applications.  
     The applications are characterized by the need to distribute a 
     real-time application over a shared wide-area network in a 
     scalable manner such that numbers of hosts from a few to tens of 
     thousands are able to interchange state data with sufficient
     reliability and timeliness to sustain a three-dimensional virtual, 
     visual environment containing large numbers of moving objects.  
     Each such host may simulate a number of battlefield entities
     that may be as few as one or an many as thousands.  The network 
     supporting such a system necessarily will be capable of multicast.

     Distributed Interactive Simulation is the name of a family of 
     protocols used to exchange information about a virtual 
     environment among hosts in a distributed system that are 
     simulating the behavior of objects in that environment.  The 
     objects are capable of physical interactions and can sense each 
     other by visual and other means (infrared, etc.).  DIS was 
     developed by the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) to implement 
     system for military training, rehearsal, and other purposes.
     DIS standards are used for the same purposes by defense and other 
     organizations in other countries as well.  More information on DIS 
     can be found in the references.

     The feature of DIS that drives network requirements is that it 
     is intended to work with output to and input from humans across 
     distributed simulators at both local and distant locations in real 
     time.  This places tight limits on latency between hosts.  It also 
     means that any practical network will require multicasting to 
     implement the required distribution of large amounts of data to all 
     participating simulators.  Large DIS configurations are expected to 
     place hosts in multicast groups based on sharing the same sensor 
     inputs in the virtual environment.  This can mean a need for 
     hundreds of multicast groups where objects may move between groups 
     in large numbers at high rates.

     DIS real time flow consists of packets of length around 2000 
     bits at rates from .2 per second per simulator to 15 per second 
     per simulator.  This information is intentionally redundant and
     normally is transmitted with a best-effort transport protocol 
     (UDP), and in some cases also is compressed.  Required accuracy 
     both of latency and of physical simulation varies with the 
     intended purpose but generally must be at least sufficient to 
     satisfy human perception, for example in tightly coupled




     simulations such as high performance aircraft maximum acceptable 
     latency between applications end-to-end is 100 milliseconds between 
     any two hosts.  At relatively rare intervals events (e.g. 
     collisions between battlefield entities) may occur which require 
     reliable transmission of some data on a unicast basis, to any other 
     host in the system.  Other protocols supporting the DIS environment 
     (e.g. Network Time and Simulation Management) may require 
     information transport in addition to the flow of DIS entity-state 
     data.

     DoD has a goal to build DIS systems with up to 100,000 simulated 
     objects, many of them computer-generated forces that run with 
     minimal human intervention, acting as opposing force or simulating 
     friendly forces that are not available to participate.  DoD would 
     like to carry out such simulations using a shared WAN.  Beyond 
     DoD many people see a likelihood that DIS-like capabilities may 
     be commercialized as entertainment.  The scope of such an 
     entertainment system is hard to predict but conceivably could be 
     larger than the DoD goal of 100,000.

     The High Level Architecture (HLA) is a development beyond DIS 
     that aims at bringing DIS and other forms of distributed 
     simulation into a unifying system paradigm.  Thus HLA has 
     networking requirements at least as demanding as DIS.  HLA is 
     still under development, therefore this document will focus on 
     the requirements of DIS.


2.  DIS network requirements.

     a.  real-time packet delivery, with a small fraction (less than 
     two percent), of packets exceed an established latency, in no case 
     more than a few hundred milliseconds, in a shared network

     b.  multicasting with thousands of multicast groups that can 
     sustain join/leave in less than one second at rates of hundreds 
     of join/leaves per second

     c.  support for secure networking, needed for classified military 
     simulations

     d.  A high degree of flexibility in constructing networks depending
     on the working environment, such as leased lines, ISDN, ATM, and/or 
     mobile links on instrumented ranges.





3.  Internet Protocol Suite facilities needed and not yet available for 
large-scale DIS in shared networks.  

     These derive from the need for real-time multicast with established 
     quality of service:

     a.  Requirement: resource reservation available in production 
     systems.  Work needed: RSVP seems to be on a path to achieving 
     this, however a mechanism is needed to group streams such that 
     multiple multicast groups can share the same network capacity.
     The RSVP Working Group recognizes a need for this and is 
     planning to consider it after they complete a draft standard
     based on their current work (experimental RSVP version 12). 

     Note: Some current DIS networks allow for quality of service in 
     terms of reserved/prioritized bandwidth and/or minimal delay 
     (ST-2 or RSVP) or private dial-up links with bandwidth on 
     demand and compression (ISDN), but no commercial, production
     system using open standards is available to meet the performance
     requirements projected above.


     b.  Requirement: resource-sensitive routing to be used with the 
     resource reservation mechanism.  Work needed: a routing protocol
     for IP multicast, derived from the current versions (DVMRP or 
     MOSPF) but sensitive to resource requirements.  A new protocol
     called Quality of Service Open Shortest Path First (QOSPF) has
     been proposed and a working group is being formed to investigate 
     its potential.  QOSPF will work with RSVP.  It is likely to 
     require at least two years to develop such a protocol. 

     c.  Requirement: IP multicast that is capable of taking advantage 
     of link-layer multicast (such as ATM) for packet replication across 
     multiple logical IP subnets (LIS). Work needed: Extend or replace 
     the current standards-track IP multicast over ATM multicast, which
     uses a Multicast Address Resolution Server (MARS) to resolve the
     fact that ATM provides no mechanism to distribute IP multicast
     group information.  It only works within an LIS and hence will not
     support high-performance, wide-area, shared-use IP/ATM networks
     in multicast mode.  An approach to solving this problem has been
     developed in the DARPA Real time Information Transport Network 
     (RITN) program and was briefed to the IETF in December, 1995 but
     no working group is pursuing it.

     d.  Requirement: a hybrid transport protocol that can support best-
     effort multicast of most data, lightweight reliable multicast of 
     critical reference data, and reliable unicast of occasional data.
     Without such a protocol the application must become responsible
     for reliability of transport in the real time multicast 
     environment. Work needed:  A Selectively Reliable Transport 
     Protocol (SRTP) has been proposed by the Distributed Interactive 
     Simulation Communications and Security (DIS-CAS) working group.  
     This work needs to be brought into the IETF and pursued there.  A 
     new IETF working group on multicast transport has been proposed.  
     Such a group would provide a logical home for SRTP development.




     e.  Requirement: network management for DIS systems.  Work needed: 
     Create a DIS/HLA Management Information Base (MIB) for use with the 
     Internet standard Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP).  This
     could be undertaken by the LAMUG.

     f.  Requirement: a session protocol to start, pause, and stop a DIS 
     exercise over an IP network.  Work needed: a new subgroup of the 
     Multiparty Multimedia Session Control working group to investigate 
     use of that session protocol for DIS/HLA.

     g.  Requirement: an integrated security architecture. Work needed:
     Investigate use of the IPv6 security architecture to meet this  
     need.


4.  References

   [1] Symington et. al, "Modeling and Simulation Requirements for IPng", 
       RFC 1667, August 1994

   [2] DIS Steering Committee, "The DIS Vision", Institute for 
       Simulation and Training, University of Central Florida, May 1994

   [3] IEEE 1278.1-1995, Standard for Distributed Interactive Simulation 
       Application Protocols 

   [4] IEEE 1278.2-1995, Standard for Distributed Interactive Simulation 
       Communication services and Profiles

   [5] Deering, "Host Requirements for IP Multicasting", RFC 1112, 
       August 1989

   [6] Case et. al., "Simple Network Management Protocol", RFC 1067, 
       May 1990 

   [7] Moy, "MOSPF: Analysis and Experience", RFC1585, March 1994

   [8] Estrin et. al., "Protocol Independent Multicast-Sparse Mode",
       work in progress (draft-ietf-idmr-pim-sm-spec-06), September 1996

   [9] Pusateri, "Distance Vector Multicast Routing Protocol",
       work in progress (draft-ietf-idmr-dvmrp-v3-03), September 1996

   [10] Atkinson, "IPv6 Security Architecture", work in progress
        (draft-ietf-ipngwg-sec-00), March 1996

   [11] Braden et. al., "Resource Reservation Protocol Version 1 Functional 
        Specification", work in progress (draft-ietf-rsvp-policy-arch-12)

   [12] Zhang et. al., "Quality of Service Extensions to OSPF", work in 
        progress (Internet Draft) June, 1996

   [13] Armitage, "Support for Multicast over UNI 3.0/3.1 based ATM
        Networks", work in progress (draft-ietf-ipatm-ipmc-12), 
        February 1996




   [14] Bormann et. al., "Simple Conference Control Protocol", work in 
        progress (draft-ietf-mmusic-sccp-00), June 1996

   [15] Pullen et. al. "Implementation of A Selectively Reliable Transport 
        Protocol for DIS", Proceedings of the 14th Distributed Interactive 
        Simulation Workshop, March 1996
 
5.  Authors' Addresses

  J. Mark Pullen
  Computer Science/4A5
  George Mason University
  Fairfax, VA 22032
  mpullen@gmu.edu

  Michael Myjak
  Institute for Simulation and Training
  University of Central Florida
  3800 Progress Drive
  Orlando, FL  32826
  mmyjak@ist.ucf.edu

  Christina Bouwens
  SAIC Inc.
  Orlando FL
  chris_bouwens@cpqm.saic.com



