
Long-term Archive And Notary                                  T. Gondrom
Services (LTANS)                                        IXOS Software AG
Internet-Draft                                   
Expires: January 1, 2005                        

                                                           July 12, 2004



                 Notary Services requirements
                 draft-ietf-ltans-notareqs-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 12, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   Notary services are available today in a wide variety for paper based 
   processes and documents. To define the needs, requirements and future 
   world for notary services in the elctronic world, this document 
   describes use cases and scenarios as base for further discussion and 
   work of the LTANS WG in this area.






Gondrom, et al.         Expires January  1, 2004                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Notary Services requirements			   July 2004


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Use cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Technical Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Operational Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 17







































Gondrom, et al.         Expires January  1, 2004                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Notary Services requirements			   July 2004


1.  Introduction

   The office of notary dates back to the Roman Empire. Since about 
   2000 years trustworthy persons act as notaries to approve that they 
   have witnessed something. 
   A Notary in common law jurisdictions is a qualified lawyer. 
   The office of a notary is always commissioned by the state.   
   Traditionally, notaries recorded matters of judicial importance as 
   well as private transactions or events where an officially 
   authenticated record or a document drawn up with professional skill 
   or knowledge was required. Specifically, the functions of notaries 
   include the attestation of documents and certification of their due 
   execution, administering of oaths, witnessing affidavits and 
   statutory declarations, certification of copy documents, noting and 
   protesting of bills of exchange and the preparation of ships' 
   protests.
   
   Significant weight attaches to documents certified by notaries. 
   Documents certified by notaries are sealed with the notary's seal 
   and are recorded by the notary in a register maintained by him/her. 
   These are known as "notarial acts". Notarial acts and certificates 
   are recognised by some countries without the need for any further 
   certification from the respective Foreign Ministry or foreign 
   diplomatic missions. (In countries subscribing to the Hague 
   Convention Abolishing the Requirement for Legalisation for Foreign 
   Public Documents only one further act of certification is required, 
   known as an apostille). (source: wikipedia.org)


   A notary service should support and enable a human notary to fullfill 
   his tasks with electronic documents as well as he already does with 
   paper based documents and processes.

   Notary services might be located at a government facility, at the 
   office of a civil notary or a lawyer or other places that are honored 
   by the trust of the public.

   In the the different countries the characteristics of a trusted 
   notary and their "notarial acts" can vary widely so a computer based 
   notary service has to meet their individual concerns and 
   requirements.

   Examples of notary service usage by submitters include:

      - an entity (person or company) wants a notary to function as a 
        witness for the existence of a document or the clkosing of a 
        contract
      



Gondrom, et al.         Expires January  1, 2004                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Notary Services requirements			   July 2004


      - entities need a trusted third party to gather and store 
        documents, making it impossible for them to delete the document, 
        or taking care, that some information has to be submitted by a 
        sender until a certain time and also guaranteeing that the 
        recepient doesn't receive the document before a giving time. 
        (an important requirment for awarding contracts by public 
        authorities)
      - format transformations
        Classically, virtually the only "format conversion" exerted by 
        notaries is the exemplification of attested copies of documents. 
        Besides this paper-to-paper transformation, with electronic 
        documents three other format changes become possible: 
        paper-to-electronic, electronic-to-paper, and most importantly 
        electronic-to-electronic format transformations.
      - verification and testation of the legal validity of signed 
        documents
      - ...



   In parallels to the document "Long term archive service requirements"
   draft-ietf-ltans-reqs-01.txt, which aims to identify the technical 
   requirements for a long-term archive service, this document tries to 
   identify possible use cases and technical requirements for notary 
   services. 


























Gondrom, et al.         Expires January  1, 2004                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Notary Services requirements			   July 2004


2.  Terminology


      Notary: a person or institution which is trusted by the public 
      and other involved parties. 

      Seal: The sign of a notary set to certify a notarial act.

      User: Person or institution that needs the service of a notary 
      or other trusted third party.

      Notary service: electronic service that supports a human notary
      to provide his/her services on electronic based processes and 
      documents. An electronic notary service cannot function without 
      the trust earned by the human behind it and the fact that the
      human notary has absolut control over the the machine.
      


































Gondrom, et al.         Expires January  1, 2004                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Notary Services requirements			   July 2004


3.  Use cases

   3.1 record transactions: 
   The notary service has to record private transactions, e.g. 
   transactions of ownership. Additionally to the recording it MUST 
   be able to guarantee and provide documentation that all necessary 
   information has been provided to all involved parties. 


   3.2. record events: 
   The notary service has to document and proof that a certain event 
   has happened. At first the service has to identify the involved 
   entities and verify that all necessary preconditions are met. 
   After this the event or ceremony can be held. During which the 
   notary service has to ensure that all entities understood and 
   received the whole information and consequences of the event. 
   After the event an officially authenticated record has to be 
   issued to all entities and one copy kept for later documentation. 
   (events might be e.g. marriage, à) 


   3.3. certification of copy documents
   The notary service must be able to attest that one document contains 
   the same information as another and the validity of all contained 
   digital signatures and the identity of the signers. With this the 
   transformation of one document format into another can be achieved. 


   3.4. administering of oaths
   One Service can be that the administering of oaths can in the future 
   be documented electronically instead of applying the seal of a notary 
   on a piece of paper. E.g. the client can visit the office of a notary 
   (maybe even only virtually), take an oath and the notary can record 
   that with an electronic document, like a digital signed document. 


   3.5. attestation and certification of documents and events
   The notary can attest and certify the correctness and existence of a 
   document and all contained signatures as the notary service took part 
   in the creation and signing of the document and by this ensured the 
   integrity of the environment for all participants. 










Gondrom, et al.         Expires January  1, 2004                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Notary Services requirements			   July 2004


4.  Technical Requirements

   This section describes a (technical) system delivering 
   notary services.
   Possible services MUST support at least one use cases completely 
   but NEED NOT support all possible use cases for notary systems 
   and services. This way one can have a self-contained system for 
   each separate task.
   

4.1  Enable submission, retrieval and deletion

4.1.1  Functional Requirements

   A notary service must permit entities to perform the
   following basic operations:

      - submit data
      - retrieve data,
      - delete data (if the notary services is authorised to allow 
        deletion at a given point in time)

   Users must be able to request a specific service they want to access, 
   and receive an attestation (possibly a digitally signed document) 
   after the completion of the service. The format for the 
   acknowledgements must allow the identification of the notary service 
   provider; in specific cases also the identity of the individual human 
   notary. The acknowledgement of a successful execution of the notary 
   service should permit the submitter to verify that the correct data 
   was received by the service and the correct kind of service was 
   executed. 
   
   All requests to a notary service MUST be authenticated. 
   
   Following submission, the service must start a workflow to enable the 
   human notary to fulfill and supervise its work. If supervision or a 
   response within a given timeframe is not possible the service must 
   report an error to the user.

   After submission and before completion of the service the user SHOULD 
   always be able to receive information about the status of the 
   process. The access to the status information MUST only be accessible 
   to authorised entities.

   Deletion requests also MUST be authorised and additionally their MUST 
   be a kind of authorisation policy which controls that the notary 
   service does not delete information that must be kept.

   It must be possible to authenticate requests and responses. This may
   be accomplished using transport security mechanisms.

Gondrom, et al.         Expires January  1, 2004                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Notary Services requirements			   July 2004

   
4.2 Provide services

4.2.1  Functional Requirements

   All services must be well documented and the notary service MUST 
   create reports whose autheniticity can be verified by an initial 
   client and any other interested authorised party, for a long time 
   after the creation of the report.

   Depending on the kind of service online interaction between the 
   participants MUST be possible.


4.3  Support Demonstration of Service Integrity and Trust

4.3.1  Functional Requirements

   A notary service MUST be able to demonstrate that the clients and 
   users can trust it. For this evaluation records by other trusted 
   parties (e.g. government authorities), the identity of members of 
   the notary office and further documentation MUST be easily accessible 
   to the client. For every user and client MUST be obvious if 
   systems are tempered or manipulated. 
   

4.4  Operation

4.4.1  Functional Requirements

   The operation of the notary service must be under the complete and 
   unconditional control of the notary office. It MUST be impossible 
   to manipulate the system without the human notaries from the office 
   noticing it. 

4.5  Data confidentiality

4.5.1  Functional Requirements

   The notary service MUST allow to respect the confidentiality 
   requirement of a particular procedure to be executed.

   If information is deployed on systems outside the direct supervision 
   of the notary office it is MANDATORY to encrypt the information with 
   maximum security. If encryption becomes weak, due to improvements in 
   cryptography the notary office has to be informed and all 
   information has to encrypted with better algorithms again. 

   All communications with a notary service MUST be encrypted. 
   (e.g. SSL)  Traditional standardized encrypting methods and formats, 
   e.g. CMS, should be supported.

Gondrom, et al.         Expires January  1, 2004                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Notary Services requirements			   July 2004


5.  Operational Considerations

   A notary service must be able to work efficiently even for large 
   amounts of data objects and requests. 
   
   In order to limit expenses and to achieve high performance, the 
   involvement of other trusted third parties should be minimized.




6.  Security Considerations

   Trust is the principal asset of a notary service. Concerning that the 
   implementation of such a service must be very careful so that no data 
   integrity can be lost or manipulation of the system can be done. 



































Gondrom, et al.         Expires January  1, 2004                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Notary Services requirements			   July 2004


7.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to members of the LTANS mailing list for review of earlier
   drafts and many suggestions.



Authors' Addresses

   Tobias Gondrom
   IXOS Software AG
   Bretonischer Ring 12
   85630 Grasbrunn / Munich 
   Germany

   Fax: +49 (89) 4629-33-1816
   eMail: tobias.gondrom@ixos.de


































Gondrom, et al.         Expires January  1, 2004               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Notary Services requirements			   July 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Gondrom, et al.         Expires January  1, 2004               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    Notary Services requirements			   July 2004


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Gondrom, et al.         Expires January  1, 2004               [Page 12]

