


DNS Extensions Working Group                                 G. Barwood
Internet-Draft                                                           
Intended status: Informational                        September 5, 2008
Expires: March 2009


                       Resolver side mitigations
              draft-barwood-dnsext-fr-resolver-mitigations-00

Status of This Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire in March 2009   .

Abstract

   Describes mitigations against spoofing attacks on DNS.
   
   
   











Barwood              Expires March 2009                         [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Resolver mitigations               August 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3

   2.  Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3

   3.  Mitigations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  Prepend a random nonce label to the question.  . . . . . .  4
     3.2.  Repeat the query . . .   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.3   Include Bad IDs in entropy caclulation . . . . . . . . . .  8

   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9

   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9

   7.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10

   8.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
































Barwood                 Expires March 2009                      [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Resolver mitigations               August 2008


1.  Introduction

   This document describes mitigations that a resolver can currently
   deploy to resist spoofing attacks on DNS, without server software
   being updated.
   

2.  Criteria

   These are resolver side solutions, thus only the resolver needs to be 
   redeployed, or the software updated, for this to work.  This allows
   deployment in the short term.

   The solutions have to follow the DNS protocol.

   The solutions have to be practical, non disruptive, and not anti-social.

   The context in which these solutions were explored is CERT Vulnerability Note VU#800113, "Multiple DNS implementations vulnerable to cache poisoning".


Barwood                 Expires March 2009                       [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Resolver mitigations                August 2008
   
   
3.  Mitigations

   Below, the resolver side mitigations are described.
   Not described are port randomization, and 0x20 ( which are both 
   nevertheless recommmended ). The techniques are especially, but not 
   solely applicable where port randomization is not possible, due 
   to NAT devices or other reasons.

3.1. Prepend a random nonce label to the question.

   This should be used where a referral is probable.

   It allows an amount of entropy to be encoded limited only by the 256
   character limit on a question, provided the authority server returns a
   copy of the question in the response.

   If the response is a Name Error (due tio the server being authoritative
   for the question), or an Answer is given ( due to a wildcard ), the
   response should be discarded, and the query repeated without the nonce.

   A simple heuristic for deciding where a referral probable is:

   (1) If the Bailiwick is Root, and the last label in the question is 
   a known TLD other than ARPA, a referral is probable.

Barwood                 Expires March 2009                       [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Resolver mitigations                August 2008
  

   (2) If the Bailiwick is top level ( does not have a dot ), a referral 
   is probable.

   (3) Otherwise a referral is not probable.

   Where the heuristic fails, this may be recorded so subsequent retries 
   are avoided.

   A static list of known TLDs (and any exceptional cases) may be kept. If 
   this list is not up to date, extra queries may be generated, but no loss 
   of functionality will occur.

Barwood                 Expires March 2009                       [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            Resolver mitigations               August 2008


3.2.  Query repetition

   By repeating the query, additional entropy may be obtained. A practical 
   problem occurs when responses are non-deterministic, that is many 
   different responses are obtained for the same question.
    
   In this case, the resolver will need to perform an analysis to produce 
   a converged result.

   RFC 2181 introduced the concept of "RRset Integrity", and this needs 
   to be taken into account.

   Resolvers may decide to ditch RRset Integrity for some Types, for 
   non-deterministic servers, if the alternative is unacceptable security 
   or failure to resolve a name.

   In particular, for most of the types defined in RFC 1034/1035, RRset 
   integrity may not be essential.

   One model is to accumulate entropy for various attributes of each 
   observed RRset, such as Number of values, Value, TTL. Provided these 
   converge, a plausible synthesised RRset may be constructed.

   For example, suppose the question is MX records for example.com.

   First response:
   example.com MX mail1.example.com
   example.com MX mail2.example.com

   Second response:
   example.com MX mail2.example.com  ( mail2.example.com confirmed)
   example.com MX mail3.example.com

   Barwood                 Expires March 2009                       [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            Resolver mitigations                August 2008
  
   Third response:
   example.com MX mail3.example.com ( mail3.example.com confirmed )
   example.com MX mail4.example.com 

   Plausible result:
   example.com MX mail2.example.com
   example.com MX mail3.example.com

   The semantic model here is that 2 MX records are to be offered, 
   but the selection does not matter.

   Another possibility where convergence is slow is to resolve glue. For 
   example:

   First response:
   example.com NS ns1.example.com
   example.com NS ns2.example.com
   ..
   example.com NS ns9.example.com
   ns1.example.com A 0.0.0.1
   ns2.example.com A 0.0.0.2   
   ..
   ns9.example.com A 0.0.0.9

   Second response:
   example.com NS ns1.example.com
   example.com NS ns2.example.com
   ..
   example.com NS ns9.example.com
   ns1.example.com A 0.0.0.2
   ns2.example.com A 0.0.0.3   
   ..
   ns8.example.com A 0.0.0.9
   ns9.example.com A 0.0.0.1

   Converged result:
   example.com NSA 0.0.0.1
   example.com NSA 0.0.0.2
   ..
   example.com NSA 0.0.0.9

   where NSA is an internal pseudo-type with the obvious meaning.

   Some in-essential information is lost, but resolution can 
   still proceed.

   This may all sound quite daunting, but early practical experiments  
   show that commonly encountered non-deterministic servers select values
   from very small pools (in short time intervals), and show simple behavior.
   A more comprehensive survey of such servers would be valuable, 
   unfortunately the author does not have access to the resources 
   needed to carry out such a survey properly.

Barwood                  Expires March 2009                     [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            Resolver mitigations               August 2008

3.3.  Include observed Bad IDs in entropy calculation

   When a response is received, an entropy calculation may be performed
   to estimate how many bits have been checked.

   It will typically include the 0x20 bits, the prepended nonce, 
   16 bits for the ID, and discount for unusual/non-standard 
   features ( such as IP mismatch, question not copied ).

   The number of incorrect IDs observed while waiting for a response 
   should be included in the calculation, for example the logarithm 
   (base 2) of the number of Bad IDs could be subtracted.

   The result of the calculation should be used to decide whether to
   repeat the query. This allows a smooth response to attacks, while 
   not detracting from performance in the normal situation where Bad 
   IDs are not observed.

   While this measure does not reduce the number of packets required 
   for a successful attack, it does increase the time required, since 
   an attacker gains nothing from sending spoof packets at a very
   high rate.


Barwood                     Expires March 2009                     [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            Resolver mitigations               August 2008

5.  Security Considerations

   All of the mitigations aim to provide more security. Query repetition
   has an obvious adverse effect on performance and bandwith.

   Each query repetition provides an extra attack opportunity, so the 
   total entropy requirement may be adjusted to reflect this.

   The random nonce may expose internal state to an attacker who 
   controls a name server. It is essential that a cryptographically
   strong source of random numbers be used to generate IDs, 0x20 bits 
   and prepended nonces. This must be seeded from data that cannot be
   guessed by an attacker, such as thermal noise or other random 
   physical fluctuations.

   A sufficently determined attacker may cause a denial of service, due to
   a very large number of Bad IDs reducing the effective entropy to zero.
   In practice, denial of service would probably occur due to the extreme
   number of incoming packets.

6.  IANA Considerations

   None.

Barwood                 Expires March 2009                       [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            Resolver mitigations               August 2008


7.  Acknowledgments

   Thanks to Nicholas Weaver (ICSI Berkeley) and Wouter Wijngaards (NLnet
   Labs). The idea of prepending a nonce may be due to Paul Vixie (ISC).

8.  Informative References

   [RFC2181]  Elz, R. and R. Bush, "Clarifications to the DNS
              Specification", RFC 2181, July 1997.

Author's Address

   George Barwood
   33 Sandpiper Close
   Gloucester GL2 4LZ
   United Kingdom

   Phone: +44 452 722670
   EMail: george.barwood@blueyonder.co.uk
   Skype: george.barwood


Barwood                    Expires March 2009                      [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            Resolver mitigations               August 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Barwood                  Expires March 2009                    [Page 11]
