


Network Working Group                                           B. Rosen
Internet-Draft                                                   NeuStar
Intended status: Informational                              July 3, 2009
Expires: January 4, 2010


     URN Namespace for National Emergency Number Association (NENA)
                        draft-rosen-urn-nena-00

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 4, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   This document describes the Namespace Identifier (NID) for Uniform
   Resource Namespace (URN) resources published by National Emergency
   Number Association (NENA).  NENA defines and manages resources that



Rosen                    Expires January 4, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             URN nena Namespace                  July 2009


   utilize this URN name model.  Management activities for these and
   other resource types are provided by the National Emergency Number
   Association (NENA) Registry System (NRS).  For the processes that NRS
   uses to manage this and other registries, see NENA ??-???


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  URN Specification for "nena" NID  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  Examples  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  Namespace Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Community Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   8.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7


































Rosen                    Expires January 4, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             URN nena Namespace                  July 2009


1.  Introduction

   NENA is the "Voice of 9-1-1" in North America.  NENA's mission is to
   foster the technological advancement, availability and implementation
   of a universal emergency telephone number system (9-1-1).  In
   carrying out its mission, NENA promotes research, planning, training
   and education.  The protection of human life, the preservation of
   property, and the maintenance of general community security are among
   NENA's objectives.  NENA serves as a link in the delivery of
   emergency services. 9-1-1 has, throughout its evolution, become
   recognized as an asset of the North American public.

   NENA is currently in the process of setting standards, processes and
   procedures for the use of an IP-based Emergency Services IP Network
   (ESInet) for all public safety entities in North America.  This
   activity is supported by a membership composed of private and public
   sector entities that have an interest in 9-1-1 and public safety.
   This effort, dubbed "Next Generation 9-1-1" (NG9-1-1) is based in
   large part on IETF standards for interactive media session
   establishment and emergency calling.

   Some of the solutions being developed by NENA need XML namespaces
   that are managed so that they are unique and persistent.  To assure
   that the uniqueness is absolute, the registration of a specific
   Namespace ID (NID) for use by NENA was deemed appropriate.
   Therefore, a full and complete registration will follow the namespace
   specification process as defined in [RFC3406].
























Rosen                    Expires January 4, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             URN nena Namespace                  July 2009


2.  URN Specification for "nena" NID

  Namespace ID:
  The NID "nena" is requested.

  Registration Information:
    registration version number: 1
    registration date: YYYY-MM-DD  [RFC Editor, please replace with the
                                        data of publication of this RFC]

  Declared registrant of the namespace:
    Registering organization
      Name:       National Emergency Number Association (NENA)
      Address:    4350 North Fairfax Drive, Suite 750
                  Arlington, VA 22203-1695

  Designated contact:
    Role:    NENA Registry Services Administrator
    Email:   nrs-admin@nena.org

  Declaration of syntactic structure:
  The Namespace Specific String (NSS) of all URNs that use the "nena"
  NID will have the following structure:

  urn:nena:{NENAresource}:{ResourceSpecificString}

   where the "NENAresource" is a US-ASCII string that conforms to the
   URN syntax requirements [RFC2141] and defines a specific class of
   resource type.  Each resource type has a specific labeling scheme
   that is covered by "ResourceSpecificString", which also conforms to
   the naming requirements of [RFC2141].

   NENA maintains a naming authority, the National Emergency Number
   Association (NENA) Registration System (NRS) that will manage the
   assignment of NENAresources" and the specific registration values
   assigned for each resource class.  Other NENA Standards documents
   will define the "ResourceSpecificStrings" for a given "NENAresource".

   Relevant ancillary documentation:
   The National Emergency Number Association Registration System (NRS)
   provides information on the registered resources and the
   registrations for each.  More information about NRS and the
   registration activities and procedures to be followed are defined in
   "Managing Registries for NENA Next Generation Data Elements Technical
   Standard Document", NENA 02-XXX, Version 1, DRAFT March 22, 2009,
   which is available at: http://www.nena.org/technical-standards.

   Identifier uniqueness considerations:



Rosen                    Expires January 4, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             URN nena Namespace                  July 2009


   The NRS will manage resources using the "nena" NID and will be the
   authority for managing the resources and subsequent strings
   associated.  In the associated procedures, NRS will ensure the
   uniqueness of the strings themselves or shall permit secondary
   responsibility for management of well-defined sub-trees.

   NENA may permit use of experimental type values that will not be
   registered.  As a consequence, multiple users may end up using the
   same value for separate uses.  As experimental usage is only intended
   for testing purposes, this should not be a real issue.

   Identifier persistence considerations:
   NRS will provide clear documentation of the registered uses of the
   "nena" NID.  NRS will establish a registry for NENAresources.  Each
   NENAresource will have a separate description in the registry and may
   have its own sub-registry.

   The registries and information will be published and maintained by
   NRS on its web site.

   Process of identifier assignment:
   NRS will provide procedures for registration of each type of resource
   that it maintains.  Each such resource may have three types of
   registration activities:
   1.  Registered values associated with NENA specifications or services
   2.  Registration of values or sub-registries to other entities
   3.  Name models for use in experimental purposes

   Process for identifier resolution:
   The namespace is not listed with an RDS; this is not relevant.

   Rules for Lexical Equivalence:
   No special considerations; the rules for lexical equivalence of
   [RFC2141] apply.

   Conformance with URN Syntax:
   No special considerations.

   Validation mechanism:
   None specified.  URN assignment will be handled by procedures
   implemented in support of NRS activities.

   Scope:
   Global







Rosen                    Expires January 4, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             URN nena Namespace                  July 2009


3.  Examples

   The following examples are representative urns that could be assigned
   by NRS.  They may not be the actual strings that would be assigned.

   NENAresource "psaproute"
   Syntax: "urn:nena.emergencyresponders:<responder name>"
   ResourceSpecificString: simple string with name of responder,
                           defined in a sub-registry
   Use: Defines the urn to be used for queries to an NG9-1-1 Emergency
   Call Routing Function that provides URIs for responding agencies.

   Examples:
   urn:nena.emergencyresponders:ambulance
   urn:nena.emergencyresponders:fire
   urn:nena.emergencyresponders:ambulance
   urn:nena.emergencyresponders:police
   urn:nena.emergencyresponders:poison
   urn:nena.emergencyresponders:coastguard
   urn:nena.emergencyresponders:marine


4.  Namespace Considerations

   The National Emergency Number Association is developing a variety of
   applications and services.  Some of these services require that
   supporting information (e.g., data descriptions, attributes, etc.) be
   fully specified.  For proper operation, descriptions of the needed
   supporting information must exist and be available in a unique,
   reliable, and persistent manner.  These dependencies provide the
   basis of need for namespaces, in one form or another.

   As the National Emergency Number Association work is ongoing and
   covers many technical areas, the possibility of binding to various
   other namespace repositories has been deemed impractical.  Each
   object or description, as defined in NENA, could possibly be related
   to multiple different other namespaces, so further conflicts of
   association could occur.  Thus the intent is to utilize the National
   Emergency Number Association Registration System, operated by NENA,
   as the naming authority for NENA-defined objects and descriptions.


5.  Community Considerations

   The objects and descriptions required for services defined by NENA
   are generally available for use by other organizations.  The National
   Emergency Number Association will provide access and support for name
   requests by these organizations.  This support can be enabled in a



Rosen                    Expires January 4, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             URN nena Namespace                  July 2009


   timely and responsive fashion as new objects and descriptions are
   produced.  These will be enabled in a fashion similar to current IANA
   processes.


6.  Security Considerations

   There are no additional security considerations other than those
   normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general.


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document adds a new entry in the urn-namespaces registry.  The
   namespace should be "nena".  The defining document is this RFC.  The
   entry can be found at: http://www.iana.org/assignments/urn-namespaces
   and any associated mirrors.


8.  Informative References

   [RFC2141]  Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997.

   [RFC3406]  Daigle, L., van Gulik, D., Iannella, R., and P. Faltstrom,
              "Uniform Resource Names (URN) Namespace Definition
              Mechanisms", BCP 66, RFC 3406, October 2002.


Author's Address

   Brian Rosen
   NeuStar, Inc.
   470 Conrad Dr
   Mars, PA  16046
   US

   Email: br@brianrosen.net














Rosen                    Expires January 4, 2010                [Page 7]


