


MMUSIC Working Group                                                    
Internet Draft                                                 M. Saito 
draft-saito-mmusic-ipsec-negotiation-req-02          NTT Communications 
Expires: September 2006                                     S. Fujimoto 
                                                           Fujitsu Labs 
                                                             March 2006 
    
    
          Requirements for IPsec Negotiation in the SIP Framework 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Abstract 
    
   As the Internet grows, it becomes inevitable even for the general 
   users to take measures against the security risks such as tapping, 
   unauthorized access, and so on. For example, we can consider the use 
   case of networked home appliances which cannot have the rich 
   calculation resources and may use the dedicated transport protocol 
   for the media session. In such a case, it is effective to connect 
   such devices securely using IPsec [1] because it does not require the 
   rich resources, and is independent of the upper layer protocol. Also 
   from the viewpoint of implementation, IPsec is not only widespread in 
   IPv4, but also mandatory in IPv6 which is expected in the networked 
   home appliances region(this use case is just the one of examples, and 
   this document does not focus only on home appliances but also on the 
   general applications which use the dedicated media protocols, where 
   IPsec is suitable as the security protocol). 

 
 
Saito & Fujimoto       Expires - September 2006               [Page 1] 
              Requirements for IPsec Negotiation in SIP    March 2006 
 
 
    
   However, it is necessary to set up a lot of option parameters 
   properly in order to establish the IPsec connection. And it requires 
   the technical knowledge even if using IKE, which does it 
   automatically. At least, IKE is not so simple that the general users 
   who do not know the security well can handle. 
    
   By the way, SIP [2] mechanism, which has a function of flexible 
   negotiation, enables the different applications to connect to each 
   other easily by negotiating the codec, frame rate, and so on. On the 
   other hand, we found out the similarity between IPsec configuration 
   and parameter configuration for media session, and we thought to 
   negotiate the parameters for IPsec easily with using SIP. 
   Particularly, if the application itself supports SIP by nature, there 
   should be more merits. 
    
   In this document, we provide some use cases of IPsec communication 
   systems. Then we explain what kind of IPsec parameters should be 
   negotiated on SIP. Note that we assumed that the system users are 
   end-users who are not familiar with IPsec. This document also offers 
   the candidate methods to realize it, including the existing specs, 
   and which one we should take among them. 
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [3]. 
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction and Problem Statement............................3 
   2. Application Scenarios.........................................4 
   3. Requirements for Security Method..............................5 
      3.1. Requirements for Security Protocol.......................6 
      3.2. Reduction of Implementation..............................6 
      3.3. Interoperability of Security Protocol....................7 
      3.4. Generalized Security Protocol............................7 
   4. Protocol Requirements for IPsec...............................7 
      4.1. Requirements for Key-Exchange............................7 
      4.2. Synchronization of Key-Exchange and Media Negotiation....8 
      4.3. Interoperability.........................................8 
      4.4. Shared Security Policy between Media Sessions............8 
   5. Possible Solutions............................................9 
      5.1. Evaluation of Existing Specifications....................9 
      5.2. Idea of Solution Using SDP..............................10 
      5.3. Generic Use.............................................10 
   6. Conclusions..................................................10 
   7. Security Considerations......................................11 
 
 
Saito & Fujimoto       Expires - September 2006               [Page 2] 
              Requirements for IPsec Negotiation in SIP    March 2006 
 
 
   8. Changes since draft-saito-mmusic-ipsec-negotiation-req-01....11 
    
 
1. Introduction and Problem Statement 
    
   Various applications which use different protocols are increasing now, 
   so that the security of them is also required more and more. On the 
   other hand, SIP is considered as the de facto standard to invoke the 
   application sessions. We can use it for not only VoIP applications 
   but also general applications now. And the general users, in other 
   words, the people who do not have sufficient knowledge about security, 
   began to want the secure and easy communication tools. On the other 
   hand, the sessions invoked by SIP applications also need security 
   features, such as end-to-end authentication and/or encryption. In 
   fact, several security methods have already been offered. For example, 
   there are key exchange frameworks in order to encrypt the media 
   session, such as MIKEY [4], Key Management Extensions for SDP and 
   RTSP [5], SDP Security Descriptions [6], and so on. However so far, 
   these frameworks mainly support the specific use such as SRTP for 
   VoIP sessions although it may be applicable to general protocols. The 
   usage for the other protocols hasn't been defined yet. 
    
   However, considering the general applications, the dedicated protocol 
   is often used even if it is not sufficiently protected. In such a 
   case, SRTP cannot be used for the security protocol because it is 
   strongly combined with VoIP applications. On the other hand, there is 
   a quick choice to use IPsec that is independent of media and 
   applications. IPsec is recognized as the standard security protocol 
   of the IP layer, and has sufficient interoperability. 
    
   On the other hand, as shown in IKE, IPsec has a practical issue that 
   the configuration of its option parameters is so complicated. It 
   often prevents the applications from making use of IPsec. But the 
   most applications only want to use IPsec with ease, and they would 
   not require more than the recommended sets of parameters which are 
   believed to be sufficiently secure (Some devices can not support a 
   lot because of the resource restriction). In fact, the combination of 
   parameter sets which are secure and do not have a problem in 
   interoperability are limited, therefore we thought it would be 
   sufficient to choose one of them simply. Besides, it makes sense to 
   make use of SIP and an offer/answer model with the SDP [7] in order 
   to resolve the name, authenticate, and decide the media session when 
   the devices start the communication. And more, if we negotiated even 
   the IPsec parameters inside this mechanism, the problem could be 
   reduced compared with negotiating them after the start of media 
   session. Actually, if doing it after the start of media session, the 
   first data of UDP based media would be lost. 
    

 
 
Saito & Fujimoto       Expires - September 2006               [Page 3] 
              Requirements for IPsec Negotiation in SIP    March 2006 
 
 
   Therefore in this document, we describe the issues on applying IPsec 
   to the application sessions invoked by SIP, and we also describe the 
   requirements to solve them. 
    
2. Application Scenarios 
    
   We assume the end-to-end media communication invoked by SIP for the 
   use case, particularly the following patterns which the standard 
   protocols are not necessarily used for the media session. 
    
   o  Dedicated media protocol which can control or manage the home 
      network devices from the outside (Figure 1). 
 
    
                           +----------+ 
              REGISTRATION |   SIP    | REGISTRATION 
               +---------->|  Proxy   |<-------------+ 
               |  +------->|          |-----------+  | 
               |  |INVITE  +----------+   +-------|--+------+ 
               |  |                       | Home  |  |      | 
               |  |                       | Net.  V  |      | 
         +----------+                     |   +-----------+ | 
         | User A's |                     |   | User A's  | | 
         | Terminal |=========================|  Device   | | 
         |          | Session over IPsec  |   | (Sensor)  | | 
         +----------+                     |   +-----------+ | 
                                          +-----------------+ 
    
      Figure 1: Network Structure in Remote Device Control Scenario 
    
   o  Tunneling protocol such as L2TP which can transmit the various 
      media such as file sharing, video stream, and so on (Figure 2). 
 
 
                           +----------+ 
              REGISTRATION |   SIP    | REGISTRATION 
               +---------->|  Proxy   |<-------------+ 
               |  +------->|          |-----------+  | 
               |  |INVITE  +----------+           |  | 
               |  |                               |  | 
               |  |                               V  | 
         +----------+      L2TP with IPsec    +-----------+ 
         | User A's |-------------------------|  User B's | 
         | Terminal |======Media Sessions=====|  Terminal | 
         |          |-------------------------|           | 
         +----------+                         +-----------+ 
    
      Figure 2: Network Structure in Tunneling Protocol Scenario 
    
 
 
Saito & Fujimoto       Expires - September 2006               [Page 4] 
              Requirements for IPsec Negotiation in SIP    March 2006 
 
 
   In addition, we assume the following conditions when we use SIP in 
   these scenarios. 
    
   o  Signaling Path via the SIP Proxies 
    
       Each UA retains the SIP signaling path with its own outbound 
       proxy, and the media session between UAs is negotiated with the 
       exchange of the SIP messages via the SIP proxies. 
    
   o  Root of Trust 
    
       Each UA trusts the common entity. It may be the trusted 3rd 
       party such as CA in the PKI system, or the private CA. Or SIP 
       proxy may play such a role. The formation of Root of Trust is 
       outside the scope of this document, but the trust between each 
       UA and Root of Trust MUST be deployed easily to the direct trust 
       between UAs with the exchange of SIP messages. By the way, Root 
       of Trust is trusted by each UA in the following points. 
        
         Authentication between UAs 
         Authorization of Media Communication between UAs 
         Integrity of the Data Exchanged between UAs 
         Confidentiality of the Data Exchanged between UAs 
 
       Following above conditions, it can be also said that each UA has 
       some method to exchange the SIP message or SDP included in it 
       securely between them. 
    
   o  Network Topology 
    
       End-to-End media session is often influenced by the firewall/NAT 
       on the direct path between UAs. It is inevitable to think of the 
       existence of such middle boxes, but this issue has been 
       discussed a lot in the existing SIP framework. And for the 
       simplicity, we decide that this issue is outside the scope, 
       although recognizing it. 
    
   It is our goal to make the end-to-end media protocol secure easily 
   under the above conditions. In order to achieve that, we also need 
   the protocol-independent security method because the media protocol 
   is not always the standard one. 
    
3. Requirements for Security Method 
    
   In the above scenarios, we can point the several factors necessary 
   for the security of the media. Particularly, we focus on the 
   following factors in this document. 
    

 
 
Saito & Fujimoto       Expires - September 2006               [Page 5] 
              Requirements for IPsec Negotiation in SIP    March 2006 
 
 
3.1. Requirements for Security Protocol 
    
   The security protocol for the media MUST support the following 
   functions. 
    
   o  Authentication of the Peer 
 
       All the SIP nodes which initiate the media sessions between them 
       MUST be able to authenticate each other with the help of Root of 
       Trust. That is, impersonation by the malicious node will be 
       eliminated. And, the media session itself MUST be also 
       authenticated based on this authenticator. In other words, this 
       is the function assuring that the peer of the media session and 
       the peer of the SIP negotiation have the same identity. 
 
   o  Integrity of the Media Data 
 
       The integrity of all the media data MUST be assured. It prevents 
       the malicious person from tampering the media data between the 
       legitimate nodes. 
 
   o  Confidentiality of the Media Data 
 
       The contents of the media data SHOULD be hidden from the un-
       trusted nodes. Therefore, the encryption of the media will be 
       required. 
 
   o  Access Control 
 
       The access from the nodes other than legitimate one MUST be 
       blocked. One of the approaches would be the mechanism to 
       generate the proper security associations covering the media 
       between the legitimate nodes, and discard the access which does 
       not coincide with them based on the node's security policy. 
 
   o  Update of Secret Keys 
 
       The secret keys used for authentication or encryption SHOULD be 
       updated periodically. Even if the peers are properly 
       authenticated and the end-to-end session between them is 
       encrypted, there still remains the risk that the attacker may 
       try all possible keys, that is to say, "brute force attack". 
       This requirement also includes the generic functions supported 
       by the generic key-exchange process, such as derivation of the 
       key, negotiation of SAs, choice of the cipher algorithm and so 
       on. 
 
3.2. Reduction of Implementation 
    
 
 
Saito & Fujimoto       Expires - September 2006               [Page 6] 
              Requirements for IPsec Negotiation in SIP    March 2006 
 
 
   Thinking of the use cases such as networked home appliances, the 
   security method SHOULD be light-weighted (or implementation cost 
   SHOULD be reduced) because devices do not always have the rich memory 
   or CPU resources. Generally speaking, the process of authentication 
   and encryption for the first time before the media session starts, 
   that is key-exchange process, tends to be heavy. But there is an 
   assumption that SIP or SDP messages can be transmitted securely, 
   therefore it is expected to reduce the load of key-exchange process 
   by synchronizing them. 
 
3.3. Interoperability of Security Protocol 
 
       The interoperability of the security protocol used for the end-
       to-end media session is also the important factor. Therefore, it 
       is desirable to use the protocol which is standard and has been 
       used practically and sufficiently, and proved to be relatively 
       interoperable. 
 
3.4. Generalized Security Protocol 
    
   The choice of the transport protocols used for the end-to-end media 
   session between terminals is not limited. It will depend on the upper 
   layer applications. If we have to provide the different security 
   protocols for each media transport protocol, it means the waste of 
   resources. Therefore, we think it desirable to use the standard, all-
   purpose security protocol for the IP applications such as IPsec. 
 
4. Protocol Requirements for IPsec 
    
   Considering the above requirements, we thought it proper to use IPsec, 
   which does not require the rich memory and CPU resources and is 
   recognized as the standard security protocol. In this section, we 
   describe the protocol requirements when applying IPsec to the media 
   session invoked by SIP. 
    
4.1. Requirements for Key-Exchange 
    
   IPsec is designed to fill the most of the requirements with security 
   functions such as, access control, connectionless integrity, data 
   origin authentication, protection against replays (a form of partial 
   sequence integrity), confidentiality (encryption), and limited 
   traffic flow confidentiality. The behavior of IPsec is controlled 
   based on SAs (Security Associations). 
    
   By the way, the above security functions of IPsec are controlled by 
   pre-defined SAs: Security Associations. Therefore, it is necessary to 
   negotiate SAs prior to starting the actual media sessions. For 
   example, the following SA parameters MUST be shared between the nodes. 
 
 
 
Saito & Fujimoto       Expires - September 2006               [Page 7] 
              Requirements for IPsec Negotiation in SIP    March 2006 
 
 
   o  SPI (Security Parameter Index: ID for SA) 
 
   o  IPsec Mode (tunnel mode or transport mode) 
 
   o  Lifetime of SA 
 
   o  Encryption Algorithm (in case of ESP) 
 
   o  Authentication Algorithm 
 
   o  Compression Algorithm in IPComp 
 
   o  A Pair of IP Addresses That IPsec Applied 
 
   In addition, it is necessary to share and update the secret key for 
   encryption between the nodes. This is one of the requirements for 
   security protocol described in 3.1. To achieve it, the following 
   parameters will be necessary. 
 
o  Master Key Data: Given to PRF 
   o  PRF (Pseudo-Random Function): Session keys will be derived from 
      Master Key with PRF 
 
   o  Key Rounds State of PRF 
 
   According to the specification of IPsec [10][11], Sequence Number 
   field (32 bits) is used for cryptographic calculation. Therefore, the 
   secret key SHOULD be updated before 2^32 packets are sent. 
    
4.2. Synchronization of Key-Exchange and Media Negotiation 
    
   For saving the bandwidth and the implementation, the IPsec-SA SHOULD 
   be negotiated in the minimum roundtrips (hopefully one roundtrip 
   synchronized with the offer-answer model of SDP negotiation [7]). 
    
4.3. Interoperability 
 
   In order to gain the interoperability of IPsec, The parameter sets 
   (such as the mode of security, the set of supporting cipher 
   algorithms, and so on) SHOULD be pre-defined, and at least one SHOULD 
   be chosen as mandatory to implement. 
 
4.4. Shared Security Policy between Media Sessions 
    
   For the simplicity, it is preferable to be able to share IPsec SAs 
   between media sessions invoked by the single INVITE request. In order 
   to share the SA information across the plural media, IPsec parameters 
   MUST be defined independently of the media. In other words, it is the 
   mechanism that makes a pair of SAs protect the plural media sessions. 
 
 
Saito & Fujimoto       Expires - September 2006               [Page 8] 
              Requirements for IPsec Negotiation in SIP    March 2006 
 
 
 
5. Possible Solutions 
    
   In this section, we describe the possible solutions for our 
   application models including the existing specifications. 
 
5.1. Evaluation of Existing Specifications 
    
   There are the following existing specifications which can be used for 
   negotiating the IPsec SA parameters. 
 
   o  IKE (v1/v2) 
 
       IKE [12] is one of the widespread standard specifications of 
       IPsec key-exchange. However, since it includes a lot of 
       available functions, the implementation is not light and the 
       interoperability is not always fine. On the other hand, it is 
       efficient to exchange the key for the media session in the SDP 
       simultaneously with the media negotiation. 
 
   o  Key-Exchange Using Kerberos (KINK) 
 
       There is a light-weighted key exchange mechanism, KINK [13]. In 
       this mechanism, the traffic and the calculation cost can be 
       reduced with using the secure key-distribution server. On the 
       other hand, it is too large a task to build and operate the 
       Kerberos system in addition to the SIP platform. And it is 
       difficult to make the new framework of assuring the end-to-end 
       connectivity of KINK, and binding KINK and the media sessions of 
       SDP. 
 
   o  Key-Exchange Using SDP 
 
       The frameworks such as MIKEY [4] and Key Management Extensions 
       [5], or SDP Security Descriptions [6] are offered. If there is 
       the assumption that SDP is securely protected (particularly 
       Security Descriptions is designed on this case), the key 
       exchange can be fairly simple. On the other hand, the present 
       specification of Security Descriptions only defines the profiles 
       for SRTP. Therefore it is necessary to modify the specification 
       or add the profiles in order to express the SA information such 
       as "Media-Protocol over IPsec" and so on. In addition, there may 
       be a case that the port number of SA becomes different from that 
       of the media transport by applying the tunneling, i.e. UDP 
       encapsulation of IPsec, etc. Therefore it will be necessary to 
       think the mechanism to support such a situation. 
    
   By the way, as for the update of the encryption keys, we think there 
   are following possible methods. 
 
 
Saito & Fujimoto       Expires - September 2006               [Page 9] 
              Requirements for IPsec Negotiation in SIP    March 2006 
 
 
 
   o  Method-1: re-INVITE 
 
   o  Method-2: Key Derivation at the Pre-defined Timing 
 
   If the update of the secret key seldom occurs since the most sessions 
   finish before it, it may be suitable to use Method-1. However, it 
   generally costs to use SIP signaling channel, and the nodes must take 
   care of synchronization with the media sessions.  
    
   In contrast, Method-2 is useful if the key-update is frequently 
   occurred. The SPI and "session" key will be updated when certain 
   amount of IP packets are sent. But Sequence Number is usually managed 
   by IP layer, and it might be difficult to check its value from 
   application layer. 
 
5.2. Idea of Solution Using SDP 
    
   It is thought that the approach using SDP is most effective in the 
   use case of this document. In addition, we think there are following 
   possible approaches which reduce the implementation cost and increase 
   the interoperability. 
 
   o  Defining the sets of SA parameter suites which are frequently 
      chosen in order to increase the simplicity. 
    
   o  Binding IPsec parameters not only with the media (media level of 
      SDP) but also with the session (session level of SDP) in order to 
      share a pair of IPsec SAs between plural media sessions. 
    
   In addition, like the use case of this document, the tunneling 
   protocol such as L2TP can be also thought as a kind of media. 
   Therefore, the mechanism to negotiate the concept of VPN in the 
   offer-answer model of SDP negotiation is also convenient. 
 
5.3. Generic Use 
    
   At the same time, in order to share the single IPsec SA between 
   multiple media which invoked by single INVITE request, it SHOULD be 
   possible to bind IPsec parameters with the session (session level of 
   SDP), not only with the media (media level of SDP). 
 
6. Conclusions 
    
   We evaluated the existing protocols, but there was no protocol which 
   met our requirements completely. The closest candidates were key-mgt 
   and the SDP Security Descriptions I-D. However the former needs the 
   new format for IPsec key exchange, and the latter requires the 

 
 
Saito & Fujimoto       Expires - September 2006              [Page 10] 
              Requirements for IPsec Negotiation in SIP    March 2006 
 
 
   additional definition of transport specific parameters and the 
   standard format to express the IPsec SA information. 
    
   Therefore we want to build a new specification to negotiate IPsec-SA 
   parameters based on offer-answer model of SDP with reflecting the 
   feedbacks from IETF community. That will specify the call-sequences 
   of IPsec-SA negotiation and define the required data formats 
   including IPsec-SA suites. 
 
7. Security Considerations 
    
   This document focuses on the key-exchange process of IPsec, but from 
   the viewpoint of security, the following features must be considered, 
   too. 
 
   o  Formation of Root of Trust 
 
       There is another issue how a trusted entity assumed in this 
       document can be retained in order to ease the end-to-end 
       security. At least the disclosure of data by way of Root of 
       Trust must be avoided. CA in PKI architecture is one of the 
       candidates, but thinking of the use case of home appliances, it 
       may not be necessarily the best way to distribute the 
       certificates to all the devices in the home network from the 
       outside. On the other hand, the trust relationship between the 
       device and SIP proxy may be used as Root of Trust, or the 
       private CA which is valid only within the home network may be 
       introduced. In anyway, it is necessary to build up the model of 
       Root of Trust adapted to the use cases. Because Root of Trust 
       can be a man-in-the-middle potentially, it is an essential 
       factor in the total security architecture. 
 
   o  SA Management Related to Applications 
 
       IPsec is a per-host basis security protocol. Therefore we need 
       the mechanism that the application can invoke IPsec SAs, and 
       that manages all IPsec SAs not to conflict with each other. For 
       example, when plural applications generate the IPsec SAs which 
       have the different security levels respectively, the application 
       data must be transmitted by the IPsec SAs which are generated by 
       the same application. Therefore it will require the SA 
       management mechanism related to applications. 
 
8. Changes since draft-saito-mmusic-ipsec-negotiation-req-01 
 
   o  Application scenarios section was revised so that IPsec was 
      applied to more general use cases including L2TP. 
    

 
 
Saito & Fujimoto       Expires - September 2006              [Page 11] 
              Requirements for IPsec Negotiation in SIP    March 2006 
 
 
   o  Clarified the concept of Root of Trust, and made the model of it 
      outside the scope. 
 
   o  Requirements sections were revised from the viewpoint of security 
      methods and IPsec itself. 
 
   o  Minor grammatical edits. 
 
References 
    
                     
   1  Kent, S., and R. Atkinson, "Security Architecture for the Internet 
      Protocol", RFC 2401, November 1998. 
    
   2  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A., 
      Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler, "SIP: 
      Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002. 
    
   3  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
   4  J. Arkko, E. Carrara, F. Lindholm, M. Naslund, K. Norrman, "MIKEY: 
      Multimedia Internet KEYing", RFC 3830, August 2004. 
    
   5  J. Arkko, E. Carrara, F. Lindholm, M. Naslund, K. Norrman, "Key 
      Management Extensions for Session Description Protocol (SDP) and 
      Real Time Streaming Protocol (RTSP)", work in progress, June 2005. 
    
   6  Andreasen, F., Baugher, M., Wing, D., "Session Description 
      Protocol Security Descriptions for Media Streams", work in 
      progress, September 2005. 
    
   7  Rosenberg, J., and Schulzrinne, H., "An Offer/Answer Model with 
      the Session Description Protocol (SDP)", RFC 3264, June 2002. 
    
    
   10 Kent, S., and R. Atkinson, "IP Authentication Header", RFC 2402, 
      November 1998. 
    
   11 Kent, S., and R. Atkinson, "IP Encapsulating Security Payload 
      (ESP)", RFC 2406, November 1998. 
    
   12 Harkins, D. and D. Carrel, "The Internet Key Exchange (IKE)", RFC 
      2409, November 1998. 
    
   13 Sakane, S., Kamada, K., M. Thomas and J. Vilhuber, "Kerberized 
      Internet Negotiation of Keys (KINK)", draft-ietf-kink-kink-11, 
      work in progress, December 2005. 
 

 
Saito & Fujimoto       Expires - September 2006              [Page 12] 
              Requirements for IPsec Negotiation in SIP    March 2006 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
    
   The concepts of this document were discussed in the UOPF: Ubiquitous 
   Open Platform Forum (http://www.uopf.org/en/), which is participated 
   by many ISPs and information appliances makers and so on. The authors 
   would like to thank the UOPF members and those who contributed to 
   this document. 
    
Author's Addresses 
    
   Makoto Saito 
   NTT Communications 
   3-20-2 Nishi-Shinjuku, Shinjuku-ku 
   Tokyo 163-1421 Japan 
   Phone: +81-3-6800-3262 
   Email: ma.saito@nttv6.jp 
    
   Shingo Fujimoto 
   Fujitsu Laboratories LTD. 
   64 Nishiwaki, Ohkubo-cho 
   Akashi 674-8555 Japan 
   Phone: +81-78-934-8248 
   Email: shingo_fujimoto@jp.fujitsu.com 
    
Intellectual Property 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights. Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 
    
 

 
Saito & Fujimoto       Expires - September 2006              [Page 13] 
              Requirements for IPsec Negotiation in SIP    March 2006 
 
 
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). This document is subject 
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
    


































 
 
Saito & Fujimoto       Expires - September 2006              [Page 14] 