


Individual Submission                                          P. Wilson
Internet-Draft                                             G. Michaelson
Intended status: Standards Track                               G. Huston
Expires: February 4, 2008                                          APNIC
                                                          August 3, 2007


   Redesignation of 240/4 from "Future Use" to "Limited Use for Large
                           Private Internets"
                      draft-wilson-class-e-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 4, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   This document directs the IANA to designate the block of IPv4
   addresses from 240.0.0.0 to 255.255.255.255 (240.0.0.0/4) as unicast
   address space for limited use in large private Internets.






Wilson, et al.          Expires February 4, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              240/4 Private Use                August 2007


1.  Redesignation of 240.0.0.0/4

   The address block spanning 240.0.0.0 to 255.255.255.255
   (240.0.0.0/4), formerly designated as "Class E", and noted as being
   "Reserved" in the IANA IPv4 address registry, is no longer held in
   reserve by IANA for the IETF.

   IANA is directed to redesignate the address block 240.0.0.0/4 as
   unicast address space intended for private use in large private
   Internets that require more address space than is available in the
   private use address space designated by [RFC1918].

   Potential users of this address space would need to ensure that their
   envisaged deployment can satisfy the use caveats noted here.


2.  Caveats of Use

   Many implementations of the TCP/IP protocol stack have the
   204.0.0.0/4 address block marked as experimental, and prevent the
   host from forwarding IP packets with addresses drawn from this
   address block.

   For this reason, it is strongly suggested that private network
   addressing requirements which can be fulfilled from the private use
   address space designated by [RFC1918] should continue to use that
   space.  Network administrators with very large scale requirements for
   private use address space who wish to use addresses drawn from
   240.0.0.0/4 are advised to conduct appropriate tests to ensure that
   such addresses can be used in their envisaged private use context.

   [Note: not for publication.  It is suggested that in order to assist
   with verification of equipment compatibility, a separate
   informational RFC or other mechanism be developed to assist with the
   recording of specific test results, upgrade status, etc.]


3.  Security Considerations

   Equipment deployed on the public Internet is configured by default to
   treat addresses in the block 240.0.0.0/4 as experimental addresses
   that cannot be forwarded.  This implies that accidental leakage of
   packets destined to such addresses would conventionally be discarded.


4.  IANA Considerations

   The IANA is directed to redesignate the block of IPv4 addresses from



Wilson, et al.          Expires February 4, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              240/4 Private Use                August 2007


   240.0.0.0 to 255.255.255.255 as unicast address space reserved for
   "Limited Use for Large Private Internets".


5.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to acknowledge the thoughtful assistance of
   David Conrad, Andy Davidson and Robert Seastrom in the preparation of
   this document.


6.  Normative References

   [RFC1918]  Rekhter, Y., Moskowitz, R., Karrenberg, D., Groot, G., and
              E. Lear, "Address Allocation for Private Internets",
              BCP 5, RFC 1918, February 1996.


Authors' Addresses

   Paul Wilson
   Asia Pacific Network Information Centre

   Email: pwilson@apnic.net
   URI:   http://www.apnic.net


   George Michaelson
   Asia Pacific Network Information Centre

   Email: ggm@apnic.net
   URI:   http://www.apnic.net


   Geoff Huston
   Asia Pacific Network Information Centre

   Email: gih@apnic.net
   URI:   http://www.apnic.net












Wilson, et al.          Expires February 4, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              240/4 Private Use                August 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Wilson, et al.          Expires February 4, 2008                [Page 4]

