SIPPING Working Group                                      R. Ramanathan
Internet-Draft                                     Microsoft Corporation
Intended status: Informational                          October 15, 2006
Expires: April 18, 2007


                Response code for dynamic proxy redirect
                      draft-rajesh-sipping-303-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 18, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document defines new response code that clients would use for
   hinting the server to retarget a redirect response rather than
   allowing the sending client do perform the redirect








Ramanathan               Expires April 18, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                     303                      October 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  303 Proxy Redirect  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   4.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     4.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 5










































Ramanathan               Expires April 18, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                     303                      October 2006


1.  Introduction

   The 303 Proxy Redirect response code allows the receiving UA the
   ability to hint the proxy to retarget an INVITE, rather than send the
   INVITE all the way back to the calling UA.

   The 303 looks identical to the 302 in all respects, except that the
   response code servers as a hint to the proxy to retarget the INVITE.
   Proxys that do not support 303 or intentionally do not honor 303 are
   expected to send the 303 all the back to the client.


2.  Terminology

   In this document, the key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED",
   "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT
   RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" are to be interpreted as
   described in BCP 14, RFC 2119 [1] and indicate requirement levels for
   compliant implementations.


3.  303 Proxy Redirect

   SIP provides a 302 response code which allows the client receiving an
   INVITE request to redirect the caller to a new URI.  The 302 response
   code can be sent all the way back to the calling party, or can be
   retargeted by the proxy.  Currently SIP does not provide for a way
   for the redirecting client to instruct the server to perform one
   specific action dynamically on a call by call basis.

   An example where a new response code which provides a hint to
   retarget the call is needed is where the client wants to dynamically
   choose to the call to be sent through the PSTN gateways in the
   client's own domain for billing purposes.

   Another example is when the client is retargeting to a URI that is
   routable only through the receiving clients's own domain.  For
   example if a redirecting to sip:+14251234567@microsoft.com;user=phone
   will fail from a federated company contoso.com because the
   microsoft.com access proxies may not authorize an incoming call to a
   PSTN number from contoso.com.

   Moving the decision the retargeting on the client side reduces
   complexity on the server side and provides more flexibilty to the
   client.  The server does not need to be updated on the list of
   retargeting destinations, and clients can be designed to make this
   choice.




Ramanathan               Expires April 18, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                     303                      October 2006


   The 303 response code is very similar in structure to the 302, but
   the server interprets this as a hint to retarget the response.  When
   a client sends a 303 back, the proxy should handle this in the
   following way:

   Proxies that do not support 303 should send the response all the way
   to the caller.

   Proxies that do support the 303 but do not authorize the redirect for
   the user can either choose to send a 302 to the caller, or proxy the
   303 all the way back.

   Proxies that support the 303 and authorize the redirect should
   retarget the INVITE to the Contact URI specified in the 303 response.

   Clients should be prepared to receive a 303 and treat it similar to a
   302.


4.  References

4.1.  Normative References

      [1] Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
          Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler, "SIP:
          Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.



Author's Address

   Rajesh Ramanathan
   Microsoft Corporation
   One Microsoft Way
   Redmond, WA  98052, USA

   Email: rajeshra@microsoft.com














Ramanathan               Expires April 18, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                     303                      October 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Ramanathan               Expires April 18, 2007                 [Page 5]
