

SIMPLE                                                                  
Internet Draft                                               P. Kyzivat 
Document: draft-kyzivat-simple-prescaps-reqts-00.txt              Cisco 
Expires: April 2003                                        October 2002 
    
    
                 Requirements for SIP Capabilities in PIDF 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This document sets forth requirements for the definition of elements 
   for representation of SIP specific features within the Presence 
   Information Data Format (PIDF), as well as for guidelines on how to 
   use these new elements with PIDF to represent the capabilities of a 
   SIP User Agent Server.  
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2]. 
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. Definitions....................................................2 
   3. Motivation.....................................................3 
 
 
Kyzivat                  Expires - April 2003                 [Page 1] 
              Requirements for SIP Capabilities in PIDF  October 2002 
 
 
   4. How Presence Changes SIP Usage.................................3 
   5. The Role of Caller Preferences.................................4 
   6. Requirements...................................................5 
      6.1 DonÆt Change PIDF...............Error! Bookmark not defined. 
      6.2 Represent a Tag-Set........................................5 
      6.3 Represent Any Tag Set......................................5 
      6.4 Compatibility with Registration............................6 
   Security Considerations...........................................6 
   References........................................................6 
   Acknowledgments...................................................7 
   Author's Addresses................................................7 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
   Interoperation of Instant Messaging and Presence systems has been 
   defined by the IMPP Working Group. That group has also defined a 
   generic model for Presence and Instant Messaging [3] and requirements 
   for protocols implementing such a system [4]. Common Presence and 
   Instant Messaging (CPIM) defines common operations and formats which 
   all Presence and Instant Messaging services must agree upon so that 
   basic interoperability would be possible [5]. The actual base format 
   for presence (PIDF) is being defined in [6]. The PIDF document format 
   standardizes a minimal definition of status. In order to make the 
   PIDF format usable by different presence applications, these 
   applications usually must extend the basic PIDF format as defined in 
   [6]. 
    
   This document sets forth requirements for the definition of elements 
   for representation of SIP specific features within the Presence 
   Information Data Format (PIDF), as well as for guidelines on how to 
   use these new elements with PIDF to represent the capabilities of a 
   SIP User Agent Server. 
    
   With this extension SIP and SIMPLE based applications can have 
   available richer and more useful content compared to the baseline 
   PIDF data format. Using presence a SIP client may monitor the status 
   of a potential callee and send a request only when the expectation is 
   high that it will be successful. 
    
2. Definitions 
    
   This document uses the terms as defined in RFC 2778 [3], RFC 3261 
   [7], CPIM [5], and Callerprefs [8]. Additionally, the following terms 
   are defined and/or additionally clarified: 
    
   SIP-PRESENCE-EXTENSIONS:  
     A specification satisfying the requirements defined herein. 
    
 
 
Kyzivat                  Expires - April 2003                 [Page 2] 
              Requirements for SIP Capabilities in PIDF  October 2002 
 
 
3. Motivation 
    
   The PIDF document format [6] defines a <contact> element which may 
   appear once inside every <tuple> element.  The content of the 
   <contact> element encodes the CONTACT ADDRESS and CONTACT MEANS as 
   defined in [3].  The <contact> element is defined to be an URI.  This 
   URI can be of any URI type.  In some uses this URI can uniquely 
   identify the application the <tuple> intends to describe (e.g. im: 
   URIs).  However, this is not always the case. For instance a SIP URI 
   can represent different kinds of applications.  A SIP URI can be used 
   to contact voice applications, video applications, messaging 
   applications, or an application supporting all of these. If it is not 
   known by other means, it is difficult for applications processing the 
   presence document containing only SIP URI contact addresses to know 
   what particular application the <tuple> intends to describe.  
    
   Also, when a SIP URI designates an application that supports many 
   features such as audio, video, and messaging, a simple basic status 
   of OPEN/CLOSED may be insufficient to represent the dynamic status. 
   For instance, when engaged in an audio call the application may be 
   CLOSED for additional audio calls yet still be OPEN for messaging. 
    
4. How Presence Changes SIP Usage 
    
   Common usage of SIP encourages a specific relationship between a 
   caller (UAC) and callee (UAS): 
    
   o  The caller knows the callee by a relatively static address called 
      an Address of Record (AOR), and sends requests intended for the 
      callee to this address. 
    
   o  The callee is represented at any particular time by zero or more 
      UAS devices, each with its own, often transient, contact address. 
    
   o  The callee registers, with a registrar, the association between 
      the AOR and the server device addresses.  
    
   o  A proxy server receives a request addressed to the AOR and makes 
      the decision about how to route the request, deciding among 
      potentially several different contact addresses associated with 
      the requested callee's Address of Record. In making this decision 
      the proxy is guided by information provided to it by the callee 
      using Contacts in REGISTER messages, and by information provided 
      by the caller through headers in the message being routed.  
    
   o  The caller may suggest to the proxy preferences about how choices 
      among contacts should be made, encoding the preferences in request 
      headers. 
    
 
 
Kyzivat                  Expires - April 2003                 [Page 3] 
              Requirements for SIP Capabilities in PIDF  October 2002 
 
 
   o  The caller can only determine if the callee is actually available 
      to receive a call by attempting to send a request and observing 
      the result. 
    
   Presence, when used in conjunction with a SIP Presentity, provides 
   the opportunity for new relationships between caller and callee: 
    
   o  A potential callee reports aspects of its availability to some 
      potential callers. 
    
   o  A potential caller may decide whether to attempt a call based on 
      the availability reported to it by the callee. The caller has an 
      expectation that the likelihood of the call being answered is high 
      when callee is available - much higher than when attempting calls 
      at random. 
    
   o  The callee may present a single consolidated view of availability 
      and associate it with a single AOR. The caller may then decide 
      when to call based on availability, but depends on the proxy for 
      the AOR to route calls to appropriate device(s). 
    
   o  The callee may report the availability separately for different 
      devices, yet associate each with a single common AOR, and depend 
      upon a proxy to route calls to an appropriate device. The caller 
      may then decide when to call based on the availability of a device 
      with suitable availability characteristics, but depends on the 
      proxy for the AOR to route calls to appropriate device. 
    
   o  The callee may report the availability of different devices 
      separately, associating each with address of a specific device. 
      The caller may then decide when to call based on the availability 
      of a device with suitable availability characteristics, and may 
      then direct the call to that device without depending on a proxy 
      to make the desired selection. 
    
   To summarize, without presence a caller must poll for availability of 
   a callee by sending a request, and determine availability of the 
   callee by success or failure of the request. Using presence a caller 
   may monitor the status of the callee and send a request only when the 
   expectation is high that it will be successful. If specific device 
   addresses are reported in the presence document the caller also has 
   the opportunity to bypass the routing function of the proxy. 
    
5. The Role of Caller Preferences 
    
   Callerprefs [8] enhances SIP by permitting the callee to associate 
   with each contact a description of what kinds of call features are 
   acceptable, and by permitting the caller to associate with each call 

 
 
Kyzivat                  Expires - April 2003                 [Page 4] 
              Requirements for SIP Capabilities in PIDF  October 2002 
 
 
   a description of the call features desired. This enhances the ability 
   of a proxy to route a call to an appropriate UAS. 
    
   However, the benefits of callerprefs and presence are not entirely 
   complementary. Presence availability, as encoded by PIDF, is 
   currently limited to a simple OPEN/CLOSED status. 
    
   Features such as media support cannot be represented. So a presence-
   aware caller cannot effectively exploit presence to decide when and 
   how to attempt a call, and instead must resort to polling. For 
   instance, the callee may be available, but not for the medium the 
   caller wishes to use, so that an attempt to make a call to the 
   supposedly available callee may fail. 
    
   This document sets forth requirements for defining extended data 
   elements that may be used in conjunction with the extensibility of 
   PIDF, so that the callee capabilities defined in callerprefs [8] may 
   also be represented in PIDF documents. 
    
6. Requirements 
    
6.1 Use PIDF Without Change 
    
   SIP-PRESENCE-EXTENSIONS MUST NOT require changes to PIDF. 
    
   PIDF has provisions for extensibility built in, within the 
   <presence>, <tuple>, and <status> elements. Those are presumed to 
   provide sufficient latitude to fulfill these requirements. 
    
6.2 Represent a Tag-Set 
    
   Callerprefs defines a new kind of header parameter called a tag-set. 
    
   SIP-PRESENCE-EXTENSIONS MUST specify a way of representing a tag-set 
   for use in a PIDF document. 
    
6.3 Represent Any Tag Set 
    
   The definition of tag-set utilizes Feature tag, defined in RFC 2506 
   [9]. New feature tags may be defined at any time. Also, there is a 
   form of feature tag that requires no registration. In consequence, 
   new feature tags may begin to be used by SIP UAs at any time. It 
   would be unreasonable to require a revision of SIP-PRESENCE-
   EXTENSIONS or any other standardization activity before a new 
   feature-tag can be used with PIDF. 
    
   SIP-PRESENCE-EXTENSIONS MUST be capable of representing ANY valid 
   tag-set.   
    
 
 
Kyzivat                  Expires - April 2003                 [Page 5] 
              Requirements for SIP Capabilities in PIDF  October 2002 
 
 
6.4 Compatibility with Registration 
    
   Callerprefs specifies how to express the capabilities of a UAS in a 
   registration, by including one or more tag-sets as Contact 
   parameters. 
    
   SIP-PRESENCE-EXTENSIONS MUST specify how the capabilities of a UAS, 
   as represented in a registration, may be equivalently represented in 
   a PIDF document. 
    
   Note there is no intent to require that a PIDF document be compatible 
   with registration û only that it be possible for it to be. 
    
Security Considerations 
    
   This document provides requirements for new content in a PIDF 
   document. Because it permits the incorporation of new information 
   into a PIDF document, that new information is also subject to 
   disclosure when the PIDF document is distributed. All the security 
   considerations of PIDF apply. 
    
    
References 
    
                     
   1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   2  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
   3  Day, M., Rosenberg, J. and H. Sugano, "A Model for Presence and 
      Instant Messaging", RFC 2778, February 2000. 
    
   4  Day, M., Aggarwal, S., Mohr, G. and J. Vincent, "Instant Messaging 
      / Presence Protocol Requirements", RFC 2779, February 2000. 
    
   5  Crocker, D., "Common Presence and Instant Messaging (CPIM)", 
      draft-ietf-impp-cpim-03.txt, August 2002. 
    
   6  Sugano, H., Fujimoto, S., Klyne, G. and A. Bateman, "Common 
      Presence and Instant Messaging (CPIM) Presence Information Data 
      Format", draft-ietf-impp-cpim-pidf-05.txt, May 2002. 
    
   7  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A., 
      Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler, "SIP: 
      Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002. 
    

 
 
Kyzivat                  Expires - April 2003                 [Page 6] 
              Requirements for SIP Capabilities in PIDF  October 2002 
 
 
                                                                         
   8  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., "Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) 
      Caller Preferences and Callee Capabilities", draft-ietf-sip-
      callerprefs-06.txt, July 2002 
    
   9  K. Holtman, A. Mutz, T. Hardie, "Media Feature Tag Registration 
      Procedure", RFC 2506, March 1999. 
    
 
Acknowledgments 
    
   Thanks to Mikko Lonnfors and Krisztian Kiss for consultation and 
   feedback, and for contributions to the introductory and motivational 
   text. 
    
    
Author's Addresses 
    
   Paul Kyzivat 
   Cisco Systems 
   Mail Stop LWL3/12/2 
   900 Chelmsford St. 
   Lowell, MA 01851 
   Email: pkzivat@cisco.com 
     
























 
 
Kyzivat                  Expires - April 2003                 [Page 7] 
