


   Geopriv WG                                            James M.  Polk 
   Internet Draft                                         Cisco Systems 
   Document:                                                            
     draft-polk-geopriv-location-data-00.txt              Jorge Cuellar 
                                                             Siemens AG 
                                                                        
   Expires: October 2002                                      June 2003 
    
    
                   GEOPRIV Location Data Considerations 
    
    
   Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1]. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This document describes the Geopriv Location Data Fields of the 
   Location Object that MUST be present under what conditions, which 
   fields SHOULD be present, and which MAY be present.  This document 
   does not address the privacy and security requirements of the 
   GEOPRIV Protocol or the privacy and security requirements of the 
   GEOPRIV LO Using Protocol. 
    
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2]. 
    




Polk/Cuellar           Expires - December 2003                 [Page 1]

                 GEOPRIV Location Data Considerations         June 2003

 Table of Contents 
    
   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
      1.1  Motivation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
      1.2  Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Location Data Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Location Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   4.  Coordinate Location Data Type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
      4.1   Coordinate Location - Latitude (Lat) . . . . . . . . . .  5
      4.1.1 Coordinate Location - Latitude Resolution (LaRes). . . .  5
      4.2   Coordinate Location - Longitude (Long) . . . . . . . . .  6
      4.2.1 Coordinate Location - Longitude Resolution (LoRes) . . .  6
      4.3   Coordinate Location - Altitude (Alt) . . . . . . . . . .  7
      4.3.1 Coordinate Location - Altitude Resolution (AltRes) . . .  7
      4.3.2 Coordinate Location - Altitude Measurement Unit (MU) . .  7
      4.4   Coordinate Location - Datum (Datum)  . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Civil Location Data Type  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Independent Location Data Fields  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
      6.1  Distance Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
      6.2  Direction Fields  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
      6.3  Speed Fields  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
      6.4  Angle or Position Fields  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
      6.5  Miscellaneous . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  Open Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   10. Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   11. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   12. Author Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   13. Full Copyright Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
    
    
1.  Introduction 
    
   This document describes the Geopriv Location Data Fields of the 
   Location Object that MUST be present under what conditions, which 
   fields SHOULD be present, and which MAY be present.  This document 
   does not address the privacy and security requirements of the 
   GEOPRIV Protocol or the privacy and security requirements of the 
   GEOPRIV LO Using Protocol described in [3], which is out of scope 
   here.  The presented set or list of Location Data Fields is not all-
   inclusive, but fields that are relevant to the WG at this time. 
    
   Location Data is to be defined in several ways within Geopriv in 
   regards to a Location Target - and should always be understood in 
   the context of a Geopriv Target (the entity device whose location is
   sought).  The Target might be associated with a person (Joe), or it 
   might be associated with a building (a particular pizza restaurant).
    
   First is the data contained within a single field (i.e.  Latitude or
   cube number or velocity of the target).  These fields are defined 


Polk/Cuellar           Expires - December 2003                 [Page 2]

                 GEOPRIV Location Data Considerations         June 2003

   within this document and are categorized as: MUST be present in a 
   Location Object (LO), SHOULD be present in the LO, or MAY be present
   in the LO.  These fields are also characterized as being 
   individually independent (meaning a particular field can be present 
   independently of any other field being present - such as velocity); 
   while other fields are characterized as being dependent on another 
   present field for relevance (such as a Latitude field requiring a 
   Datum field for exactness of the position of a target with respect 
   to a meridian). 

    
1.1 Motivation 
    
   This document attempts to open up discussion on the location fields 
   that can be carried within the Geopriv Location Object.


1.2 Definitions 
    
    
   Here is listed the Geopriv components as well as other significant 
   terms that are not defined and scoped from the (section below that 
   this document is about). 
    
   Meridian - An imaginary great circle on the earth's surface passing 
   through both the North and South geographic poles.  All points on 
   the same meridian have the same longitude 
    
   Other definitions may be found in [3]. 


2.  Location Data Objective 
    
   The objective of Location Data is to convey the location of the  
   Geopriv Target to another entity. The Target might, through policy, 
   alter the precision of resolution of the data provided, but should 
   not lie. Various reasons might be valid to reveal more or less 
   precise resolution to a location request from another entity. Those 
   reasons for the level of precision conveyed are left to the Target, 
   or the domain the Target is within (i.e. a matter of policy - which 
   is out of scope for this document).


3.  Location Data 
    
   <<Comments: One possible way to group these fields even further is 
   to identify or name a Location Data Type for what MUST be present 
   (much the same way as packages work in the MGCP and H.248 worlds), 
   while allowing for additional individual Data fields to also be 
   present.  Two Data Types would seem to be obvious: Coordinate 
   Location and Civil Location, with everything else being optional and


Polk/Cuellar           Expires - December 2003                 [Page 3]

                 GEOPRIV Location Data Considerations         June 2003

   considered a MAY. 
    
   A slightly confusing piece to all this classification is that while 
   the Coordinate Data Type is fairly easily scoped in [4] as being 8 
   identifiable fields, the Civil Data Type isn't so "set" as the 
   number of fields that should be present is dependent on where the 
   target is.  Reference [5] provides around 14 fields that might be 
   present, of which not all are expected for several reasons.  For 
   example, at my house, I would not include a precinct (location 
   within a city) or cube/office number or maybe not a floor number.  
   Yet people living in London or NYC (2 cities I know) would include a
   precinct or borough field (Manhattan vs. Queens for example).>> 
    
    
    
4.  Coordinate Location Data Type 
    
   This Geopriv Location Data Type (LDT) represents location 
   information involving coordinate mapping systems.  Some mapping 
   systems focus on a 2-dimensional location (two intersecting lines),
   and others focus on a 3-dimensional location (three intersection 
   lines). Typically the 2D mapping system provides coordinates in 
   Latitude and Longitude. While 3D mapping systems add altitude to 
   latitude and longitude. From this we can conclude that a 2D 
   Coordinate Data Type MUST include Latitude, Longitude; while a 3D 
   Coordinate Data Type MUST add Altitude.  

   All mapping systems must start at some point of reference, called 
   the meridian (what is " 0 " on a map). The most common meridian used
   throughout the world is Greenwich. Datums define the meridian to be 
   used. Unless otherwise stated, for Coordinate Data Types, the 
   starting point is Greenwich for Longitude, the Equator for Latitude,
   and mean-low-tide for Altitude.

   The scope of each coordinate field is explained in the following 
   subsections. Also provided is the mandatory list of dependant fields
   that also must be present per location field, and the fields that 
   are related/optional. An example of this is Latitude. By itself, it 
   only provides the location of a line (just a longitude does). But 
   when Longitude is included with latitude, a point on the earth is 
   described. So in this sense, the longitude field is dependant on 
   latitude field being present to provide meaningful location 
   information. The reverse is true as well.

   A related field to Lat and Long is Altitude. Altitude is not 
   mandatory to determine a point on a 2D map (it is for a 3D map), 
   therefore it is considered related, or optional. 

   An example of unrelated or independent location fields is Latitude 
   and slope. However useful slope might be in describing the Target, 
   these two fields are not dependant on each other to make an 


Polk/Cuellar           Expires - December 2003                 [Page 4]

                 GEOPRIV Location Data Considerations         June 2003

   otherwise partial location field complete in 2D or 3D.
    
4.1 Coordinate Location - Latitude (Lat) 
    
   Latitude is defined as the angular distance north or south of the 
   earth's equator, measured in degrees along a meridian, as on a map 
   or globe; +90 degrees representing the North Pole; -90 degrees 
   representing the South Pole.  Each degree can be fractionalized 
   indefinitely, though this is impractical.  [4] scopes a reasonable 
   minimum fraction of a degree of Latitude to within 3.11mm or 
   0.0000002 of a degree.  Values can be in either decimal format, 
   binary format, or hexadecimal format - there MUST be an indication 
   of which numbering format is used within the Location Data Type (of 
   the Location Object).  This numbering format MUST be consistent with
   the one used for Longitude. 

   Latitude field dependencies: 
    
   - having the Longitude field also present to provide a 2D point on a
     map 
    
   - If the location Data Type requires a 3D point, then the Altitude 
     field must also be present

   Related fields: 
    
   - Altitude to provide a third axis point of location reference 
    
   - Latitude Resolution field would provide the exactness of the value
     given 
    
   One possibility when the exactness of latitude is known by the 
   responding Location Server (provided the exactness isn't 
   unnecessarily small), is to provide 2 latitude fields to give a 
   upper and lower boundary of where the target is with respect to 
   Latitude. 
    
    
4.1.1 Coordinate Location - Latitude Resolution (LaRes) 
    
   In [4], there is described a location field Latitude Resolution. 
   This is provided as an efficient means of placing boundaries on a 
   Latitude field value in binary (see appendix A and B of that 
   document for a 2 mathematical examples of how this LaRes field 
   refines or reduces the boundaries in which a target is within). 

   This is not a straightforward in decimal or hexadecimal formats. 
   This subsection, therefore, needs more work.

    



Polk/Cuellar           Expires - December 2003                 [Page 5]

                 GEOPRIV Location Data Considerations         June 2003

4.2 Coordinate Location - Longitude (Long) 
    
   Longitude is defined as Angular distance on the earth's surface, 
   measured east or west from the prime meridian of a given datum, to 
   the meridian passing through a position, expressed in degrees (and 
   fractions of a degree); 0 degrees representing the meridian; 
   positive degrees as traveling East, negative degrees as traveling 
   West; can be represented by +/-180 degrees bisecting the earth in 
   either direction away from the datum meridian.  Each degree can be 
   fractionalized infinitely, though this is impractical.  [4] scopes a
   reasonable minimum fraction of a degree of Longitude to within 
   2.42mm or 0.0000004 of a degree.  Values can be in either decimal 
   format, binary format, or hexadecimal format - there MUST be an 
   indication of which numbering format is used within the Location 
   Data Type (of the Location Object).  This numbering format MUST be 
   consistent with the one used for Latitude. 
    
   Longitude field dependencies: 
    
   - having the Latitude field also present to provide a 2D point on a 
     map 
    
   - If the location Data Type requires a 3D point, then the Altitude 
     field must also be present

   Related fields: 
    
   - Altitude to provide a third axis point of location reference 
    
   - Longitude Resolution field would provide the exactness of the 
     value given 
    
   One possibility when the exactness of Longitude is known by the 
   responding Location Server (provided the exactness isn't one point),
   is to provide 2 longitude fields to give a left and right (West and 
   East) boundary of where the target is with respect to Longitude. 
    
    
4.2.1 Coordinate Location - Longitude Resolution (LoRes) 
    
   In [4], there is described a location field Longitude Resolution. 
   This is provided as an efficient means of placing boundaries on a 
   Longitude field value in binary (see appendix A and B of that 
   document for a 2 mathematical examples of how this LaRes field 
   refines or reduces the boundaries in which a target is within). 

   This is not a straightforward in decimal or hexadecimal formats. 
   This subsection, therefore, needs more work.





Polk/Cuellar           Expires - December 2003                 [Page 6]

                 GEOPRIV Location Data Considerations         June 2003

4.3 Coordinate Location - Altitude (Alt) 
    
   Altitude is defined as the space extended upward above a reference 
   level, especially above sea level or above the earth's surface; 
   height; the perpendicular elevation of an object above a given 
   level, above the ground; as, the altitude of a mountain, or of a 
   building.  The base Altitude is considered Mean Low Tide, unless 
   otherwise stated in the definition of the field (building floors 
   being an example of an exception). 
    
   Direct field dependencies are: 
    
   - the Measurement Unit field to provide the necessary unit of length
     (meters, building floors, kilometers, etc) for this field value to
     read properly 
    
   Related fields: 
    
   - having the Longitude field and Latitude fields to provide a three 
     axis point of location reference 
    
    
4.3.1 Coordinate Location - Altitude Resolution (AltRes) 
    
   This subsection needs more work.

    
4.3.2 Coordinate Location - Altitude Measurement Unit (MU) 
    
   This field is a dependant field for the Altitude Field that gives 
   the Altitude field value a unit of measurement (i.e.  meters).  The 
   units of measure that MUST be supported are: meters, building floors
   (include the definition of mezzanines and sub-basements) and what 
   represents the surface of the earth (i.e.  the ground) outside of 
   any structures. 
    
   MU field dependencies are: 
    
   - This field need not be present if the Altitude field is not 
     present. It provides no useful information by itself. 
    
   Related fields: 
    
   - none at this time 
    
    
4.4 Coordinate Location - Datum (Datum) 
    
   The Map Datum used for the coordinates given (DHCP Option [TBD] 
   specifies 4 for Geopriv currently): 



Polk/Cuellar           Expires - December 2003                 [Page 7]

                 GEOPRIV Location Data Considerations         June 2003

    
   1: WGS84 (Geographical 3D) - World Geodesic System 1984, CRS 
      Code 4327, Prime Meridian Name: Greenwich 
    
   2: ED50 - European Datum 1950(77), CRS Code 4154, Prime Meridian 
      Name: Greenwich 
    
   3: ED87 - European Datum 1987, CRS Code 4231, Prime Meridian 
      Name: Greenwich 
    
   4: NAD83 - North American Datum 1983, CRS Code 4269, Prime 
      Meridian Name: Greenwich 
    
    
5.  Civil Location Data Type 
    
   In [5] a Civil Location format is described. At this time, there are
   a number of suggestions within that document that will need to be 
   further examined for incorporation within this document. This is not
   a meant as anything other than the two sets of authors for this 
   document and the document at [5] need to collaborate more.  
    
    
6.  Independent Location Data Fields 
    
   The following section describes the data fields that are optional; 
   meaning they can be included in any order and in any combination 
   with other optional location data fields, as well as with either 
   Location Data Type (Coordinate or Civil).  <<Comment: These optional
   fields could also become part of a "packages" ID or IDs so that this
   core doc (and the Geopriv protocol) isn't burdened by having to 
   adhere to too much at once.>> 
    
   <<Editorial Comment - this section is only partially completed>>. 
    

6.1 Distance Fields 
    
   The fields in this subsection relate to distance to or from the 
   Target and another location (i.e. how far is the Target from the 
   pizza restaurant?). 
    
   Distance is defined as the length or numerical value of a known 
   measurement unit of a straight line or curve between two objects or 
   places. Potential Geopriv fields related to a Target that could be 
   created have the following descriptions (this is not a complete list
   of reasonable fields for Distance)
    
     - Distance to/from a known physical Object (i.e. a place)
    



Polk/Cuellar           Expires - December 2003                 [Page 8]

                 GEOPRIV Location Data Considerations         June 2003

     - Distance to/from another Geopriv Entity 

        - Direction towards that other Geopriv Entity 
         
     - Distance from a line 

        - as in how far away from a certain Lat or Long value 
    
    
6.2 Direction Fields 
    
   The fields in this subsection relate to the direction the Target is 
   facing, turning or moving towards. Potential Geopriv fields related 
   to a Target that could be created have the following descriptions 
   (this is not a complete list of reasonable fields for Direction)
    
     - Direction (of the LT) 

        - unit of measurement of direction (degrees or NSEW) 

        - indicator whether this direction is changing, and which way 

     - vector (of the target) 

     - Nautical Dead Reckoning 
    
    
6.3  Speed Fields 
    
   The fields in this subsection relate to the speed/velocity the 
   Target is traveling or turning in any one direction. Potential 
   Geopriv fields related to a Target that could be created have the 
   following descriptions  (this is not a complete list of reasonable 
   fields for speed/velocity). 

   Speed is defined at distance traveled divided by the time of travel.
    
     - Speed/velocity (of the LT) 

        - unit of measurement of speed (mph, nmph, kmph, fps, mps, etc)

        - indicator whether this speed is changing, and which way 

        - The rate at which the target is turning
    
    
6.4  Angle or Position Fields 
    
   The fields in this subsection relate to the angle/position the 
   Target is in any one time (perhaps to include if these values are 
   individually changing). Potential Geopriv fields related to a Target


Polk/Cuellar           Expires - December 2003                 [Page 9]

                 GEOPRIV Location Data Considerations         June 2003

   that could be created have the following descriptions  (this is not 
   a complete list of reasonable fields for angle/position). 

     - Pitch 
      
        - with 0 degrees as the forward facing horizon, positive (0 to 
          +180) degrees and negative (-1 to -180) degrees elevation are
          given within this field. 
         
        - To oscillate about a lateral axis so that the nose lifts or 
          descends in relation to the tail.  Used of an aircraft. 
         
        - To oscillate about a lateral axis that is both perpendicular 
          to the longitudinal axis and horizontal to the earth.  Used 
          of a missile or spacecraft. 
    
     - tilt 
    
        - To oscillate about a longitudinal axis so that the nose moves
          laterally (left or right) in relation to the tail.  Used of 
          an aircraft. 
         
        - To oscillate about a longitudinal axis that is both 
          perpendicular to the lateral axis and horizontal to the 
          earth.  Used of a missile or spacecraft. 
    
     - yaw 
    
        - To turn about the vertical axis.  Used of an aircraft, 
          spacecraft, or projectile. 
         
        - a deviation from a straight course in steering 
         
        - an erratic deflection from an intended course 
         
        - deviate erratically form a set course, as of a ship 
         
        - become deflected 
    
    
6.5.       Miscellaneous 
    
     - Temperature (of LT) 

        o-indicate if temp is changing, and which way 







Polk/Cuellar           Expires - December 2003                [Page 10]

                 GEOPRIV Location Data Considerations         June 2003

7.    Open Issues 
    
     - Timestamps of when the target was observed at a particular 
       location 

     - Timestamp of when the LO was sent or delivered 
      

8.  Security Considerations 
    
   The Security Considerations for this Location Data will be solved 
   within another document detailing how privacy and confidentiality 
   will be accomplished for the Location Data of a Target... 
    
    
9.  IANA Considerations 
    
   None within this document 
    
    
10.  Acknowledgements 
    
   None at this time 
    
    
11. References 
    
   [1]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", 
      BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   [2]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
   [3]  Cuellar, J.R., Morris, J.B., Mulligan, D., Peterson, J., Polk, 
      J., Geopriv Requirements, work in progress, March 2003 
    
   [4]  Schnizlein, J., Polk, J., Linsner, M., DHC Location Object 
      within GEOPRIV, work in progress, Jan 2003 
    
   [5] Schulzrinne, H., DHCP Option for Civil Location, work in 
      progress, Feb 2003 
    
    









Polk/Cuellar           Expires - December 2003                [Page 11]

                 GEOPRIV Location Data Considerations         June 2003

12. Author Information 
    
   James M.  Polk 
   Cisco Systems 
   2200 East President George Bush Turnpike 
   Richardson, Texas 75082 USA                 Email:  jmpolk@cisco.com
    

   Jorge R Cuellar 
   Siemens AG 
   Corporate Technology 
   CT IC 3 
   81730 Munich                       Email:  jorge.cuellar@siemens.com
   
 
13. Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved. 
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    






 
 
Polk/Cuellar           Expires - December 2003              [Page 12] 

