     Internet Draft                                    Francis Reichmeyer
     Expiration: March 2000                                 IPHighway
     File: draft-ops-mumble-terminology-00.txt         Mark Stevens
                                                            Lucent

                A Unified Terminology for Policy Based Networking

                      <draft-ops-mumble-terminology-00.txt>

                                 22-October-1999

     Status of this Memo

       This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
       all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

       Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
       Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
       other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
       Drafts.

       Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
       months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
       at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
       reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

       The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
       http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

       The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
       http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

       Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

     Copyright Notice

       Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1998).  All Rights Reserved.

     Internet Draft            Expires March 2000                   [Page 1]

     Internet Draft                                                22-Oct-99

     Abstract

       Policy Based Networking (PBN) is a topic of interest to many areas
       within the networking community. Initially considered for the
       implementation and control of QoS services, several groups are
       looking to deploy policy-based networks for a wider variety of

       applications, such as security and VPN. We have found, when trying
       to coordinate efforts of the different groups, that there are some
       misunderstandings among the groups, some of which can be attributed
       to the different terminology that has propagated through the groups.

       In this draft, we attempt to clear up some of these
       misunderstandings, concentrating on PBN for Policy Provisioning
       (rap), Differentiated Services (diffserv), IP Security (ipsp), and
       general Policy Framework (policy). The terminology discussed here is
       not meant to be an exhaustive list of PBN-related terms and
       concepts, but it is intended to represent at least the four areas
       mentioned.

       It is NOT intended that this draft defines an architecture or
       framework for PBN _ each group is clearly qualified to define these
       for themselves. Instead, we identify the terminology common to all
       PBN applications and suggest definitions, which are meaningful and
       useful, yet general enough to be applicable across all PBN
       applications.

     Reichmeyer, et al.        Expires March 2000                   [Page 2]

     Internet Draft                                                22-Oct-99

     Table of Contents

     Abstract..............................................................2

     Table of Contents.....................................................3
     1  Introduction ......................................................4
     2  Terminology for Common PBN Components .............................5
     2.1PBN Management Models .............................................6
     2.2Policy Decision Point/Policy Consumer .............................7
     2.3Policy Enforcement Point/Policy Target ............................7
     2.4Policy Repository .................................................8
     2.5Policy Rules ......................................................8

     2.6Policy Requests ...................................................9
     2.7Policy Decisions ..................................................9
     3  General PBN Terminology ...........................................9
     3.1Roles .............................................................9
     3.2Service Level Agreement (SLA) ....................................10
     4  IP Security Policy Terminology ...................................10
     5  DiffServ Policy Terminology ......................................11

     6  References .......................................................12
     7  Author Information ...............................................13
     8  Full Copyright Notice ............................................14

     Reichmeyer, et al.        Expires March 2000                   [Page 3]

     Internet Draft                                                22-Oct-99

     1   Introduction

       Policy Based Networking (PBN) is a topic of interest to many areas
       within the networking community. Initially considered for the
       implementation and control of QoS services, people are looking to
       deploy policy-based networks for a wider variety of applications,

       such as security and VPN. As various groups begin developing
       architectures and protocol specifications related to their specific
       PBN needs, we have found that there is some overlap in the
       terminology defined _ different terms used to describe basically the
       same concept. We've also found, when trying to coordinate efforts of
       the different groups, that there are some misunderstandings among
       the people in the groups and some of that misunderstanding can be
       attributed to the different terminology that has propagated through
       the groups.

       In this draft, we attempt to clear up some of these
       misunderstandings as well as to eventually eliminate some of the
       overlap in like terms. We concentrate on the areas of Policy
       Provisioning (rap), policy for Differentiated Services (diffserv),
       IP Security policy (ipsp), and general Policy Framework (policy).
       The terminology discussed here is not meant to be an exhaustive list
       of PBN-related terms and concepts, but it is intended to represent
       at least the four areas mentioned. These areas are in the forefront
       of PBN development and are working to coordinate efforts so that a
       common PBN model can be agreed upon.

       This draft does NOT define an architecture or framework for PBN _
       each group is undoubtedly better qualified to define these for their
       specific needs. Instead, we identify the terminology common to all
       PBN applications and suggest definitions, which are meaningful and
       useful, yet general enough to be applicable across all PBN
       applications. In doing so, it will be easier and more efficient to
       coordinate PBN efforts and provide the mechanisms for a single PBN
       system that supports all policy applications.

        Most of the terminology in this draft has appeared in other IETF
        Internet Drafts in one form or another; some is being introduced for
        the first time. As the terms in this draft are meant to be relevant
        to a number of different working groups, it is unrealistic to think
        that a first cut at this will be complete. The intention of this
        draft is to present the existing terminology and identify areas of
        conflict with terms and concepts that are common to multiple policy

        applications, e.g. where similar terms are used with different
        definitions, or different terms are used for the same definition.

        Upon reviewing the drafts from the various working groups and
        participating in meetings attended by representatives of the
        different groups, it becomes apparent there are differences in some
        of the "basic" PBN concepts. This is to be expected given the
        different starting points and goals of the groups. However, it

        should be possible to go back and revisit the terms and concepts and

     Reichmeyer, et al.        Expires March 2000                   [Page 4]

     Internet Draft                                                22-Oct-99

        come up with a unified set of definitions that can be applied and
        shared among all policy applications.

        Once such a unified terminology exists, architectures for new PBN
        applications will be able to be described easily and efficiently
        using common building blocks. For example, with common terms and
        definitions for the functional components of a PBN system (two such
        terms are "PDP" and "PEP" while "Policy Consumer" and "Policy
        Target" have also been suggested for the same components) one can

        look at the architecture of a PBN application and identify where the
        functionality resides.

        In the following sections, we'll the various terms and definitions
        that currently exist for some of basic PBN components and concepts.
        We expect future versions of the draft to contain a complete list
        for a unified PBN terminology.

     2   Terminology for Common PBN Components

        Describing different policy applications has resulted in some
        similar PBN terms and concepts with slightly varying meanings. For
        example, the PBN architectures for policy outsourcing and policy
        provisioning described by the RAP WG have both include a Policy
        Decision Point (PDP) that controls network devices that act as

        Policy Enforcement Points (PEP). However, the role of the PDP is
        slightly different in the two models and this can lead to processing
        policy rules differently in the two cases. In the outsourcing case,
        the PDP might issue a decision of the form "accept the admission
        control request" whereas in the provisioning case a PDP message
        might be "mark packets with this DHCP value." These different
        directives from the PDP have lead to some question about whether it,
        functionally, is a "decision point" in all cases. As a result, this

        same component has been called a Policy Consumer in the Policy WG
        framework document.

        In the actual enforcement of the policy at the data level in the
        network device, the behavior is similar, but the policy rules that
        need to be stored and processed are different. Both PEP and Policy
        Target have been used to define this component. If we consider a IP

        Security Policy application, the policy rules and processing might
        be different still, as will the terminology for the functional
        components of the system.

        Thus, although in these simplified examples, all three PBN
        applications define similar components, different terms are used and
        they mean slightly different things in each case. In order to
        describe a common PBN system, applicable to all cases, the

        components need to be defined in a way that is meaningful to all
        applications.

     Reichmeyer, et al.        Expires March 2000                   [Page 5]

     Internet Draft                                                22-Oct-99

        The following concepts are common to all the PBN applications of

        interest here:

        - PBN Management Model
             o how components interact and process policy information
        - Policy Decision Point/Policy Consumer
             o component that controls the network devices

        - Policy Enforcement Point/Policy Target
             o component that applies the policy to IP data packets
        - Policy Repository
             o where PBN policies are stored
        - Policy Rules

             o "instructions" for the PBN system
        - Policy Requests
             o requests passed into or within a PBN system
        - Policy Decisions
             o directives generated as a result of a request

        The following sections examine these PBN concepts and present the
        existing terminology for each.

     2.1  PBN Management Models

        The management model for PBN describes how the different components
        of the system interact and process policy information in order to

        implement policy based networking. There are two types of policy
        management models discussed: Outsourcing and Provisioning.

        The Outsourcing model describes how policy is implemented in
        situations where network devices refer to a PBN management component
        to provide policy decisions for requests initiated by the network
        devices themselves. The requests are typically the result of some
        event occurring at the device that requires a policy decision, for

        example receiving a signaling protocol message. A specific example
        is the COPS-RSVP [cops-rsvp] case, described in the RAP WG [rap-
        frame], where RSVP nodes outsource policy decisions for RSVP Path
        and Resv messages they receive.

        The Provisioning model describes how policy is implemented in
        situations where the PBN management system issues directives to the

        network devices preparing them, in advance, for some event that may
        occur in the network; usually the arrival of some IP data or control
        traffic that requires particular processing behavior. Since the
        policy prepares the network beforehand, prior to the packets
        actually arriving, we use the term provisioning policy. For a
        specific example, the Diffserv architecture [rfc2475] defines the
        following:

     Reichmeyer, et al.        Expires March 2000                   [Page 6]

     Internet Draft                                                22-Oct-99

        - Service Provisioning Policy: a policy which defines how traffic
        conditioners are configured on DS boundary nodes and how traffic

        streams are mapped to DS behavior aggregates to achieve a range of
        services.

     2.2  Policy Decision Point/Policy Consumer

        There are at least two models for implementing policy in IP
        networks, outsourcing and provisioning, as described above. Policy-
        based network management will probably utilize both models.

        A policy model based on outsourcing decisions establishes a software
        process that responds to queries triggered by events occurring
        within network elements. In the decision outsource model the
        software process is referred to a PDP or Policy Decision Point. The
        PDP is in a position to read and evaluate expressions of policy and
        render a decision on behalf of the device making the request for a
        decision. The PDP is where the decision is made in the outsource

        model.

        In an alternate policy model, decisions can be distributed. In such
        a model, it makes little sense to refer to a decision point. Policy
        expressions in this model may contain operands that cannot be
        obtained in real-time at a centralize point. As a result,
        translation and configuration operations occur. A software process

        is established to interpret policy. As the interpretation dictates,
        the configuration of devices may be altered. Altering the
        configuration of network elements effectively implements the policy,
        but in reality some of the operands in the policy are evaluated
        outside of the network element while other operands of the same
        policy are evaluated within the device. In such cases, the terms
        Policy Consumer and Policy Target are used.

     2.3  Policy Enforcement Point/Policy Target

        Network devices play a part in PBN as the points in the network
        where the policy directives issued by PBN management are carried out
        on the IP data traffic in the network. The term Policy Enforcement
        Point (PEP) has been used to describe these devices [RAPFRAME] for
        both outsourcing and provisioning models, since the policy is
        enforced on the IP individual packets in both cases. For example, in

        the devices, packets get classified, queued, dropped, etc. based on
        the installed policy regardless of whether the installed policy is a
        result of a response to a request (outsourcing) or an asynchronous
        message (provisioning).

        The Policy Framework [TERMS] document offers the following
        definition:

     Reichmeyer, et al.        Expires March 2000                   [Page 7]

     Internet Draft                                                22-Oct-99

        - Policy Enforcement: the action of placing the network (or a part

          of the network) in a desired policy state using a set of
          management commands. When this definition is applied to network
          elements, these management commands change the configuration of
          the device(s) using one or more mechanisms. Enforcement is
          carried out in the context of a policy rule.

        However, as described in the previous section, the Policy framework
        draft [PLYFRAME] uses the term Policy Target to refer to the PBN

        component controlled by Policy Consumers.

        To work toward reconciling the two views of enforcement, we must
        recognize that the term PEP implies that the enforcement of a policy
        occurs in one distinct location. The term Policy Target acknowledges
        that in certain situations activities related to the enforcement of
        a given policy can be distributed among more than on entity in a

        policy system. In policy model that outsources decisions, the
        enforcement is thought to be localized in the device that requested
        a decision be made by an external entity. In a policy model that
        utilizes translation and configuration, policy enforcement
        activities can be seen as happening in multiple locations. In the
        case where a Policy Rule contains both operands whose expansions
        cannot be done in a device, and operands that must be expanded in a
        device, enforcement is seen occurring as a result of actions taken

        in both an external process (the Policy Consumer) and the device
        itself (the Policy Target). The Policy Target is the device whose
        behavior is modified by the policy, but is not the only component in
        the policy system involved in the enforcement of the given policy.

     2.4  Policy Repository

        A Policy Repository provides persistent storage and retrieval of

        Policy Rules. The repository simply stores data. It does not in
        general process or act on it. The term does not imply a particular
        access protocol. For persistent storage to be useful in a policy
        system, the organization of information representing Policy Rules
        must be standardized. The core policy schema is on example of a
        standard for organizing the storage of Policy Rules.

     2.5  Policy Rules

        Policy Rules are expressions of policy stored in a Policy Repository
        and structurally organized according to the structural model defined
        by the core policy information model. See [INFO]. Ultimately, Policy
        Rules will have to contain operands and operators to express the
        conditions and the actions of a policy. A first pass at the
        standardization of the QoS operands can be found at [MODEL]. A
        forthcoming draft will refine the QoS information model. See

        [REFINE]. Operands will be of little use without standardized
        operators. At present there is no clear work in the area of operator

     Reichmeyer, et al.        Expires March 2000                   [Page 8]

     Internet Draft                                                22-Oct-99

        definition available, but on going discussions in the Policy working
        group are expected to yield a plan for the development of a draft to

        define operators.

     2.6  Policy Requests

     2.7  Policy Decisions

        [TERMS] defines a policy decision as follows:

         - Policy Decision: the abstraction of activating and evaluating one

         or more policy rules. Each policy rule is interpreted in the
         context of a specific request (implied or explicit) for accessing
         and/or using one or more resources. It connotes taking one or more
         pre-determined actions based on whether or not a given set of
         policy conditions was satisfied.

     3   General PBN Terminology

        A number of terms and concepts have appeared which may not
        necessarily be applicable to all PBN systems, but which none the
        less have been interpreted differently among the groups that have
        tried to apply them. This section discusses some of these terms.

     3.1  Roles

        Roles (and role combinations) have been discussed in the context of

        the Policy Information Base [PIB], described for use with the COPS-
        PR policy protocol, as well as in the Policy Framework WG. [PIB]
        defines roles with regard to policy classes while [TERMS] approaches
        the concept of a role from the point of view of the policy schema
        and policy information model.

        In [PIB] a role is defined as simply a string that is associated
        with an interface to describe the functions of an interface. A

        "role-combination" is an unordered set of roles. Instances of a
        given policy rule class are applied to interface if and only if the
        set of roles in the role combination is identical to the set of the
        roles of the interface.

        As defined in [TERMS], a role, in the most general sense, describes
        the duties, rights, and permissions of an object with respect to the
        rest of the managed environment. A role is realized via the

        collection object in the policy information model. This collection
        object aggregates a network object with other objects that a policy
        is to be applied to. A role is therefore a means of grouping
        together a set of objects, so that one or more policies can be
        specified as being applied to the entire group of objects. This
        provides a better means of abstraction that relying on one or more
        attribute values to group the objects.

     Reichmeyer, et al.        Expires March 2000                   [Page 9]

     Internet Draft                                                22-Oct-99

     3.2  Service Level Agreement (SLA)

        Service Level Agreements (SLA) are often referred to in PBN in the
        context of specifying and sharing policies between domains. Several
        definitions have been given for SLAs; the first one given here is
        proposed in the diff serv architecture RFC and the second one is a
        revised definition appearing the Policy Framework terminology draft.

        From [DIFFARCH]:

        Service Level Agreement: a service contract between a customer and a
        service provider that specifies the forwarding service a customer
        should receive.  A customer may be a user organization (source
        domain) or another DS domain (upstream domain). A SLA may include
        traffic conditioning rules which constitute a TCA in whole or in
        part.

        From [TERMS]:

        Service Level Agreement: a service contract between a customer and a
        Service Provider that specifies the expected operational
        characteristics of their relationship. Example operational
        characteristics include the details of the treatment which a
        customer's traffic and/or requests for service should receive. The
        details of the operational characteristics are defined in terms of
        Service Level Objectives (SLOs). The SLA documents the agreed levels

        and parameters of services provided, and can cover a wide range of
        parameters including items that effect the network element and items
        that don't (e.g., service hours and availability, user support
        levels, etc.).

        Service Level Objective (SLO): partitions an SLA into individual
        objectives that can be mapped into policies that can be executed.
        The SLOs define metrics to enforce, police, and/or monitor the SLA.

        Some commonly used metrics to determine whether or not an SLA is
        being fulfilled include component system availability (e.g., up-time
        and MTBF), performance (e.g., response time), and serviceability
        (e.g., MTTR).

     4   IP Security Policy Terminology

        While PBN frameworks, architectures, and protocols for Diff Serv,
        RSVP, general policy frameworks, etc. have been worked on with
        relatively close coordination, policy for IP Security applications
        has just recently begun to engage with the other groups. This
        section describes the terminology used in the IPSec policy
        specifications.

        The following definitions appear in [SEPOL]:

     Reichmeyer, et al.        Expires March 2000                  [Page 10]

     Internet Draft                                                22-Oct-99

        - Security Gateway: A security gateway refers to an intermediate
        system that implements IPSec protocols. For example, a router or a

        firewall implementing IPSec is a security gateway.

        - Security Domain: A set of communicating entities and resources
        that share a common security policy enforced at one or more
        enforcement agents or at an individual host. The definition of
        security domain applies to networks protected by security gateways
        as well as to single hosts, since a host may be the enforcer of its

        own policies. Security domains could exist inside other security
        domains.

     5   DiffServ Policy Terminology

        Policy for Differentiated Services encompasses the efforts of
        several groups since the initial concentration for PBN has been for
        QoS networks. With Diffserv, policy based management is concerned

        with controlling the elements and mechanisms defined by Diffserv to
        implement differentiated services. Hence, most definitions and
        terminology from the Diffserv WG could be related back to policy and
        included in a unified PBN terminology. For example, PIBs and QoS
        policy schema refer to definitions of packet classifiers, markers,
        shapers, etc. However it seems a bit unwieldy to include all of the
        terminology here. Most PBN efforts are committed to participating in

        and tracking the Diffserv specifications and conforming to them.

     Reichmeyer, et al.        Expires March 2000                  [Page 11]

     Internet Draft                                                22-Oct-99

     6   References

     [COPS]    Boyle, J., Cohen, R., Durham, D., Herzog, S., Raja, R.,

               Sastry, A., "The COPS (Common Open Policy Service)
               Protocol", IETF <draft-ietf-rap-cops-07.txt>, August 1999.

     [COPSRSVP]Boyle,  J., Cohen,  R., Durham,  D., Herzog,  S., Rajan,  R.,
               Sastry,  A.,  "COPS Usage  for  RSVP",  <draft-ietf-rap-cops-
               rsvp-05.txt>, June 1999.

     [COPSPR]  Reichmeyer, F., et. al., "COPS Usage for Policy
               Provisioning", <draft-ietf-rap-cops-pr-01.txt>, November
               1999.

     [MODEL]   Weiss, W., Strassner, J., Westerinen, A., "Terminology for
               Describing Network Policy and Services ", IETF <draft-weiss-
               policy-device-qos-model-00.txt>, August 1999.

     [REFINE]  Weiss, W., Strassner, J., Westerinen, A., "Terminology for
               Describing Network Policy and Services", IETF <draft-weiss-
               policy-device-qos-model-01.txt>, October 1999.

     [INFO]    Moore, B., Ellesson, E., Strassner, J., "Policy Framework
               Core Information Model", IETF <draft-ietf-policy-core-info-
               model-02.txt>, October 1999.

     [PIB]     Fine, M., McCloghrie, K., Hahn, S., Chan, K., Smith, A., "An
               Initial Quality of Service Policy Information Base for COPS-
               PR Clients and Servers", <draft-mfine-cops-pib-00.txt>,
               February 1999.

     [PLYFRAME] Stevens, M., et. al., Policy Framework, Internet Draft,
               <draft-ietf-policy-framework-00.txt>, September 1999.

     [RAP]     Yavatkar, R., et al., "A Framework for Policy Based
               Admission Control", IETF <draft-ietf-rap-framework-03.txt>,
               April 1999.

     [RAPFRAME]Yavatkar, R., et al., "A Framework for Policy Based
               Admission Control", IETF <draft-ietf-rap-framework-03.txt>,

               April 1999.
     [SECPOL]  Srisuresh, P., Sanchez, L.A., "Policy Framework for IP
               Security_, <draft-ietf-ipsec-policy-framework-00.txt>,
               February 1999.

     [TERMS]   Strassner, J., Ellesson, E., "Terminology for Describing
               Network Policy and Services", <draft-ietf-policy-terms-
               00.txt>, June 1999.

     Reichmeyer, et al.        Expires March 2000                  [Page 12]

     Internet Draft                                                22-Oct-99

     7   Author Information

     Francis Reichmeyer
     IPHighway Inc.
     400 Kelby St.
     Fort-Lee, NJ 07024
     Email:franr@iphighway.com

     Mark Stevens
     Lucent Technologies

     300 Baker Ave.
     Concord, MA 01742
     Email:markstevens@lucent.com

     Reichmeyer, et al.        Expires March 2000                  [Page 13]

     Internet Draft                                                22-Oct-99

     8   Full Copyright Notice

     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1997).  All Rights Reserved.

     This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
     others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or
     assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and
     distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
     provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
     included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this

     document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the
     copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
     Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing
     Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights defined
     in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as required to
     translate it into languages other than English.

     The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be

     revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

     This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
     "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
     TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT
     NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL
     NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR

     FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

     Reichmeyer, et al.        Expires March 2000                  [Page 14]
