


Networking Working Group                                       K. Pister
Internet-Draft                                             Dust Networks
Intended status: Informational                                P. Thubert
Expires: October 24, 2008                             Cisco Systems, Inc
                                                          April 22, 2008


    Industrial Routing Requirements in Low Power and Lossy Networks
                draft-pister-roll-indus-routing-reqs-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 24, 2008.

Abstract

   Wireless, low power field devices enable industrial users to
   significantly increase the amount of information collected and the
   number of control points that can be remotely managed.  The
   deployment of these wireless devices will significantly improve the
   productivity and safety of the plants while increasing the efficiency
   of the plant workers.  For wireless devices to have a significant
   advantage over wired devices in an industrial environment the
   wireless network needs to have three qualities: low power, high
   reliability, and easy installation and maintenance.  The aim of this
   document is to analyze the requirements for the routing protocol used
   for low power and lossy networks (L2N) in industrial environments.



Pister & Thubert        Expires October 24, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   draft-pister-roll-indus-routing-reqs-01      April 2008


Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


Table of Contents

   1.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.1.  Applications and Traffic Patterns  . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.2.  Network Topology of Industrial Applications  . . . . . . .  6
       2.2.1.  The Physical Topology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.  Service Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.1.  Configurable Application Requirement . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     3.2.  Different Routes for Different Flows . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   4.  Reliability Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  Device-Aware Routing Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  Broadcast/Multicast  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   7.  Route Establishment Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   8.  Mobility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  Manageability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   10. Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   11. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   12. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   13. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     13.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     13.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     13.3. External Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 17



















Pister & Thubert        Expires October 24, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   draft-pister-roll-indus-routing-reqs-01      April 2008


1.  Terminology

   Actuator: a field device that moves or controls plant equipment.

   Closed Loop Control: A process whereby a device controller controls
   an actuator based on information sensed by one or more field devices.

   Downstream: Data direction traveling from the plant application to
   the field device.

   Field Device: physical devices placed in the plant's operating
   environment (both RF and environmental).  Field devices include
   sensors and actuators as well as network routing devices and L2N
   access points in the plant.

   HART: "Highway Addressable Remote Transducer", a group of
   specifications for industrial process and control devices
   administered by the HART Foundation (see [HART]).  The latest version
   for the specifications is HART7 which includes the additions for
   WirelessHART.

   ISA: "International Society of Automation".  ISA is an ANSI
   accredited standards-making society.  ISA100 is an ISA working group
   whose charter includes defining a family of standards for industrial
   automation.  ISA100.11a is a work group within ISA100 that is working
   on a standard for non-critical process and control applications.

   L2N Access Point: The L2N access point is an infrastructure device
   that connects the low power and lossy network system to a plant's
   backbone network.

   Open Loop Control: A process whereby a plant technician controls an
   actuator over the network where the decision is influenced by
   information sensed by field devices.

   Plant Application: The plant application is a process running in the
   plant that communicates with field devices to perform tasks on that
   may include control, monitoring and data gathering.

   Upstream: Data direction traveling from the field device to the plant
   application.

   RL2N: Routing in Low power and Lossy Networks.


2.  Introduction

   Wireless, low-power field devices enable industrial users to



Pister & Thubert        Expires October 24, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   draft-pister-roll-indus-routing-reqs-01      April 2008


   significantly increase the amount of information collected and the
   number of control points that can be remotely managed.  The
   deployment of these wireless devices will significantly improve the
   productivity and safety of the plants while increasing the efficiency
   of the plant workers.

   Wireless field devices enable expansion of networked points by
   appreciably reducing cost of installing a device.  The cost
   reductions come from eliminating cabling costs and simplified
   planning.  Cabling for a field device can run from $100s/ft to
   $1,000s/ft depending on the safety regulations of the plant.  Cabling
   also carries an overhead cost associated with planning the
   installation, determining where the cable has to run, and interfacing
   with the various organizations required to coordinate its deployment.
   Doing away with the network and power cables reduces the planning and
   administrative overhead of installing a device.

   For wireless devices to have a significant advantage over wired
   devices in an industrial environment, the wireless network needs to
   have three qualities: low power, high reliability, and easy
   installation and maintenance.  The routing protocol used for low
   power and lossy networks (L2N) is important to fulfilling these
   goals.

   Industrial automation is segmented into two distinct application
   spaces, known as "process" or "process control" and "discrete
   manufacturing" or "factory automation".  In industrial process
   control, the product is typically a fluid (oil, gas, chemicals ...).
   In factory automation or discrete manufacturing, the products are
   individual elements (screws, cars, dolls).  While there is some
   overlap of products and systems between these two segments, they are
   surprisingly separate communities.  The specifications targeting
   industrial process control tend to have more tolerance for network
   latency than what is needed for factory automation.

   Both application spaces desire battery operated networks of hundreds
   of sensors and actuators communicating with L2N access points.  In an
   oil refinery, the total number of devices is likely to exceed one
   million, but the devices will be clustered into smaller networks that
   report to an existing plant network infrastructure.

   Existing wired sensor networks in this space typically use
   communication protocols with low data rates, from 1,200 baud (e.g.
   wired HART) to the one to two hundred Kbps range for most of the
   others.  The existing protocols are often master/slave with command/
   response.





Pister & Thubert        Expires October 24, 2008                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   draft-pister-roll-indus-routing-reqs-01      April 2008


2.1.  Applications and Traffic Patterns

   The industrial market classifies process applications into three
   broad categories and six classes.

   o  Safety

      *  Class 0: Emergency action - Always a critical function

   o  Control

      *  Class 1: Closed loop regulatory control - Often a critical
         function

      *  Class 2: Closed loop supervisory control - Usually non-critical
         function

      *  Class 3: Open loop control - Operator takes action and controls
         the actuator (human in the loop)

   o  Monitoring

      *  Class 4: Alerting - Short-term operational effect (for example
         event-based maintenance)

      *  Class 5: Logging and downloading / uploading - No immediate
         operational consequence (e.g., history collection, sequence-of-
         events, preventive maintenance)

   Critical functions effect the basic safety or integrity of the plant.
   Timely deliveries of messages becomes more important as the class
   number decreases.

   Industrial users are interested in deploying wireless networks for
   the monitoring classes 4 and 5, and in the non-critical portions of
   classes 3 through 1.

   Classes 4 and 5 also include asset monitoring and tracking which
   include equipment monitoring and are essentially separate from
   process monitoring.  An example of equipment monitoring is the
   recording of motor vibrations to detect bearing wear.

   In the near future, most low power and lossy network systems will be
   for low frequency data collection.  Packets containing samples will
   be generated continuously, and 90% of the market is covered by packet
   rates of between 1/s and 1/hour, with the average under 1/min.  In
   industrial process, these sensors include temperature, pressure,
   fluid flow, tank level, and corrosion.  Some sensors are bursty, such



Pister & Thubert        Expires October 24, 2008                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   draft-pister-roll-indus-routing-reqs-01      April 2008


   as vibration monitors that may generate and transmit tens of kilo-
   bytes (hundreds to thousands of packets) of time-series data at
   reporting rates of minutes to days.

   Almost all of these sensors will have built-in microprocessors that
   may detect alarm conditions.  Time-critical alarm packets are
   expected to have lower latency than sensor data.

   Some devices will transmit a log file every day, again with typically
   tens of Kbytes of data.  For these applications there is very little
   "downstream" traffic coming from the L2N access point and traveling
   to particular sensors.  During diagnostics, however, a technician may
   be investigating a fault from a control room and expect to have "low"
   latency (human tolerable) in a command/response mode.

   Low-rate control, often with a "human in the loop" (also referred to
   as "open loop"), is implemented today via communication to a
   centralized controller.  The sensor data makes its way through the
   L2N access point to the centralized controller where it is processed,
   the operator sees the information and takes action, and the control
   information is then sent out to the actuator node in the network.

   In the future, it is envisioned that some open loop processes will be
   automated (closed loop) and packets will flow over local loops and
   not involve the L2N access point.  These closed loop controls for
   non-critical applications will be implemented on L2Ns.  Non-critical
   closed loop applications have a latency requirement that can be as
   low as 100 ms but many control loops are tolerant of latencies above
   1 s.

   In critical control, tens of milliseconds of latency is typical.  In
   many of these systems, if a packet does not arrive within the
   specified interval, the system enters an emergency shutdown state,
   often with substantial financial repercussions.  For a one-second
   control loop in a system with a mean-time between shutdowns target of
   30 years, the latency requirement implies nine 9s of reliability.

2.2.  Network Topology of Industrial Applications

   Although network topology is difficult to generalize, the majority of
   existing applications can be met by networks of 10 to 200 field
   devices and maximum number of hops from two to twenty.  It is assumed
   that the field devices themselves will provide routing capability for
   the network, and additional repeaters/routers will not be required in
   most cases.

   For most industrial applications, a manager, gateway or backbone
   router acts as a sink for the wireless sensor network.  The vast



Pister & Thubert        Expires October 24, 2008                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   draft-pister-roll-indus-routing-reqs-01      April 2008


   majority of the traffic is real time publish/subscribe sensor data
   from the field devices over a L2N towards one or more sinks.
   Increasingly over time, these sinks will be a part of a backbone but
   today they are often fragmented and isolated.

   The wireless sensor network is a Low Power and Lossy Network of field
   devices for which two logical roles are defined, the field routers
   and the non routing devices.  It is acceptable and even probable that
   the repartition of the roles across the field devices change over
   time to balance the cost of the forwarding operation amongst the
   nodes.

   The backbone is a high speed network that interconnects multiple WSNs
   through backbone routers.  Infrastructure devices can be connected to
   the backbone.  A gateway / manager that interconnects the backbone to
   the plant network of the corporate network can be viewed as
   collapsing the backbone and the infrastructure devices into a single
   device that operates all the required logical roles.  The backbone is
   likely to always become an important function of the industrial
   network.  The Internet at large is not considered as a viable option
   to perform the backbone function.

   A plant or corporate network is also present on the factory site.
   This is the typical IT nework for the factory operations beyond
   process control.  That network is out of scope for this document.

2.2.1.  The Physical Topology

   There is no specific physical topology for an industrial process
   control network.  One extreme example is a multi-square-kilometer
   refinery where isolated tanks, some of them with power but most with
   no backbone connectivity, compose a farm that spans over of the
   surface of the plant.  A few hundred field devices are deployed to
   ensure the global coverage using a wireless self-forming self-healing
   mesh network that might be 5 to 10 hops across.  Local feedback loops
   and mobile workers tend to be only one or two hops.  The backbone is
   in the refinery proper, many hops away.  Even there, powered
   infrastructure is also typically several hops away.  So hopping to/
   from the powered infrastructure will in general be more costly than
   the direct route.

   In the opposite extreme case, the backbone network spans all the
   nodes and most nodes are in direct sight of one or more backbone
   router.  Most communication between field devices and infrastructure
   devices as well as field device to field device occurs across the
   backbone.  Form afar, this model resembles the WIFI ESS (Extended
   Service Set).  But from a layer 3 perspective, the issues are the
   default (backbone) router selection and the routing inside the



Pister & Thubert        Expires October 24, 2008                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   draft-pister-roll-indus-routing-reqs-01      April 2008


   backbone whereas the radio hop towards the field device is in fact a
   simple local delivery.
                    ---+------------------------
                     |          Plant Network
                     |
                  +-----+
                  |     | Gateway
                  |     |
                  +-----+
                     |
                     |      Backbone
               +--------------------+------------------+
               |                    |                  |
            +-----+             +-----+             +-----+
            |     | Backbone    |     | Backbone    |     | Backbone
            |     | router      |     | router      |     | router
            +-----+             +-----+             +-----+
               o    o   o    o     o   o  o   o   o   o  o   o o
           o o   o  o   o  o  o o   o  o  o   o   o   o  o  o  o o
          o  o o  o o    o   o   o  o  o  o    M    o  o  o o o
          o   o  M o  o  o     o  o    o  o  o    o  o   o  o   o
            o   o o       o        o  o         o        o o
                    o           o          o             o     o
                           L2N

   Considering that though each field device to field device route
   computation has specific constraints in terms of latency and
   availability it can be expected that the shortest path possible will
   often be selected and that this path will be routed inside the LLN as
   opposed to via the backbone.  It can also be noted that the lifetimes
   of the routes might range from minutes for a mobile workers to tens
   of years for a command and control closed loop.  Finally, time-
   varying user requirements for latency and bandwidth will change the
   constraints on the routes, which might either trigger a constrained
   route recomputation, a reprovisioning of the underlying L2 protocols,
   or both in that order.  For instance, a wireless worker may initiate
   a bulk transfer to configure or diagnose a field device.  A level
   sensor device may need to perform a calibration and send a bulk file
   to a plant.

   For these reasons, the ROLL routing infrastructure MUST be able to
   compute and update constrained routes on demand (that is reactively),
   and it can be expected that this model will become more prevalent for
   field device to field device connectivity as well as for some field
   device to Infrastructure devices over time.






Pister & Thubert        Expires October 24, 2008                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   draft-pister-roll-indus-routing-reqs-01      April 2008


3.  Service Requirements

   The industrial applications fall into four large service categories
   [ISA100.11a]:

   1.  Periodic data (aka buffered).  Data that is generated
       periodically and has a well understood data bandwidth
       requirement, both deterministic and predictable.  Timely delivery
       of such data is often the core function of a wireless sensor
       network and permanent resources are assigned to ensure that the
       required bandwidth stays available.  Buffered data usually
       exhibits a short time to live, and the newer reading obsoletes
       the previous.  In some cases, alarms are low priority information
       that gets repeated over and over.  The end-to-end latency of this
       data is not as important as the regularity with which the data is
       presented to the plant application.

   2.  Event data.  This category includes alarms and aperiodic data
       reports with bursty data bandwidth requirements.  In certain
       cases, alarms are critical and require a priority service from
       the network.

   3.  Client/Server.  Many industrial applications are based on a
       client/server model and implement a command response protocol.
       The data bandwidth required is often bursty.  The acceptable
       round-trip latency for some legacy systems was based on the time
       to send tens of bytes over a 1200 baud link.  Hundreds of
       milliseconds is typical.  This type of request is statistically
       multiplexed over the L2N and cost-based fair-share best-effort
       service is usually expected.

   4.  Bulk transfer.  Bulk transfers involve the transmission of blocks
       of data in multiple packets where temporary resources are
       assigned to meet a transaction time constraint.  Transient
       resources are assigned for a limited period of time (related to
       file size and data rate) to meet the bulk transfers service
       requirements.

   For industrial applications Service parameters include but might not
   be limited to:

   o  Data bandwidth - the bandwidth might be allocated permanently or
      for a period of time to a specific flow that usually exhibits well
      defined properties of burstiness and throughput.  Some bandwidth
      will also be statistically shared between flows in a best effort
      fashion.





Pister & Thubert        Expires October 24, 2008                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft   draft-pister-roll-indus-routing-reqs-01      April 2008


   o  Latency - the time taken for the data to transit the network from
      the source to the destination.  This may be expressed in terms of
      a deadline for delivery.  Most monitoring latencies will be in
      seconds to minutes.

   o  Transmission phase - process applications can be synchronized to
      wall clock time and require coordinated transmissions.  A common
      coordination frequency is 4 Hz (250 ms).

   o  Service contract type - revocation priority.  L2Ns have limited
      network resources that can vary with time.  This means the system
      can become fully subscribed or even over subscribed.  System
      policies determine how resources are allocated when resources are
      over subscribed.  The choices are blocking and graceful
      degradation.

   o  Transmission priority - the means by which limited resources
      within field devices are allocated across multiple services.  For
      transmissions, a device has to select which packet in its queue
      will be sent at the next transmission opportunity.  Packet
      priority is used as one criterion for selecting the next packet.
      For reception, a device has to decide how to store a received
      packet.  The field devices are memory constrained and receive
      buffers may become full.  Packet priority is used to select which
      packets are stored or discarded.

   The routing protocol MUST also support different metric types for
   each link used to compute the path according to some objective
   function (e.g. minimize latency).

   Industrial application data flows between field devices are not
   necessarily symmetric.  In particular, asymmetrical cost and
   unidirectional routes are common for published data and alerts, which
   represent the most part of the sensor traffic.  The routing protocol
   MUST be able to set up unidirectional or asymmetrical cost routes
   that are composed of one or more non congruent paths.

3.1.  Configurable Application Requirement

   Time-varying user requirements for latency and bandwidth will require
   changes in the provisioning of the underlying L2 protocols.  A
   technician may initiate a query/response session or bulk transfer to
   diagnose or configure a field device.  A level sensor device may need
   to perform a calibration and send a bulk file to a plant.  The
   routing protocol MUST route on paths that are changed to
   appropriately provision the application requirements.  The routing
   protocol MUST support the ability to recompute paths based on
   underlying link characteristics that may change dynamically.



Pister & Thubert        Expires October 24, 2008               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft   draft-pister-roll-indus-routing-reqs-01      April 2008


3.2.  Different Routes for Different Flows

   Because different services categories have different service
   requirements, it is often desirable to have different routes for
   different data flows between the same two endpoints.  For example,
   alarm or periodic data from A to Z may require path diversity with
   specific latency and reliability.  A file transfer between A and Z
   may not need path diversity.  The routing algorithm MUST be able to
   generate different routes for different flows.


4.  Reliability Requirements

   Another critical aspect for the routing is the capability to ensure
   maximum disruption time and route maintainance.  The maximum
   disruption time is the time it takes at most for a specific path to
   be restored when broken.  Route maintainance ensures that a path is
   monitored to be restored when broken within the maximum disruption
   time.  Maintenance should also ensure that a path continues to
   provide the service for which it was established for instance in
   terms of bandwidth, jitter and latency.

   In industrial applications, reliability is usually defined with
   respect to end-to-end delivery of packets within a bounded latency.
   Reliability requirements vary over many orders of magnitude.  Some
   non-critical monitoring applications may tolerate a reliability of
   less than 90% with hours of latency.  Most industrial standards, such
   as HART7, have set user reliability expectations at 99.9%.
   Regulatory requirements are a driver for some industrial
   applications.  Regulatory monitoring requires high data integrity
   because lost data is assumed to be out of compliance and subject to
   fines.  This can drive reliability requirements to higher then 99.9%.

   Hop-by-hop path diversity is used to improve latency-bounded
   reliability.  Additionally, bicasting or pluricasting may be used
   over multiple non congruent / non overlapping paths to ensure that at
   least one instance of a critical packet is actually delivered.

   Because data from field devices are aggregated and funneled at the
   L2N access point before they are routed to plant applications, L2N
   access point redundancy is an important factor in overall
   reliability.  A route that connects a field device to a plant
   application may have multiple paths that go through more than one L2N
   access point.  The routing protocol MUST support multiple L2N access
   points and load distribution among L2N access points.  The routing
   protocol MUST support multiple L2N access points when L2N access
   point redundancy is required.  Because L2Ns are lossy in nature,
   multiple paths in a L2N route MUST be supported.  The reliability of



Pister & Thubert        Expires October 24, 2008               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft   draft-pister-roll-indus-routing-reqs-01      April 2008


   each path in a route can change over time.  Hence, it is important to
   measure the reliability on a per-path basis and select a path (or
   paths) according to the reliability requirements.


5.  Device-Aware Routing Requirements

   Wireless L2N nodes in industrial environments are powered by a
   variety of sources.  Battery operated devices with lifetime
   requirements of at least five years are the most common.  Battery
   operated devices have a cap on their total energy, and typically can
   report an estimate of remaining energy, and typically do not have
   constraints on the short-term average power consumption.  Energy
   scavenging devices are more complex.  These systems contain both a
   power scavenging device (such as solar, vibration, or temperature
   difference) and an energy storage device, such as a rechargeable
   battery or a capacitor.  These systems, therefore, have limits on
   both long-term average power consumption (which cannot exceed the
   average scavenged power over the same interval) as well as the short-
   term limits imposed by the energy storage requirements.  For solar-
   powered systems, the energy storage system is generally designed to
   provide days of power in the absence of sunlight.  Many industrial
   sensors run off of a 4-20 mA current loop, and can scavenge on the
   order of milliwatts from that source.  Vibration monitoring systems
   are a natural choice for vibration scavenging, which typically only
   provides tens or hundreds of microwatts.  Due to industrial
   temperature ranges and desired lifetimes, the choices of energy
   storage devices can be limited, and the resulting stored energy is
   often comparable to the energy cost of sending or receiving a packet
   rather than the energy of operating the node for several days.  And
   of course, some nodes will be line-powered.

   Example 1: solar panel, lead-acid battery sized for two weeks of
   rain.

   Example 2: vibration scavenger, 1mF tantalum capacitor.

   Field devices have limited resources.  Low-power, low-cost devices
   have limited memory for storing route information.  Typical field
   devices will have a finite number of routes they can support for
   their embedded sensor/actuator application and for forwarding other
   devices packets in a mesh network slotted-link.

   Users may strongly prefer that the same device have different
   lifetime requirements in different locations.  A sensor monitoring a
   non-critical parameter in an easily accessed location may have a
   lifetime requirement that is shorter and tolerate more statistical
   variation than a mission-critical sensor in a hard-to-reach place



Pister & Thubert        Expires October 24, 2008               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft   draft-pister-roll-indus-routing-reqs-01      April 2008


   that requires a plant shutdown in order to replace.

   The routing algorithm MUST support node-constrained routing (e.g.
   taking into account the existing energy state as a node constraint).
   Node constraints include power and memory, as well as constraints
   placed on the device by the user, such as battery life.


6.  Broadcast/Multicast

   Existing industrial plant applications do not use broadcast or
   multicast addressing to communicate to field devices.  Unicast
   address support is sufficient.  However wireless field devices with
   communication controllers and protocol stacks will require control
   and configuration, such as firmware downloading, that may benefit
   from broadcast or multicast addressing.

   The routing protocol SHOULD support broadcast or multicast
   addressing.


7.  Route Establishment Time

   During network formation, installers with no networking skill must be
   able to determine if their devices are "in the network" with
   sufficient connectivity to perform their function.  Installers will
   have sufficient skill to provision the devices with a sample rate or
   activity profile.  The routing algorithm MUST find the appropriate
   route(s) and report success or failure within several minutes, and
   SHOULD report success or failure within tens of seconds.

   Network connectivity in real deployments is always time varying, with
   time constants from seconds to months.  So long as the underlying
   connectivity has not been compromised, this link churn should not
   substantially affect network operation.  The routing algorithm MUST
   respond to normal link failure rates with routes that meet the
   Service requirements (especially latency) throughout the routing
   response.  The routing algorithm SHOULD always be in the process of
   optimizing the system in response to changing link statistics.  The
   routing algorithm MUST re-optimize the paths when field devices
   change due to insertion, removal or failure, and this re-optimization
   MUST not cause latencies greater than the specified constraints
   (typically seconds to minutes).


8.  Mobility

   Various economic factors have contributed to a reduction of trained



Pister & Thubert        Expires October 24, 2008               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft   draft-pister-roll-indus-routing-reqs-01      April 2008


   workers in the plant.  The industry as a whole appears to be trying
   to solve this problem with what is called the "wireless worker".
   Carrying a PDA or something similar, this worker will be able to
   accomplish more work in less time than the older, better-trained
   workers that he or she replaces.  Whether the premise is valid, the
   use case is commonly presented: the worker will be wirelessly
   connected to the plant IT system to download documentation,
   instructions, etc., and will need to be able to connect "directly" to
   the sensors and control points in or near the equipment on which he
   or she is working.  It is possible that this "direct" connection
   could come via the normal L2Ns data collection network.  This
   connection is likely to require higher bandwidth and lower latency
   than the normal data collection operation.

   The routing protocol SHOULD support the wireless worker with fast
   network connection times of a few of seconds, and low command and
   response latencies to the plant behind the L2N access points, to
   applications, and to field devices.  The routing protocol SHOULD also
   support the bandwidth allocation for bulk transfers between the field
   device and the handheld device of the wireless worker.  The routing
   protocol SHOULD support walking speeds for maintaining network
   connectivity as the handheld device changes position in the wireless
   network.

   Some field devices will be mobile.  These devices may be located on
   moving parts such as rotating components or they may be located on
   vehicles such as cranes or fork lifts.  The routing protocol SHOULD
   support vehicular speeds of up to 35 kmph.


9.  Manageability

   The process and control industry is manpower constrained.  The aging
   demographics of plant personnel are causing a looming manpower
   problem for industry across many markets.  The goal for the
   industrial networks is to have the installation process not require
   any new skills for the plant personnel.  The person would install the
   wireless sensor or wireless actuator the same way the wired sensor or
   wired actuator is installed, except the step to connect wire is
   eliminated.

   The routing protocol for L2Ns is expected to be easy to deploy and
   manage.  Because the number of field devices in a network is large,
   provisioning the devices manually would not make sense.  Therefore,
   the routing protocol MUST support auto-provisioning of field devices.
   The protocol also MUST support the distribution of configuration from
   a centralized management controller if operator-initiated
   configuration change is allowed.



Pister & Thubert        Expires October 24, 2008               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft   draft-pister-roll-indus-routing-reqs-01      April 2008


10.  Security

   Given that wireless sensor networks in industrial automation operate
   in systems that have substantial financial and human safety
   implications, security is of considerable concern.  Levels of
   security violation that are tolerated as a "cost of doing business"
   in the banking industry are not acceptable when in some cases
   literally thousands of lives may be at risk.

   Industrial wireless device manufactures are specifying security at
   the MAC layer and the transport layer.  A shared key is used to
   authenticate messages at the MAC layer.  At the transport layer,
   commands are encrypted with unique randomly-generated end-to-end
   Session keys.  HART7 and ISA100.11a are examples of security systems
   for industrial wireless networks.

   Industrial plants may not maintain the same level of physical
   security for field devices that is associated with traditional
   network sites such as locked IT centers.  In industrial plants it
   must be assumed that the field devices have marginal physical
   security and the security system needs to have limited trust in them.
   The routing protocol SHOULD place limited trust in the field devices
   deployed in the plant network.

   The routing protocol SHOULD compartmentalize the trust placed in
   field devices so that a compromised field device does not destroy the
   security of the whole network.  The routing MUST be configured and
   managed using secure messages and protocols that prevent outsider
   attacks and limit insider attacks from field devices installed in
   insecure locations in the plant.


11.  IANA Considerations

   This document includes no request to IANA.


12.  Acknowledgements

   Many thanks to Rick Enns and Chol Su Kang for their contributions.


13.  References

13.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.



Pister & Thubert        Expires October 24, 2008               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft   draft-pister-roll-indus-routing-reqs-01      April 2008


13.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.culler-rl2n-routing-reqs]
              Vasseur, J. and D. Cullerot, "Routing Requirements for Low
              Power And Lossy Networks",
              draft-culler-rl2n-routing-reqs-01 (work in progress),
              July 2007.

13.3.  External Informative References

   [HART]     www.hartcomm.org, "Highway Addressable Remote Transducer",
              a group of specifications for industrial process and
              control devices administered by the HART Foundation".

   [ISA100.11a]
              ISA, "SP100.11 Working Group Draft Standard, Version 0.1",
              December 2007.


Authors' Addresses

   Kris Pister
   Dust Networks
   30695 Huntwood Ave.
   Hayward,   94544
   USA

   Email: kpister@dustnetworks.com


   Pascal Thubert
   Cisco Systems, Inc
   Village d'Entreprises Green Side - 400, Avenue de Roumanille
   Sophia Antipolis,   06410
   FRANCE

   Email: pthubert@cisco.com














Pister & Thubert        Expires October 24, 2008               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft   draft-pister-roll-indus-routing-reqs-01      April 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Pister & Thubert        Expires October 24, 2008               [Page 17]


