


Network Working Group                                       T. Dreibholz
Internet-Draft                              University of Duisburg-Essen
Intended status: Informational                                  L. Coene
Expires: January 12, 2009                         Nokia Siemens Networks
                                                               P. Conrad
                                                  University of Delaware
                                                           July 11, 2008


 Reliable Server Pooling Applicability for IP Flow Information Exchange
                draft-coene-rserpool-applic-ipfix-06.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 12, 2009.















Dreibholz, et al.       Expires January 12, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      RSerPool Applicability for IPFIX           July 2008


Abstract

   This document describes the applicability of the Reliable Server
   Pooling architecture to the IP Flow Information Exchange using the
   Aggregate Server Access Protocol (ASAP) functionality of RSerPool
   only.  Data exchange in IPFIX between the router and the data
   collector can be provided by a limited retransmission protocol.












































Dreibholz, et al.       Expires January 12, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      RSerPool Applicability for IPFIX           July 2008


1.  Introduction

   Reliable Server Pooling provides protocols for providing highly
   available services.  The services are located in a pool of redundant
   servers and if a server fails, another server will take over.  The
   only requirement put on these servers belonging to the pool is that
   if state is maintained by the server, this state must be transferred
   to the other server taking over.

   The goal is to provide server-based redundancy.  Transport and
   network level redundancy are handle by the transport and network
   layer protcols.

   The application may choose to distribute its traffic over the servers
   of the pool conforming to a certain policy.

   The application wishing to make use of RSerPool protocols may use
   different transport layers (such as UDP, TCP and SCTP).  However,
   some transport layers may have restrictions build in in the way they
   might be operating in the RSerPool architecture and its protocols.

1.1.  Scope

   The scope of this document is to explain the way that a minimal
   version of Reliable Server Pooling protocols have to be used in order
   to provide a highly available service towards IP Flow Information
   Exchange (IPFIX) protocols.

1.2.  Terminology

   The terms are commonly identified in related work and can be found in
   the Aggregate Server Access Protocol and Endpoint Handlespace
   Redundancy Protocol Common Parameters document ietf-rserpool-common-
   param [I-D.ietf-rserpool-common-param]

















Dreibholz, et al.       Expires January 12, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      RSerPool Applicability for IPFIX           July 2008


2.  IPFIX using RSerPool

2.1.  Architecture

   IP flow information is exchanged between observation points and
   collector points.  The observation points may try to find out via the
   Aggregate Server Access Protocol (ASAP, see ietf-rserpool-asap
   [I-D.ietf-rserpool-asap]) which collector point(s) are active.  Both
   the observation and the collector point may have limitations for
   exchanging the information (observation point may have limited buffer
   space and collectors points may be overburdened with receiving lots
   of flow information from different observation points).

   The observation point will query the ENRP server for resolution of a
   particular collector pool name and the ENRP server will return a list
   of one or more collector points to the observation point.

   The observation point will use its own transport protocols (TCP, UDP,
   SCTP, SCTP with PR-SCTP extension) for exchanging the IPFIX data
   between the observation point and the collector point.  If a
   collector point would fail, then the observation point will send its
   data towards a different collector point, belonging to the same
   collector pool.

   Collector points will announce themselves to the ENRP server and will
   be monitored for their availability.  The observation point will only
   query the ENRP server for server pool name resolution.
























Dreibholz, et al.       Expires January 12, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      RSerPool Applicability for IPFIX           July 2008


3.  Transport protocols suitable for IPFIX

   The exchange of IP flow information data between an observation point
   and a collection point consists of massive amounts of data.

   One collection point can service many observation points, therefore
   transport protocols must do congestion control (example: modifying
   the receive buffer space, thus reducing the incoming flow of data),
   so that the collection point is not overburdened by its observation
   points.  Some data must arrive at the collector while other data
   might arrive (if it gets lost: no problem).  The choice of reliable
   or partial reliable delivery has to be made by the observation point
   These requirements demand a protocol which provides variable
   transport reliability of its data: it should be able to chose the
   reliability by the IPFIX protocols on a a per-message base.

   SCTP with PR-SCTP extension is the only know protocol which allows
   the choice of full, partial or unreliable delivery of the message to
   its peer node.  TCP will only allow fully reliable delivery, while
   UDP only provides unreliable delivery and NO congestion control.































Dreibholz, et al.       Expires January 12, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      RSerPool Applicability for IPFIX           July 2008


4.  Security considerations

   The protocols used in the Reliable Server Pooling architecture only
   try to increase the availability of the servers in the network.
   RSerPool protocols do not contain any protocol mechanisms which are
   directly related to user message authentication, integrity and
   confidentiality functions.  For such features, it depends on the
   IPSEC protocols or on Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocols for
   its own security and on the architecture and/or security features of
   its user protocols.

   The RSerPool architecture allows the use of different transport
   protocols for its application and control data exchange.  These
   transport protocols may have mechanisms for reducing the risk of
   blind denial-of-service attacks and/or masquerade attacks.  If such
   measures are required by the applications, then it is advised to
   check the SCTP applicability statement RFC2057 [RFC3257] for guidance
   on this issue.

































Dreibholz, et al.       Expires January 12, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      RSerPool Applicability for IPFIX           July 2008


5.  Acknowledgments

   The authors wish to thank Maureen Stillman and many others for their
   invaluable comments.















































Dreibholz, et al.       Expires January 12, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      RSerPool Applicability for IPFIX           July 2008


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC3237]  Tuexen, M., Xie, Q., Stewart, R., Shore, M., Ong, L.,
              Loughney, J., and M. Stillman, "Requirements for Reliable
              Server Pooling", RFC 3237, January 2002.

   [RFC3668]  Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF
              Technology", RFC 3668, February 2004.

   [I-D.ietf-rserpool-arch]
              Tuexen, M., "Architecture for Reliable Server Pooling",
              draft-ietf-rserpool-arch-12 (work in progress),
              November 2006.

   [I-D.ietf-rserpool-asap]
              Stewart, R., Xie, Q., Stillman, M., and M. Tuexen,
              "Aggregate Server Access Protocol (ASAP)",
              draft-ietf-rserpool-asap-20 (work in progress), May 2008.

   [I-D.ietf-rserpool-enrp]
              Xie, Q., Stewart, R., Stillman, M., Tuexen, M., and A.
              Silverton, "Endpoint Handlespace Redundancy Protocol
              (ENRP)", draft-ietf-rserpool-enrp-20 (work in progress),
              May 2008.

   [I-D.ietf-rserpool-common-param]
              Stewart, R., Xie, Q., Stillman, M., and M. Tuexen,
              "Aggregate Server Access Protocol (ASAP) and Endpoint
              Handlespace Redundancy  Protocol (ENRP) Parameters",
              draft-ietf-rserpool-common-param-17 (work in progress),
              May 2008.

   [RFC2960]  Stewart, R., Xie, Q., Morneault, K., Sharp, C.,
              Schwarzbauer, H., Taylor, T., Rytina, I., Kalla, M.,
              Zhang, L., and V. Paxson, "Stream Control Transmission
              Protocol", RFC 2960, October 2000.

   [RFC3758]  Stewart, R., Ramalho, M., Xie, Q., Tuexen, M., and P.
              Conrad, "Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP)
              Partial Reliability Extension", RFC 3758, May 2004.

   [RFC3257]  Coene, L., "Stream Control Transmission Protocol
              Applicability Statement", RFC 3257, April 2002.

   [I-D.ietf-rserpool-service]
              Conrad, P. and P. Lei, "Services Provided By Reliable



Dreibholz, et al.       Expires January 12, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      RSerPool Applicability for IPFIX           July 2008


              Server Pooling", draft-ietf-rserpool-service-02 (work in
              progress), October 2005.

6.2.  Informative References

   [RSerPoolPage]
              Dreibholz, T., "Thomas Dreibholz's RSerPool Page", URL:
               http://tdrwww.exp-math.uni-essen.de/dreibholz/rserpool/.

   [Dre2006]  Dreibholz, T., "Reliable Server Pooling -- Evaluation,
              Optimization and Extension of a Novel IETF Architecture",
              Ph.D. Thesis University of Duisburg-Essen, Faculty of
              Economics, Institute for Computer Science and Business
              Information Systems, URL: http://
              duepublico.uni-duisburg-essen.de/servlets/DerivateServlet/
              Derivate-16326/Dre2006-final.pdf, March 2007.



































Dreibholz, et al.       Expires January 12, 2009                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      RSerPool Applicability for IPFIX           July 2008


Authors' Addresses

   Thomas Dreibholz
   University of Duisburg-Essen, Institute for Experimental Mathematics
   Ellernstrasse 29
   45326 Essen, Nordrhein-Westfalen
   Germany

   Phone: +49-201-1837637
   Fax:   +49-201-1837673
   Email: dreibh@iem.uni-due.de
   URI:   http://www.iem.uni-due.de/~dreibh/


   Lode Coene
   Nokia Siemens Networks
   Atealaan 32
   Herentals  2200
   Belgium

   Phone: +32-14-252081
   Email: lode.coene@nsn.com


   Phillip Conrad
   University of Delaware
   103 Smith Hall
   Newark  DE 19716
   USA

   Phone: +1 302 831 8622
   Email: conrad@acm.org



















Dreibholz, et al.       Expires January 12, 2009               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      RSerPool Applicability for IPFIX           July 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Dreibholz, et al.       Expires January 12, 2009               [Page 11]

