 



INTERNET-DRAFT                                                  R. Huang
Intended Status: Informational                                    H.Song
Expires: April 16, 2015                                           Huawei
                                                        October 13, 2014


      Problem Statement and Use Cases for Application Intelligent 
                        Policy Interface (AIPI)
                   draft-huang-appsawg-aipi-ps-uc-00


Abstract

   This document discusses the problem statement and use cases of an
   interface named Application Intelligent Policy Interface (AIPI) that
   translates the real application requirements (e.g., network should
   ensure how many users of the OTT provider watch high definition video
   simultaneously.) into network level requirements, e.g.,
   configurations or service deployments requirements and network QoS
   requirements, are useful and necessary for modern networks.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html


Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

 


Huang                    Expires April 16, 2015                 [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT         A Framework of SIB for SIB       October 13, 2014


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Table of Contents

   1  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3. Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1 Gap Between Application Requirements and Network . . . . . .  4
     3.2 Difficulty for Network adaptation  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.3 Difficulty for Network Policies Maintenance  . . . . . . . .  5
   4. Use Cases for Application Intelligent Policy Interface  . . . .  5
     4.1 OTT Service Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.2 Enterprise Service Isolation and Interconnection . . . . . .  6
     4.3 Automatic Adaptation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5  Existing Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   6  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   7  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   8  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   9  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     9.1  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     9.2  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
















 


Huang                    Expires April 16, 2015                 [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT         A Framework of SIB for SIB       October 13, 2014


1  Introduction

   With the rapid development of network technologies, the network is
   more and more open. Many new technologies, e.g., SDN and NFV, etc.,
   are emerging to help OTT application providers to get control of the
   network more flexibly than before. So far, these technologies are all
   network oriented, which based on network elements, ports, links,
   protocols or virtualization of the above. For those OTT application
   developers with little knowledge of network or small enterprise, they
   may not be able to fully utilize the network resources or correctly
   set network services to meet their requirements from the services and
   applications they provide. 

   This document further argues that an interface that translates the
   real application requirements (e.g., network should ensure how many
   users of the OTT provider watch high definition video
   simultaneously.) into network level requirements, e.g.,
   configurations or service deployments requirements and network QoS
   requirements, are useful and necessary for modern networks. How the
   interface looks like is an issue outside the scope of the present
   document. The remainder of this document develops this idea into
   detail: Section 2 provides terminology; Section 3 discusses the
   problem statements; Section 4 provides some use cases in which the
   interface could be used, and Section 5 analyses the current related
   IETF work.

2  Terminology

   AIPI: Application Intelligent Policy Interface, which is used for
   translating the application requirements to network level
   requirements.

   Software-Defined Networking (SDN): A framework that supports the
   separation of Control and Forwarding Planes via standardized
   interfaces.

   Network Functions Virtualization (NFV): A network architecture
   concept that proposes using IT virtualization related technologies to
   virtualize entire classes of network node functions into building
   blocks that may be connected, or chained, together to create
   communication services.

   Network Policy: network level policies that can be directly used to
   configure the network elements

   Application Intelligent Policy: Application oriented policies that
   reflect the QoS of the application service, but cannot be directly
   configured to network elements 
 


Huang                    Expires April 16, 2015                 [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT         A Framework of SIB for SIB       October 13, 2014


3. Problem Statement

3.1 Gap Between Application Requirements and Network 

   Traditional network and applications effectively treat each other as
   black boxes. Network is effectively isolated from the end-systems,
   which then have little control over how the network handles packets.
   Likewise, the network has limited visibility on the application
   logic.

   With the increasingly demanding of network opening, technologies like
   SDN and NFV becomes the future trends of network development. A key
   objective of this open network is to facilitate and exploit the
   virtualization of network functions so that they can be provided on a
   programmable basis for applications and service innovators. It seems
   to be a good way for OTT or enterprise applications to have some
   insight into network infrastructure. However, applications may focus
   more on service logic, service implementation, performance and
   experience, in stead of network information. Deep network
   capabilities exposed by the programmable network will be impossible
   for non-network-owning players to replicate. 

   Moreover, many different sets of network interfaces for applications
   are emerging. They provide network functions like path computation,
   loop avoidance, routing, security and many other tasks through
   abstracting and normalizing the quirks and eccentricities of
   different data plane devices. However, these interfaces are all
   network oriented. OTT applications may not adequately use these
   interfaces to fulfill their own requirement as they have no idea how
   their service running in the network really works. For example, OTT
   applications may not know which one is the most suitable path to
   choose. Also, there is no common consensus about how those parameters
   of network (e.g., bandwidth, delay, jitter, etc.) affect the QoE of
   OTT applications. 

3.2 Difficulty for Network adaptation 

   Most of current interfaces really provides a way for OTT applications
   to easily apply for network resources or network functions or certain
   QoS (delay, loss, jitter). Due to the gap between OTT applications
   requirements and network, OTT applications may abuse these interface
   for their goods. For example, OTT applications may request more
   bandwidth than that they really need, or they may apply for some
   functions that they never use. 

   There are also some cases that requests from the OTT applications
   can't be accepted for network because of extravagant demands, while
   there do exist some other ways to fulfill the real requirements of
 


Huang                    Expires April 16, 2015                 [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT         A Framework of SIB for SIB       October 13, 2014


   OTT applications. Obviously, current interfaces between OTT
   applications and network couldn't do network adaptations since
   network has no idea what OTT applications really want.

3.3 Difficulty for Network Policies Maintenance

   Plenty varieties of requirements for service performance and access
   control breed plenty of complicated network configuration or QoS
   rules and ACL policies deployments. Usually these configurations and
   polices are maintained by network administrators who may not
   understand what the corresponding real service requirements are. With
   the change of network configuration and policies due to the updates
   of service requirements, e.g., new service deployment or old service
   expired, the maintenance of the network becomes more and more
   difficult especially along with the transfer of network
   administrators.    


4. Use Cases for Application Intelligent Policy Interface    

   If network has an interface enabling OTT applications to input their
   own application service requirements and has the ability to translate
   the application service requirements to network requirement, problems
   will be solved. AIPI (application intelligent policy interface) is
   dedicated to cope with such problems. In this document, we mainly
   discuss several use cases that AIPI which is application friend could
   be applied.

4.1 OTT Service Deployment

   OTT service providers can benefit from using such an application
   oriented interface so that they don't have to care about the underlay
   network details of no matter physical or virtual devices and
   functions. Instead, they just need to focus on what they are good at,
   which are their applications and services for end users.

   Suppose an OTT video provider wants to activate the service which
   ensure 1000 end user to watch its high definition live video content
   simultaneously. Traditional way is to request some specific bandwidth
   resources or CDN services or VPN from ISPs. These kind of requests
   are usually exaggerated which may result in wasting of resources.
   When using AIPI, the OTT provider only needs to provide inputs from
   its perspective. For example, the OTT provider indicate that the
   video is 720p, and it's a live http streaming, and he wants his end
   users could watch fluently and the QoE should be excellent. Then ISP
   will analyse the requirements from the OTT provider, and translate
   them into network QoS, e.g., bandwidth >5120kpbs, RTT<120ms,
   jitter<50ms and loss<1%.
 


Huang                    Expires April 16, 2015                 [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT         A Framework of SIB for SIB       October 13, 2014


   When OTT providers have same service deployments in different
   networks, they can also benefit by using AIPI. Same request can be
   transmitted by AIPI to different ISP networks  instead of figuring
   out what network resources they need in each different network. 

4.2 Enterprise Service Isolation and Interconnection

   Enterprise networks are growing in complexity and size with
   globalization, outsourcing, and wireless expanding the reach of the
   network beyond its traditional design parameters. IT departments are
   tasked with ensuring the applications and services run well across
   both private and public networks. Add to that ongoing application and
   data center projects such as virtualization and cloud computing all
   the components that make up that network becomes even more of a
   challenge. Especially with the frequent personnel transfer of
   functions, locations or departments, IT departments are facing a huge
   workload.

   AIPI is a way to make IT departments work more efficiently and
   effectively. Using AIPI, the administrators of IT departments just
   need to maintain the requirements from their enterprise and leave the
   automatic configurations and deployments to network service
   providers, which hence largely reduces the OPEX of IT departments. 

4.3 Automatic Adaptation

   AIPI is also helpful for network providers to achieve automatic
   adaptation for OTT service providers. With AIPI, network providers
   who know network the best will learn the real requirements from OTT
   service providers, and they certainly have the ability to figure out
   how to satisfy these requirements with minimum resources and maximum
   efficiency.

   The advantage is also reflected when network problems affecting OTT
   service SLAs happen. For example, when a node on the specific OTT
   service path is experiencing congestions, network provider could just
   choose another path which satisfies the requirements for this OTT
   service without any communication with this OTT provider.      


5  Existing Work

   There are some existing efforts in IETF that may be related to this
   work. In this section, we give a detailed analysis towards them.

   Application Enabled Collaborative Networking (AECON): AECON [AECON]
   is trying to work out ways to enable communication of flow
   characteristics between applications in end users and the network by
 


Huang                    Expires April 16, 2015                 [Page 6]

INTERNET DRAFT         A Framework of SIB for SIB       October 13, 2014


   active information exchange. And the information communicated through
   AECON is network oriented. 

   Shared Unified Policy Automation (SUPA): The main goal of SUPA [SUPA]
   is to provide a way for network management applications and for
   network services to specify share application based policies to the
   network infrastructure using a simplified view of the network. SUPA
   is also a network oriented interface and does not really concern OTT
   applications.

   Interface to the Routing System (I2RS): I2RS [I2RS] facilitates real-
   time or event driven interaction with the routing system through a
   collection of protocol-based control or management interfaces which
   allow information, policy and operational parameters to be injected
   into or retrieved from the routing system of network. It is network
   oriented as it collects and injects network information.

   Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO): ALTO [ALTO] is
   considered as a solution to expose abstract topologies and costs to
   applications in P2P domain, datacenter networks and content
   distribution networks (CDN). It is also network oriented rather than
   application oriented.

   AIPI tries to specify an application oriented interface which conveys
   the real application requirements to network and facilitates the
   translation from real application requirements to network
   requirements. AIPI is about the communication between Application
   deployment servers and network. AIPI could further use SUPA to
   configure or adjust network.

6  IANA Considerations

   This draft includes no request to IANA.

7  Security Considerations

   TBD.

8  Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Hanyu Wei for giving valuable
   comments and suggestions.

9  References

9.1  Normative References

   [SUPA] IETF SUPA (Shared Unified Policy Automation) BoF Charter,
 


Huang                    Expires April 16, 2015                 [Page 7]

INTERNET DRAFT         A Framework of SIB for SIB       October 13, 2014


              https://github.com/liushucheng/SUPA/wiki/SUPA-Charter

   [AECON] IETF AECON (Application Enabled Collaborative Networking)
              barBoF,
              http://trac.tools.ietf.org/bof/trac/wiki/BofIETF90#

   [I2RS] IETF I2RS (Interface to the Routing System) WG Charter,
              http://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/i2rs/charter/

   [ALTO] IETF ALOT (Application-Layer Traffic Optimization),
              http://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/alto/charter/

9.2  Informative References


   [NFV] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_Functions_Virtualization

   [SDN] http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-haleplidis-sdnrg-layer-
   terminology-06

Authors' Addresses


   Rachel Huang
   Huawei
   101 Software Avenue, Yuhua District
   Nanjing 210012
   China

   EMail: rachel.huang@huawei.com	



   Haibin Song
   Huawei
   101 Software Avenue, Yuhua District
   Nanjing 210012
   China

   EMail: songhaibin@huawei.com	











Huang                    Expires April 16, 2015                 [Page 8]
