



SIP WG                                                         J. Elwell
Internet-Draft                                               Siemens plc
Expires: December 21, 2006                                      K. Drage
                                                     Lucent Technologies
                                                           June 19, 2006


 Analysis of TISPAN requirements for Connected Identity in the Session
                       Initiation Protocol (SIP)
           draft-elwell-sip-tispan-connected-identity-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 21, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   ETSI TISPAN has presented Next Generation Network (NGN) requirements
   for the delivery of two identities for the caller and two identities
   for the callee in a SIP INVITE-initiated dialog.  Although the
   solution for this in SIP is relatively straightforward for caller
   identity, the delivery of callee identity presents some additional
   problems.  This document discusses the issues and suggests some



Elwell & Drage          Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             TISPAN Connected ID                 June 2006


   candidate solutions.

   This work is being discussed on the sip@ietf.org mailing list.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Overview of the two identities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Transporting the two caller identities . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   4.  Transporting two callee identities . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   5.  Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     5.1.  Authentication of connected identity . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     5.2.  Use of an additional signalling round trip . . . . . . . .  6
     5.3.  Compatibility with RFC 3261  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Summary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   7.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 10
































Elwell & Drage          Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             TISPAN Connected ID                 June 2006


1.  Introduction

   ETSI TISPAN has presented Next Generation Network (NGN) requirements
   [4] for the delivery of two identities for the caller and two
   identities for the callee in a SIP [1] INVITE-initiated dialog.
   Although the solution for this in SIP is relatively straightforward
   for caller identity, the delivery of callee identity presents some
   additional problems.  This document discusses the issues and suggests
   some candidate solutions.


2.  Overview of the two identities

   The first type of identity (ID1) is used by the NGN for billing and
   authorization purposes (e.g. for the provision of services by the
   NGN) and therefore must be authenticated by the NGN or a trusted
   partner.  It typically identifies the NGN's customer.  The second
   type of identity (ID2) can be used by the peer user for purposes such
   as call logging or making return or repeat calls.  This too may
   identify the NGN's customer, or alternatively it may identify a
   particular user within the customer's domain.

   A typical case where ID1 and ID2 can differ is where the caller (or
   callee) is in an enterprise network.  ID1 might identify the
   enterprise, which would be billed for any charges incurred.  Although
   it might be possible to use ID1 for making a return or repeat call,
   it would lead to a default user, e.g., an attendant.  ID2 might
   identity the particular calling or called user within the enterprise.

   Neither identity necessarily represents an address back to the
   terminal or other user equipment making the call, i.e. they are not a
   GRUU.

   Neither identity has a rigorously defined usage, and both identities
   are expected to be presented to the other user.  As such both
   identities are expected to be subject to privacy requirements as
   detailed in RFC 3323.

   There are existing solutions to this problem in the ISDN/PSTN and any
   SIP solution needs to interwork with these ISDN/PSTN mechanisms, both
   in the enterprise network and in the public network.


3.  Transporting the two caller identities

   TISPAN has chosen the P-Asserted-Identity header [5] for ID1.  This
   follows the equivalent decision made by 3GPP.  The NGN identifies and
   authenticates the customer by some means and then uses that identity



Elwell & Drage          Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             TISPAN Connected ID                 June 2006


   in the P-Asserted-Identity header to identify the customer to
   downstream entities in its own network, to other downstream networks
   and to the downstream user.

   The From header field URI is used for ID2 and is placed there by the
   UAC.  This is, of course, open to forgery, but it can be
   authenticated by means of the Identity header [2] added by an
   authentication service within the caller's domain.  If this is added
   by an enterprise network, the From header field URI and the Identity
   header can then be delivered to the NGN for delivery unchanged to the
   UAS.  Figure 1 shows an example of this.  Use of the From header for
   this purpose would preclude both TISPAN and 3GPP using the Identity
   header mechanism for ID1.


   UAC                Enterprise         NGN proxy         UAS
                        proxy
     1 INVITE request      2 INVITE request    3 INVITE request
       From: ID2             From: ID2           From: ID2
                             Identity:           Identity
                                                 P-AI: ID1
     -------------->       ------------->      ------------->

   Figure 1

   In 1 the UAC issues the INVITE request with a From header field URI,
   which will be ID2.

   In 2 the enterprise proxy adds an Identity header to authenticate the
   From header field URI (the proxy having authenticated the UAC by some
   means, e.g., HTTP digest authentication), i.e., to authenticate ID2.

   In 3 the NGN proxy adds the P-Asserted-Identity header field URI
   (ID1) based on authentication of the enterprise network by some means
   (e.g., TLS).
      Note: 1 could also include a P-Preferred-Identity, but this adds
      little value in this particular scenario, as the full set of valid
      P-Asserted-Numbers may well not be known at the UAC in the
      enterprise network.


4.  Transporting two callee identities

   The same principle can apply to callee (connected) identities.
   TISPAN.  However, whereas TISPAN plans to use the P-Asserted-Identity
   header in the 2xx response to the INVITE request for ID1, the
   transport of ID2 is less clear.  Three options have been suggested.




Elwell & Drage          Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             TISPAN Connected ID                 June 2006


   Option 1: Use [3], i.e., send a subsequent request such as UPDATE in
   the reverse direction containing the ID2 in the From header field URI
   and the Identity header to provide authentication.

   Option 2: Use the To header field URI in the 2xx response to provide
   unauthenticated ID2.

   Option 3: Use a new header field in the 2xx response to provide
   unauthenticated ID2.

   Option 4: Longer term it is possible that SAML could also be used to
   carry the appropriate assertions about the identities.  This work
   however is still under consideration in the SIP WG and it is too
   early to assess its applicability


5.  Discussion

   All the proposals above assume that distinct mechanisms are used to
   transport the multiple identities, and any other identities that are
   transported directly as headers between the UAC and UAS.  No solution
   has the ability to repeat the header field in order to indicate a
   different identity with different semantics for generation or
   assertion.  Therefore due consideration has to given to the impact of
   using a mechanism for one purpose, when other entities on the path
   wish to use that mechanism for other purposes.

   There are two key differences between option 1 and the other options:
   option 1 provides authentication of the identity, and option 1
   requires an extra round trip of signalling.  Between option 2 and
   option 3, the issue is compatibility with RFC 3261.  These issues are
   discussed in more detail below.

5.1.  Authentication of connected identity

   Although not laid down as a requirement by TISPAN, authentication of
   callee ID2 could be of significant value, both to users within the
   same enterprise network and to users who otherwise have some form of
   relationship with the enterprise network.  Firstly it prevents
   falsification beyond the bounds of what the NGN is able to guarantee
   and therefore provides the recipient with greater confidence.

   Secondly, it may be of use in conjunction with certain key management
   methods for media encryption.  For example, by using the Identity
   header in both directions, this could provide cryptographic
   authentication of the source of Diffie-Hellman components used for
   key agreement.




Elwell & Drage          Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             TISPAN Connected ID                 June 2006


   Some members of the community are of the opinion that an
   unauthenticated identity in a response is of little or no value.

   Therefore option 1 has considerable benefit over options 2 and 3.

5.2.  Use of an additional signalling round trip

   The main issue here is interworking with PSTN.  PSTN signalling
   protocols provide callee ID2 in the same message that indicates
   answer.  This has impact on calls in the direction PSTN to SIP.  The
   PSTN gateway would need to wait for the UPDATE request, as shown in
   figure 2.


   UAC                Enterprise         NGN proxy         UAS
                        proxy
   PSTN           Gateway            NGN proxy         Enterprise
     1 Call Request      2 INVITE request    3 INVITE request
     -------------->     ------------->      ------------->
                         5 2xx               4 2xx
                         <-------------      <-------------
                         6 ACK               7 ACK
                         ------------->      ------------->
     10 Call answer      9 UPDATE request    8 UPDATE request
     <--------------     <-------------      <-------------
                         11 2xx              12 2xx
                         ------------->      ------------->

   Figure 2

   It can be seen that the gateway must wait for the UPDATE request (9),
   which will contain callee ID2 in the From header field with
   authentication by means of the Identity header field, before
   generating the PSTN call answer message (10).  This is not a severe
   problem, unless the UPDATE request fails to arrive, which would
   happen if the UAS does not support [3].  This could be avoided by
   defining an option tag indicating support of connected identity and
   using this tag in the Supported header of the 2xx response to the
   INVITE request (4)(5) to indicate that an UPDATE request will follow.

   Further, any solution must also deal with the case where the PSTN
   gateway does not support this extension.  There is no point in the
   enterprise network sending the subsequent request if the PSTN gateway
   has no way of handling the Identity header that is included.  The
   INVITE request that initiated the dialog will contain an indication
   that the gateway supports the UPDATE method, but this will not
   indicate what applications this can be used for.  Consideration
   should also therefore be given to an option-tag in the INVITE request



Elwell & Drage          Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             TISPAN Connected ID                 June 2006


   indicating that the gateway is capable of waiting for the UPDATE
   request and the contained Identity header, and then processing that
   for use in the ISDN/PSTN

5.3.  Compatibility with RFC 3261

   Option 2 violates RFC 3261, which does not permit the To header field
   URI to change in a response (compared with the request).  It is not
   clear what harm would be done by changing the To header field URI.
   An option tag could be used to ensure support at the UAC, but there
   is no way to ensure that proxies would not be harmed.  Unlike the
   change of the From header field URI mid-dialog, as specified in [3],
   the change of To header field URI in a response is not anticipated in
   RFC 3261.


6.  Summary

   If authentication is considered important, option 1 should be
   adopted.  This probably needs the additional option tag proposed
   above to improve PSTN interworking.

   Otherwise option 3 is probably safer than option 2.

   A further alternative (option 4) would be a hybrid solution, e.g.,
   both option 1 and option 3.  Option 3 would be used when option 1 is
   not available.  It could also be used prior to option 1 to avoid the
   delay in sending the answer signal to the PSTN.  However, this would
   give potential for the authenticated callee ID2 in the UPDATE request
   to differ from that in the 2xx response to the INVITE request.

7.  Normative References

   [1]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E. Schooler, "SIP:
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [2]  Peterson, J. and C. Jennings, "Enhancements for Authenticated
        Identity Management in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)",
        draft-ietf-sip-identity-06 (work in progress), October 2005.

   [3]  Elwell, J., "Connected Identity in the Session Initiation
        Protocol (SIP)", draft-ietf-sip-connected-identity-00 (work in
        progress), April 2006.

   [4]  Jesske, R., Alexeitsev, D., and M. Garcia-Martin, "Input
        Requirements for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) in
        support for the European Telecommunications Standards



Elwell & Drage          Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             TISPAN Connected ID                 June 2006


        Institute", draft-jesske-sipping-tispan-requirements-o2 (work in
        progress), October 2005.

   [5]  Jennings, C., Peterson, J., and M. Watson, "Private Extensions
        to the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) for Asserted Identity
        within Trusted Networks", RFC 3325, October 2005.













































Elwell & Drage          Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             TISPAN Connected ID                 June 2006


Authors' Addresses

   John Elwell
   Siemens plc
   Technology Drive
   Beeston, Nottingham  NG9 1LA
   UK

   Phone: +44 115 943 4989
   Email: john.elwell@siemens.com


   Keith Drage
   Lucent Technologies
   Optimus, Windmill Hill Business Park
   Swindon, Wilts
   UK

   Phone: +44 1793 776249
   Email: drage@lucent.com































Elwell & Drage          Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             TISPAN Connected ID                 June 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Elwell & Drage          Expires December 21, 2006              [Page 10]


