



Network Working Group                                          T. Hardie
Internet-Draft
Updates: RFC4071 (if approved)                               A. Sullivan
Intended status: Best Current Practice                               Dyn
Expires: August 8, 2016                                       R. Housley
                                                          Vigil Security
                                                       February 05, 2016


         Updating the ex officio member of the IAB in the IAOC
                    draft-hardie-iaoc-iab-update-01

Abstract

   At the time the IETF Administrative Oversight Committee was set up
   the Internet Architecture Board had an internal structure
   significantly different from its current structure.  This document
   aims to update the way in which the ex officio member from the IAB
   who serves on the IAOC is appointed, in order to better account for
   that change and better match the skills set out in RFC 4333.  After
   community discussion, it is likely that this document will be split
   into two distinct parts: one which updates the IAOC membership
   section of the relevant BCP and another which describes the IAB's
   program.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 8, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.





Hardie, et al.           Expires August 8, 2016                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               IAB IAOC update               February 2016


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

1.  Introduction

   At the time of the administrative restructuring of the IETF which
   gave rise to the IAOC, the IAB made very little use of long-lived
   programs.  In part because of the adjustments to the RFC Editor
   model[RFC6635], the IAB now makes extensive use of such programs, and
   the IAB structures much of its long-lived efforts as programs.  This
   document proposes to set up one such program and to have the IAB
   member that leads that program serve as the IAB's ex officio member
   of the IAOC instead of the IAB chair serving in this role.

2.  IAOC Review Program Structure

   While many IAB programs include invited experts, the intent is for
   this program to be composed of a small number of sitting IAB members,
   possibly including the Executive Director, if one has been appointed.

   The IAB shall designate one sitting IAB member to serve as program
   lead.  The program lead shall act as the ex officio as a member of
   the IAOC, as the IAB chair did under Section 4 of [RFC4071].

   Other program members will be available to advise the ex officio IAB
   member of the IAOC, should the member request it.  In order to
   provide that advice, program members will keep up to date on all
   public correspondence of the IAOC to the community.  This will
   include reviewing public minutes of the IAOC meetings, any reports
   produced by the IAOC, and any requests for proposals which have been
   made public.

   Note that the ex officio member also serves as a Trustee of the IETF
   Trust, since its members are defined as being the members of the
   IAOC.

3.  Reasoning

   While there are clearly advantages to having a single individual
   share state as IAB Chair, IESG member, and IAOC member, this also
   weighs significantly on the time of the selected individual.  Moving



Hardie, et al.           Expires August 8, 2016                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               IAB IAOC update               February 2016


   one or more responsibilities into other forums is one approach to
   mitigating the burden on a single individual.

   Given that the program structure has worked well in other contexts to
   manage the work of the IAB, adapting it to this purpose seems a
   logical approach to adjusting the current working methods.  Having a
   dedicated set of reviewers for RFPs, minutes, and other
   correspondence will also increase the input provided to the IAOC and
   the understanding of that state in the IAB as a whole.

   This also allows the IAB to select from among its members the
   individual who best matches the criteria set out in IOAC member
   selection guidelines[RFC4333] while simultaneously serving on one of
   the IAOC's customer organizations.  This might be a different person
   than the person best able to carry out the other duties of the IAB
   Chair.  Should it happen that the IAB Chair is also the best person
   to serve on the IAOC, then the IAB Chair may serve as lead of the
   program.

4.  Security Considerations

   This document describes an administrative change rather than a
   protocol.  There is a possibility that this administrative change
   might result in less information flowing between the IAB and IAOC,
   but the existence of a larger program mitigates this risk.

5.  IANA Considerations

   This document currently has no actions for IANA.

6.  Acknowledgements

   Olaf Kolkman was kind enough to review and provide suggestions to an
   early version of this document.  Lou Berger, Brian Carpenter, Leslie
   Daigle, Martin Duerst, Bob Hinden, John Klensin, and Mike St. Johns
   provided additional comments.

7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC4071]  Austein, R., Ed. and B. Wijnen, Ed., "Structure of the
              IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA)", BCP 101,
              RFC 4071, DOI 10.17487/RFC4071, April 2005,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4071>.






Hardie, et al.           Expires August 8, 2016                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               IAB IAOC update               February 2016


7.2.  Informative References

   [RFC4333]  Huston, G., Ed. and B. Wijnen, Ed., "The IETF
              Administrative Oversight Committee (IAOC) Member Selection
              Guidelines and Process", BCP 113, RFC 4333,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4333, December 2005,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4333>.

   [RFC6635]  Kolkman, O., Ed., Halpern, J., Ed., and IAB, "RFC Editor
              Model (Version 2)", RFC 6635, DOI 10.17487/RFC6635, June
              2012, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6635>.

Authors' Addresses

   Ted Hardie

   Email: ted.ietf@gmail.com


   Andrew Sullivan
   Dyn

   Email: asullivan@dyn.com


   Russ Housley
   Vigil Security

   Email: housley@vigilsec.com






















Hardie, et al.           Expires August 8, 2016                 [Page 4]
