

SIPPING Working Group                                       S. Niccolini
Internet-Draft                                                       NEC
Intended status: Informational                                S. Salsano
Expires: February 28, 2008                     Univ. of Rome Tor Vergata
                                                               L. Veltri
                                                          Univ. of Parma
                                                         August 27, 2007


  Requirements for vertical handover of multimedia sessions using SIP
                 draft-niccolini-sipping-siphandover-02

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 28, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).











Niccolini, et al.       Expires February 28, 2008               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover           August 2007


Abstract

   This document analyses the issue of handling vertical handovers among
   different network technologies using SIP.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3

   2.  Scenario for vertical handover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4

   3.  Requirements for Vertical Handovers  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5

   4.  Taxonomy of possible approaches  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7

   5.  Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8

   6.  Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9

   7.  Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

   9.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

   Appendix A.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 15





















Niccolini, et al.       Expires February 28, 2008               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover           August 2007


1.  Introduction

   Let us consider a terminal (hereafter named "Mobile Host" or MH),
   possibly equipped with different network interfaces (i.e. a subset of
   WiFi, Bluetooth, GPRS, 3G, fixed Ethernet, WiMax).  Each interface
   will receive an IP address from the corresponding Access Network
   (AN).  Therefore the mobile host will have a set of different IP
   addresses and will have to select which one to use when running
   multimedia sessions with correspondent terminals.  While the mobile
   host moves, the "selected" interface may become not available due to
   loss of signal, or could suffer high packet loss or packet delay.
   Under these circumstances, the MH would like to switch to another
   interface (using a different IP address) keeping the running sessions
   active.  Even with a single interface the connected access network
   can become not available anymore and the terminal could connect to
   another Access Network (in this case on the same technology), which
   provides a different IP address.  If the switch to the new AN is fast
   enough, the MH could also be interested in keeping the running
   session active.

   This problem has been addressed with different approaches.  One
   approach is based on "network level" mobility solutions like Mobile
   IP or MobileIPv6.  Another approach is based on "application level"
   mobility solution.  The main advantage of application level mobility
   solutions is that they do not require any support at the network
   level from the different access networks, which only needs to provide
   plain IP connectivity.  This document details the issues and the
   requirements regarding an "application level" mobility solution, in
   particular considering the solution that exploits the SIP protocol.
   The aim of SIP based application level mobility is to keep active a
   multimedia session that has been established with SIP, while the
   terminal switches from one network interface to another or it changes
   IP address on the same interface.


















Niccolini, et al.       Expires February 28, 2008               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover           August 2007


2.  Scenario for vertical handover

   The figure below shows a Mobile Host that wants to communicate with a
   "Correspondent Host" (CH).  The Mobile Host can connect to different
   Access Networks (AN1, AN2, AN3 are represented in the figure).  The
   different ANs could have different wireless or wired techologies and
   the Mobile Host could be connected to more than one Access Network at
   the same time if it has more than one physical network interface.
   Note that the Access Networks can provide public or private addresses
   to the mobile host (in most typical scenarios the Access Networks are
   likely to provide private IP addresses).  For example in the figure
   below AN 1 and AN 3 provide a private address (as shown by the NAT
   box), while AN2 provides a public address.  Similarly, the
   Correspondent Host can have a public address (like CH 1 in the
   figure) or a private IP address (like CH 2 in the figure).

                     +-------+
                     |  AN1  |-----+
                 ----|       | NAT |                +--------+
                /    +-------+-----+                |Corresp.|
   +-------+                         __________     | Host 1 |
   | Mobile|         +-------+      /          \    +--------+
   | Host  |         |  AN2  |     /            \
   +-------+     ----|       |    |   INTERNET   |
                     + - - - +     \            /
                                    \__________/
                \    +-------+                      +--------+
                 ----|  AN3  |-----+          +-----|Corresp.|
                     |       | NAT |          | NAT | Host 2 |
                     +-------+-----+          +-----+--------+

   The goal of the handover mechanism is to let the MH roam among
   different Access Networks in a seamless way.  The mobility management
   mechanism should consider the roaming of the MH both "off call" and
   during an active call.  The MH should be able to dinamically choose
   among the available ANs the one that better suits its needs (e.g.
   perceived quality of media flows and cost) in a given moment.  It is
   important to notice that this draft does not address the criteria and
   tools for selection of the "best" access network, it only details the
   issues and the requirements regarding the mobility management and
   handover execution mechanims.










Niccolini, et al.       Expires February 28, 2008               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover           August 2007


3.  Requirements for Vertical Handovers

   In this session we discuss a set of requirements that a mobility
   management solution based on SIP should have.

   o  The solution should be as fast as possible.  The goal is to
      provide a "seamless" handover with no perception from the user
      point of view.  If it is not possible to provide a truly seamless
      solution, the impairment should be minimized.

   o  The solution should support a "forward handover" (i.e. in which
      all the procedure is performed on the new target Access Network).
      This is important if the connection on the old Access Network is
      suddenly broken.  If possible (i.e. if the connection with the old
      access network does not break suddenly) the solution could exploit
      the communication on the old access network in order to better
      control the handover procedure.  Soft handovers (i.e. where the
      two active connections can be exploited in the same moment to send
      the session data) could be exploited.

   o  The handover solution should be compatible with NATted networks,
      i.e. it should interoperate gracefully with NAT traversal
      mechanisms for SIP signaling and for session media flows.

   o  The handover solution should not require a support in the
      different access network.  The access networks are only required
      to provide IP connectivity (either with public or private
      addresses) for the forwarding of signalling SIP packets and media
      RTP packets.

   o  The switch of the "active" interface during a SIP transaction
      should be supported.  As an example the terminal should be able to
      send (receive) an INVITE on the currenlty active interface, switch
      to another interface and receive (send) the 200 OK on the other
      interface.

   o  An optional desirable requirement is to allow the decoupling of
      "user level" registration and mobility and "terminal level"
      mobility.  As an example a user with AOR "sip:user@domain.com"
      should be allowed to use different terminals (i.e.  Mobile Hosts
      supporting the handover solutions as well as normal SIP
      terminals).  These terminals can be used in sequence or at the
      same time depending on the capability of his own "home" registrar/
      proxy server, and this is independent of the vertical handover
      solution which takes care of the mobility of only one specific
      Mobile Host.  A concrete example for this requirement is to
      support a user "sip:user@domain.com" who owns three Mobile Hosts
      (one could be his phone, one his PDA, one his laptop) and two



Niccolini, et al.       Expires February 28, 2008               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover           August 2007


      fixed terminals (his desktop and his home VoIP phone).  The
      vertical handover solution takes care of the mobility of the
      phone, PDA and laptop as three separate Mobile Hosts (which can
      also be all active in the same time).

   o  An optional desirable requirement is to provide privacy with
      respect to user location and user movements.

   o  Another desirable feature is that existing user agents should
      inter-work with the handover procedure without the need to be
      updated.  This requirement applies especially to the
      "Correspondent Hosts" (which in general are not moving, but they
      are communicating with a moving terminal).  If this requirement is
      not fulfilled there is the need to change all SIP terminals to
      support the handovers of Mobile Host.  To a lesser extent this
      requirements also applies to the Mobile Host itself: it would be
      desirable to reuse existing SIP clients (User Agents) without
      updating them to support the terminal mobility.

































Niccolini, et al.       Expires February 28, 2008               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover           August 2007


4.  Taxonomy of possible approaches

   The application level mobility solutions based on SIP can be
   classified in "Correspondent host based" or "Intermediate Element
   based".

   o  Correspondent Host based solutions

   RFC 3261 [1] has a built in mechanism for mobility management.  The
   "off-call" mobility management consists in the Registration process.
   The "on-call" handover is performed using RE-INVITE messages towards
   the Corresponding Node.  No intermediate entities are directly
   involved in the handover process.  This has the advantage that no
   additional procedure for the handover needs to be implemented in
   network elements, and that there is no additional load in the
   networks due to the handovers.  On the other hand, the procedure
   requirese that the Corresponding Node (which in general is not a
   mobile host) supports the RE-INVITE mechanism.  A second drawback is
   that the handover delay is directly proportional to the end-to-end
   delay, and this could be higher with respect to the delay occurring
   between a mobile node and an intermediate entity.

   o  Intermediate Element based solutions

   In order to overcome the drawbacks of the Correspondent Host based
   solutions, "intermediate" entities that take an active role in the
   handover can be introduced.  Several proposals can be found in the
   literature, but to our knowledge no internet draft has been proposed
   in this respect.  Hereafter we mention some of the existing
   proposals.  In [2] intermediate entities are used only to speed up
   the handover process, but the handover procedure still involves the
   Corresponding Node as well.  A similar approach is followed in [4],
   which also deals with location based selection of the "optimal"
   intermediate entity and of wireless access points.  In [3] the
   intermediate entities fully handle the user mobility, hiding the
   mobility to the Corresponding Nodes.















Niccolini, et al.       Expires February 28, 2008               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover           August 2007


5.  Related work

   The general problem of continuity of multimedia sessions is currently
   heavily discussed in 3GPP and it was agreed to be studied in
   timeframe of Release 8.  The handover that this document refers to is
   referred to as PS-PS session continuity in 3GPP terminology. 3GPP is
   considering the usage of an intermediate element in order to handle
   PS-PS multimedia session continuity as written in 3GPP Technical
   Report 23.893.  The usage of such intermediate element is also the
   core point of the solution presented in [3].  Also the scenarios
   currently under discussion are inline with the scenario depicted in
   Section 2 (please note that the scenarios discussed in 3GPP are
   currently a superset of the one depicted in this document).






































Niccolini, et al.       Expires February 28, 2008               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover           August 2007


6.  Conclusions

   As a concluding remark, we believe that it is important to consider a
   new solution for vertical handover that meets the set of requirements
   that has been analysed.  This solution will help providing seamless
   handover to SIP based application with a better performance and
   overcoming some shortcomings of the current solution based on [1].
   The motiviation of this work assumes even more relevance if 3GPP
   interest in this kind of solutions is taken into account.










































Niccolini, et al.       Expires February 28, 2008               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover           August 2007


7.  Security considerations

   The security considerations should be taken into account in the
   design of the handover solution, so that no new additional security
   issues will be introduced.














































Niccolini, et al.       Expires February 28, 2008              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover           August 2007


8.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require IANA actions.
















































Niccolini, et al.       Expires February 28, 2008              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover           August 2007


9.  Informative References

   [1]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E. Schooler, "SIP:
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [2]  N. Banerjee et al., "Seamless SIP-Based Mobility for Multimedia
        Applications", IEEE Network , March/April 2006.

   [3]  S. Salsano et al., "Architecture and testbed implementation of
        vertical handovers based on SIP Session Border Controllers", to
        appear in Wireless Personal Communications, Springer , 2007.

   [4]  S. Tsiakkouris, I. Wassell, "PROFITIS: architecture for
        location-based vertical handovers supporting real-time
        applications", 25th IEEE International Performance, Computing,
        and Communications Conference, IPCCC 2006, Phoenix, Arizona,
        April 10-12, 2006 .

































Niccolini, et al.       Expires February 28, 2008              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover           August 2007


Appendix A.  Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Chiara Mingardi (Univ. of Padova/NEC)
   and Andrea Polidoro (Univ. of Rome Tor Vergata) for their support in
   the identification of the requirements and the fruitful discussions
   about possible solutions.













































Niccolini, et al.       Expires February 28, 2008              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover           August 2007


Authors' Addresses

   Saverio Niccolini
   Network Laboratories, NEC Europe Ltd.
   Kurfuersten-Anlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 (0) 6221 43 42 118
   Email: saverio.niccolini@netlab.nec.de
   URI:   http://www.netlab.nec.de


   Stefano Salsano
   DIE, University of Rome "TorVergata"
   Via Politecnico, 1
   Rome  00156
   Italy

   Phone: +39 06 7259 7770
   Email: stefano.salsano@uniroma2.it
   URI:   http://netgroup.uniroma2.it/Stefano_Salsano


   Luca Veltri
   DII, University of Parma
   Parco Area delle Scienze 181/A
   Parma  43100
   Italy

   Phone: +39 0521 90 5768
   Email: luca.veltri@unipr.it
   URI:   http://www.tlc.unipr.it/veltri


















Niccolini, et al.       Expires February 28, 2008              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover           August 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Niccolini, et al.       Expires February 28, 2008              [Page 15]


