


MIPSHOP WG                                                     G. Bajko 
Internet Draft                                                    Nokia 
Intended Status: Proposed Standard                         June 4, 2009 
Expires: December 3, 2009                                               
                                                                        
    
    
            Locating IEEE 802.21 Mobility Servers using DNS 
                draft-ietf-mipshop-mos-dns-discovery-06 
 
   Status of this Memo 
    
   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 3, 2009. 
    
   Copyright and License Notice 
    
   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors. All rights reserved. 
    
   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info). 
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your 
   rights and restrictions with respect to this document. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This document defines application service tags that allow service 
   location without relying on rigid domain naming conventions, and DNS 
   procedures for discovering servers which provide IEEE 802.21 
   [IEEE802.21] defined Mobility Services. Such Mobility Services are 
   used to assist a Mobile Node (MN) supporting IEEE 802.21 
   [IEEE802.21], in handover preparation (network discovery) and 
  
G. Bajko                   Expires 12/03/09                  [Page 1] 
 
 
Locating Mobility Servers using DNS                           June 2009 
    
   handover decision (network selection). The services addressed by 
   this document are the Media Independent Handover Services defined in 
   [IEEE802.21]. 
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119. 
    
Terminology and abbreviations used in this document 
    
   Mobility Services: comprises of a set of different services provided 
   by the network to mobile nodes to facilitate handover preparation 
   and handover decision, as described in [IEEE802.21].  
    
   Mobility Server: a network node providing IEEE 802.21 Mobility 
   Services. 
    
   MIH: Media Independent Handover, as defined in [IEEE802.21]. 
    
   MIH Service: IS, ES or CS type of service, as defined in 
   [IEEE802.21]. 
    
   Application service:  is a generic term for some type of 
   application, independent of the protocol that may be used to offer 
   it. Each application service will be associated with an IANA-
   registered tag.  
    
   Application protocol: is used to implement the application service. 
   These are also associated with IANA-registered tags. 
    
Table of Content 
    
   1. Introduction....................................................2  
   2. Discovering a Mobility Server...................................3  
        2.1 Selecting a Mobility Service..............................4  
        2.2 Selecting the transport protocol..........................4  
        2.3 Determining the IP address and port.......................6  
   3. IANA Considerations.............................................6  
   4. Security Considerations.........................................7  
   5. Normative References............................................8  
   6. Informative References..........................................8  
   7. Author's Address................................................9  
    
1. Introduction 
    
   IEEE 802.21 [IEEE802.21] defines three distinct service types to 
   facilitate link layer handovers across heterogeneous technologies:  
    
   a) Information Services (IS)  

 
G. Bajko                   Expires 12/03/09                  [Page 2] 
 
 
Locating Mobility Servers using DNS                           June 2009 
    
        IS provides a unified framework to the higher layer entities 
        across the heterogeneous network environment to facilitate 
        discovery and selection of multiple types of networks existing 
        within a geographical area, with the objective to help the 
        higher layer mobility protocols to acquire a global view of the 
        heterogeneous networks and perform seamless handover across 
        these networks.  
    
   b) Event Services (ES) 
        Events may indicate changes in state and transmission behavior 
        of the physical, data link and logical link layers, or predict 
        state changes of these layers. The Event Service may also be 
        used to indicate management actions or command status on the 
        part of the network or some management entity.  
    
   c) Command Services (CS) 
        The command service enables higher layers to control the 
        physical, data link, and logical link layers. The higher layers 
        may control the reconfiguration or selection of an appropriate 
        link through a set of handover commands. 
    
   In IEEE terminology these services are called Media Independent 
   Handover (MIH) services. 
   While these services may be co-located, the different pattern and 
   type of information they provide does not necessitate the co-
   location.  
    
   "Service Management" service messages, i.e., MIH registration, MIH 
   capability discovery and MIH event subscription messages, are 
   considered as ES and CS when transporting MIH messages over L3 
   transport. 
    
   An MN may make use of any of these MIH service types separately or 
   any combination of them. 
    
   It is anticipated that a Mobility Server will not necessarily host 
   all three of these MIH Services together, thus there is a need to 
   discover the MIH Service types separately. 
    
   This document defines a number of application service tags that 
   allow service location without relying on rigid domain naming 
   conventions.  
    
2. Discovering a Mobility Server  
    
   The Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) [RFC3401] is used to 
   implement lazy binding of strings to data, in order to support 
   dynamically configured delegation systems.  The DDDS functions by 
   mapping some unique string to data stored within a DDDS Database by 
   iteratively applying string transformation rules until a terminal 
   condition is reached. When DDDS uses DNS as a distributed database 
   of Rules, these Rules are encoded using the Naming Authority Pointer 
 
G. Bajko                   Expires 12/03/09                  [Page 3] 
 
 
Locating Mobility Servers using DNS                           June 2009 
    
   (NAPTR) Resource Record (RR). One of these Rules is the First Well 
   Known Rule, which says where the process starts. 
    
   In current specifications, the First Well Known Rule in a DDDS 
   application [RFC3403] is assumed to be fixed, ie the domain in the 
   tree where the lookups are to be routed to, is known. This document 
   proposes the input to the First Well Known Rule to be dynamic, based 
   on the search path the resolver discovers or is configured with. 
    
   The search path of the resolver can either be pre-configured, 
   discovered using DHCP or learned from a previous MIH Information 
   Service (IS) query [IEEE802.21] as described in  
   [ID.ietf-mipshop-mstp-solution]. 
    
   When the MN needs to discover Mobility Services in its home domain, 
   the input to the First Well Known Rule MUST be the MN's home domain, 
   which is assumed to be pre-configured in the MN. 
    
   When the MN needs to discover Mobility Services in a local (visited) 
   domain, it SHOULD use DHCP as described in [ID.ietf-mipshop-mos-
   dhcp-options] to discover the IP address of the server hosting the 
   desired service, and use it in SRV queries. In some instances, the 
   discovery may result in a per protocol/application list of domain 
   names which are then to be used as starting points for the 
   subsequent NAPTR lookups. If neither IP address or domain name can 
   be discovered with the above procedure, the MN MAY request for a 
   domain search list, as described in [RFC3397] and [RFC3646], and use 
   it as input to the DDDS application.  
    
   The MN may also have a list of cached domain names of Service 
   Providers, learned from a previous MIH Information Service (IS) 
   query [IEEE802.21]. If the cache entries have not expired, they can 
   be used as input to the DDDS application. 
    
   When the MN does not find valid domain names using the procedures 
   above, it MUST stop any attempt to discover MIH Services. 
    
   The dynamic rule described above SHOULD NOT be used for discovering 
   services other than MIH Services described in this document, unless 
   stated otherwise by a future specification. 
    
   The procedures defined here result in an IP address, port and 
   transport protocol where the MN can contact the Mobility Server 
   which hosts the service the MN is looking for. 
    
2.1 Selecting a Mobility Service 
    
   The MN should know the characteristics of the Mobility Services 
   defined in [IEEE802.21] and based on that it should be able to 
   select the service it wants to use to facilitate its handover. The 
   services it can choose from are: 
           - Information Service (MIHIS)  
 
G. Bajko                   Expires 12/03/09                  [Page 4] 
 
 
Locating Mobility Servers using DNS                           June 2009 
    
           - Event Service (MIHES)  
           - Command Service (MIHCS)  
    
   The service identifiers for the services are "MIHIS", "MIHES", and 
   "MIHCS" respectively. 
   The server supporting any of the above services MUST support at 
   least UDP and TCP as transport, as described in [ID.ietf-mipshop-
   mstp-solution]. SCTP and other transport protocols MAY also be 
   supported. 
    
2.2 Selecting the transport protocol  
    
   After the desired service has been chosen, the client selects the 
   transport protocol it prefers to use. Note, that transport selection 
   may impact the handover performance.  
    
   The services relevant for the task of transport protocol selection 
   are those with NAPTR service fields with values "ID+M2X", where ID 
   is the service identifier defined in the previous section and X is a 
   letter that corresponds to a transport protocol supported by the 
   domain. This specification defines M2U for UDP, M2T for TCP and M2S 
   for SCTP.   This document also establishes an IANA registry for 
   NAPTR service name to transport protocol mappings.  
    
   These NAPTR [RFC3403] records provide a mapping from a domain to the 
   SRV [RFC2782] record for contacting a server with the specific 
   transport protocol in the NAPTR services field. The resource record 
   will contain an empty regular expression and a replacement value, 
   which indicates the domain name where the SRV record for that 
   particular transport protocol can be found. If the server supports 
   multiple transport protocols, there will be multiple NAPTR records, 
   each with a different service value.  As per [RFC3403], the client 
   discards any records whose services fields are not applicable. 
    
   The MN MUST discard any service fields that identify a resolution 
   service whose value is not "M2X", for values of X that indicate 
   transport protocols supported by the client.  The NAPTR processing 
   as described in RFC 3403 will result in the discovery of the most 
   preferred transport protocol of the server that is supported by the 
   client, as well as an SRV record for the server. 
    
   As an example, consider a client that wishes to find MIHIS service 
   in the example.com domain. The client performs a NAPTR query for 
   that domain, and the following NAPTR records are returned: 
    
           order pref flags  service     regexp       replacement  
   IN NAPTR  50   50   "s"  "MIHIS+M2T"    ""  _MIHIS._tcp.example.com  
   IN NAPTR  90   50   "s"  "MIHIS+M2U"    ""  _MIHIS._udp.example.com  
    
   This indicates that the domain does have a server providing MIHIS 
   services over TCP and UDP, in that order of preference. Since the 
   client supports TCP and UDP, TCP will be used, targeted to a host 
 
G. Bajko                   Expires 12/03/09                  [Page 5] 
 
 
Locating Mobility Servers using DNS                           June 2009 
    
   determined by an SRV lookup of _MIHIS._tcp.example.com.  That lookup 
   would return: 
    
   ;;          Priority  Weight    Port        Target  
        IN  SRV    0        1      XXXX   server1.example.com  
        IN  SRV    0        2      XXXX   server2.example.com 
    
   If no NAPTR records are found, the client constructs SRV queries for 
   those transport protocols it supports, and does a query for each. 
   Queries are done using the service identifier "_MIHIS" for the MIH 
   Information Service, "_MIHES" for the MIH Event Service and "_MIHCS" 
   for the MIH Command Service. A particular transport is supported if 
   the query is successful.  The client MAY use any transport protocol 
   it desires which is supported by the server. 
    
   Note, that the regexp field in the NAPTR example above is empty. 
   This document discourages the use of this field as its usage can be 
   complex and error prone; and the discovery of the MIH services do 
   not require the flexibility provided by this field over a static 
   target present in the TARGET field.  
    
   If the client is already configured with the information about which 
   transport protocol is used for a mobility service in a particular 
   domain, it can directly perform an SRV query for that specific 
   transport using the service identifier of the Mobility Service. For 
   example, if the client knows that it should be using TCP for MIH IS 
   service, it can perform a SRV query directly for 
   _MIHIS._tcp.example.com. 
    
2.3 Determining the IP address and port  
    
   Once the server providing the desired service and the transport 
   protocol has been determined, the next step is to determine the IP 
   address and port. 
    
   If TARGET is a numeric IP address, the MN uses that IP address and 
   the already chosen transport to contact the server providing the 
   desired service. 
    
   If the TARGET was not a numeric IP address, then the MN performs an 
   A and/or AAAA record lookup of the domain name, as appropriate. The 
   result will be a list of IP addresses, each of which can be 
   contacted using the transport protocol determined previously. 
    
   If the result of the SRV query contains a port number, then the MN 
   SHOULD contact the server at that port number. If the SRV record did 
   not contain a port number then the MN SHOULD contact the server at 
   the default port number of that particular service. A default port 
   number for MIH services is requested from IANA in [ID.ietf-mipshop-
   mstp-solution]. 
    
3. IANA considerations 
 
G. Bajko                   Expires 12/03/09                  [Page 6] 
 
 
Locating Mobility Servers using DNS                           June 2009 
    
    
   The usage of NAPTR records described here requires well known values 
   for the service fields for each transport supported by Mobility 
   Services. The table of mappings from service field values to 
   transport protocols is to be maintained by IANA. 
    
   The registration in the RFC MUST include the following information: 
    
        Service Field: The service field being registered. 
         
        Protocol: The specific transport protocol associated with that 
        service field.  This MUST include the name and acronym for the 
        protocol, along with reference to a document that describes the 
        transport protocol. 
         
        Name and Contact Information: The name, address, email address 
        and telephone number for the person performing the 
        registration.  
    
   The following values have been placed into the registry: 
    
   Service Fields                    Protocol 
      MIHIS+M2T                        TCP 
      MIHIS+M2U                        UDP 
      MIHIS+M2S                       SCTP 
      MIHES+M2T                        TCP 
      MIHES+M2U                        UDP 
      MIHES+M2S                       SCTP 
      MIHCS+M2T                        TCP 
      MIHCS+M2U                        UDP 
      MIHCS+M2S                       SCTP 
    
   New Service Fields are to be added via Standards Action as defined 
   in [RFC5226].  
   New entries to the table that specify additional transport protocols 
   for the existing Service Fields may be registered by IANA on a First 
   Come First Served' basis [RFC5226]. 
    
4. Security considerations 
    
   A list of known threats to services using DNS is documented in 
   [RFC3833]. For most of those identified threats, the DNS Security 
   Extensions [RFC4033] does provide protection. It is therefore 
   recommended to consider the usage of DNSSEC [RFC4033] and the 
   aspects of DNSSEC Operational Practices [RFC4641] when deploying 
   IEEE 802.21 Mobility Services. 
    
   In deployments where DNSSEC usage is not feasible, measures should 
   be taken to protect against forged DNS responses and cache poisoning 
   as much as possible. Efforts in this direction are documented in 
   [ID.ietf-dnsext-forgery-resilience]. 
    
 
G. Bajko                   Expires 12/03/09                  [Page 7] 
 
 
Locating Mobility Servers using DNS                           June 2009 
    
    
5. Normative References 
    
   [RFC2782] Gulbrandsen, A., Vixie, P., and L. Esibov, "A DNS RR for 
       specifying the location of services (DNS SRV)", RFC 2782, 
       February 2000. 
    
   [RFC3403] Mealling, M., "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) 
       Part Three: The Domain Name System (DNS) Database", RFC 3403, 
       October 2002. 
    
   [RFC4033] Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S. 
       Rose, "DNS Security Introduction and Requirements", RFC 4033, 
       March 2005. 
    
   [RFC5226] Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an 
       IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 5226, May 
       2008. 
   [RFC3397] B. Aboba and S. Cheshire, "DHCP Domain Search Option", RFC 
       3397, November 2002. 
    
   [RFC3646] R. Droms, "DNS Configuration options for DHCPv6", RFC 
       3646, December 2003. 
    
    
6. Informative References 
    
   [IEEE802.21] IEEE 802.21 Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area 
       Networks: Media Independent Handover Services  
    
   [RFC4641] Kolkman, O. and R. Gieben, "DNSSEC Operational Practices", 
       RFC 4641, September 2006. 
    
   [RFC3401] M. Mealling, "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) 
       Part One: The Comprehensive DDDS", RFC 3401, October 2002. 
    
   [RFC3833] Atkins, D. and R. Austein, "Threat Analysis of the Domain 
       Name System (DNS)", RFC 3833, August 2004. 
    
   [ID.ietf-mipshop-mstp-solution] Mobility Services Transport Protocol 
       Design, Melia et al, April 2008, work in progress  
    
   [ID.ietf-mipshop-mos-dhcp-options] DHCP Options for IEEE 802.21 
       Mobility Services (MoS) Discovery, Bajko et al, May 2009, work 
       in progress 
    
   [ID.ietf-dnsext-forgery-resilience] Measures for making DNS more 
       resilient against forged answers, Hubert et al, August 2008, 
       work in progress  
    
    
7. Author's Addresses 
 
G. Bajko                   Expires 12/03/09                  [Page 8] 
 
 
Locating Mobility Servers using DNS                           June 2009 
    
    
   Gabor Bajko 
   gabor(dot)bajko(at)nokia(dot)com 
    
 















































 
G. Bajko                   Expires 12/03/09                  [Page 9] 
 