
Networking Working Group                                     JP. Vasseur
Internet-Draft                                        Cisco Systems, Inc
Intended status: Informational                        September 30, 2008
Expires: April 3, 2009


              Terminology in Low power And Lossy Networks
                 draft-vasseur-roll-terminology-02.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 3, 2009.

Abstract

   The documents defines a terminology for discussing routing
   requirements and solutions for networks referred to as Low power and
   Lossy Networks (LLN).  A LLN is typically composed of many embedded
   devices with limited power, memory, and processing resources
   interconnected by a variety of links.  There is a wide scope of
   application areas for LLNs, including industrial monitoring, building
   automation (e.g.  Heating, Ventilating, Air Conditioning, lighting,
   access control, fire), connected home, healthcare, environmental
   monitoring, urban sensor networks, energy management, assets
   tracking, refrigeration.





Vasseur                   Expires April 3, 2009                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    draft-vasseur-roll-terminology-02.txt   September 2008


Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     6.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     6.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 8
































Vasseur                   Expires April 3, 2009                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    draft-vasseur-roll-terminology-02.txt   September 2008


1.  Introduction

   This document defines a terminology for discussing routing
   requirements and solutions for networks referred to as Low power and
   Lossy Networks (LLN).

   Low power and Lossy networks (LLNs) are typically composed of many
   embedded devices with limited power, memory, and processing resources
   interconnected by a variety of links, such as IEEE 802.15.4, Low
   Power WiFi.  There is a wide scope of application areas for LLNs,
   including industrial monitoring, building automation (HVAC, lighting,
   access control, fire), connected home, healthcare, environmental
   monitoring, urban sensor networks, energy management, assets tracking
   and refrigeration.

   Since these applications are usually highly specific (for example
   Industrial Automation, Building Automation, ...), it is not uncommon
   to see a number of disparate terms to describe the same device or
   functionality.  Thus in order to avoid confusion or discrepancies,
   this document specifies the common terminology to be used in all ROLL
   Working Group documents.  Terminology specific to a particular
   application are out of the scope of this document.

   It is expected that all routing requirements documents defining
   requirements or specifying routing solutions for LLN will use the
   common terminology specified in this document.


2.  Terminology

   Actuator: a field device that controls a set of equipment.  For
   example, an actuator might control and/or modulates the flow of a gas
   or liquid, control electricity distribution, perform a mechanical
   operation, ...

   AMI: Advanced Metering Infrastructure that makes use of Smart Grid
   technologies.  A canonical Smart Grid application is smart-metering.

   Channel: Radio frequency sub-band used to transmit a modulated signal
   carrying packets.

   Channel Hopping: A procedure by which field devices synchronously
   change channels during operation.

   Commissioning Tool: Any physical or logical device temporarily added
   to the network for the expressed purpose of setting up the network
   and device operational parameters.  The commisioning tool can also be
   temporarily added to the LLN for scheduled or unscheduled



Vasseur                   Expires April 3, 2009                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    draft-vasseur-roll-terminology-02.txt   September 2008


   maintenance.

   Closed Loop Control: A process whereby a device controller controls
   an actuator based on information sensed by one or more field devices.

   Controller: A field device that can receive sensor input and
   automatically change the environment in the facility by manipulating
   digital or analog actuators.

   DA: Distribution Automation, part of Smart Grid.  Encompasses
   technologies for maintenance and management of electrical
   distribution systems.

   Downstream: Data direction traveling from outside of the LLN (e.g.
   traffic coming from a LAN, WAN or the Internet) via a LBR.

   Field Device: A field deviced is a physical device placed in the
   network's operating environment (e.g. plant, urban or home).  Field
   devices include sensors, actuators as well as routers and Low power
   and Lossy Network Border Router (including LBR).  A field device is
   usually (but not always) a device with constrained CPU, memory
   footprint, storage capacity, bandwidth and sometimes power (battery
   operated).  At the time of writing, for the sake of illustration, a
   typical sensor or actuator would have a few KBytes of RAM, a few
   dozens of KBytes of ROM/Flash memory, a 8/16/32 bit microcontroller
   and communication capabilities ranging from a few Kbits/s to a few
   hundreds of KBits/s.  Although it is expected to see continuous
   improvements of hardware and software technologies, such devices will
   likely continue to be seen as resource constrained devices compared
   to computers and routers used in the Internet.

   Flash memory: non-volatile memory that can be re-programmed.

   FMS: Facility Management System.  A global term applied across all
   the vertical designations within a building including, Heating,
   Ventilating, and Air Conditioning also referred to as HVAC, Fire,
   Security, Lighting and Elevator control.

   HART: "Highway Addressable Remote Transducer", a group of
   specifications for industrial process and control devices
   administered by the HART Foundation (see [HART]).  The latest version
   for the specifications is HART7 which includes the additions for
   WirelessHART.

   HVAC: Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning.  A term applied to
   the comfort level of an internal space.

   ISA: "International Society of Automation".  ISA is an ANSI



Vasseur                   Expires April 3, 2009                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    draft-vasseur-roll-terminology-02.txt   September 2008


   accredited standards-making society.  ISA100 is an ISA committee
   whose charter includes defining a family of standards for industrial
   automation.  [ISA100.11a] is a working group within ISA100 that is
   working on a standard for monitoring and non-critical process control
   applications.

   LAN: Local Area Network.

   LBR: Low power and lossy network Border Router.  The LBR is a device
   that connects the Low power and Lossy Network to another routing
   domain such as a Local Area Network (LAN), Wide Area Network (WAN) or
   the Internet where a possibly different routing protocol is in
   operation.  The LBR acts as a routing device and may possibly host
   other functions such as data collector or aggregator.

   LLN: Low power and Lossy networks (LLNs) are typically composed of
   many embedded devices with limited power, memory, and processing
   resources interconnected by a variety of links, such as IEEE 802.15.4
   or Low Power WiFi.  There is a wide scope of application areas for
   LLNs, including industrial monitoring, building automation (HVAC,
   lighting, access control, fire), connected home, healthcare,
   environmental monitoring, urban sensor networks, energy management,
   assets tracking and refrigeration..

   Open Loop Control: A process whereby a plant operator manually
   manipulates an actuator over the network where the decision is
   influenced by information sensed by field devices.

   RAM: Random Access Memory.  The RAM is a volatile memory.

   RFID: Radio Frequency IDentification.

   ROM: Read Only Memory.

   ROLL: Routing Over Low power and Lossy networks.

   Schedule: An agreed execution, wake-up, transmission, reception,
   etc., time-table between two or more field devices.

   Sensor: A sensor is a device that measures a physical quantity and
   converts it to a analog or digital signal that can be read by a
   program or a user.  Sensed data can be of many types: electromagnetic
   (e.g. current, voltage, power, resistance, ...) , mechanical (e.g.
   pressure, flow, liquid density, humidity, ...), chemical (e.g.
   oxygen, carbon monoxide, ...), acoustic (e.g. noise, ultrasound), ...

   Smart Grid: A Smart Grid is a broad class of applications to network
   and automate utility infrastructure.



Vasseur                   Expires April 3, 2009                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    draft-vasseur-roll-terminology-02.txt   September 2008


   Timeslot: A Timeslot is a fixed time interval that may be used for
   the transmission or reception of a packet between two field devices.
   A timeslot used for communications is associated with a slotted-link

   Upstream: Data direction traveling from the LLN via the LBR to
   outside of the LLN (LAN, WAN, Internet).

   WAN: Wide Area Network.


3.  IANA Considerations

   This document includes no request for IANA action.


4.  Security Considerations

   Since this document specifies terminology and does not specify new
   procedure or protocols, it raises no new security issue.


5.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Christian Jacquenet, Tim Winter,
   Pieter De Mil and David Meyer for their valuable feed-back.


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

6.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs]
              Brandt, A., Buron, J., and G. Porcu, "Home Automation
              Routing Requirement in Low Power and Lossy Networks",
              draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs-03 (work in progress),
              September 2008.

   [I-D.ietf-roll-indus-routing-reqs]
              Networks, D., Thubert, P., Dwars, S., and T. Phinney,
              "Industrial Routing Requirements in Low Power and Lossy
              Networks", draft-ietf-roll-indus-routing-reqs-01 (work in
              progress), July 2008.




Vasseur                   Expires April 3, 2009                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    draft-vasseur-roll-terminology-02.txt   September 2008


   [I-D.ietf-roll-urban-routing-reqs]
              Dohler, M., Watteyne, T., Winter, T., Jacquenet, C.,
              Madhusudan, G., Chegaray, G., and D. Barthel, "Urban WSNs
              Routing Requirements in Low Power and Lossy Networks",
              draft-ietf-roll-urban-routing-reqs-01 (work in progress),
              July 2008.

   [I-D.martocci-roll-building-routing-reqs]
              Martocci, J., Riou, N., Mil, P., and W. Vermeylen,
              "Commercial Routing Requirements in Low Power and Lossy
              Networks", draft-martocci-roll-building-routing-reqs-00
              (work in progress), September 2008.


Author's Address

   JP Vasseur
   Cisco Systems, Inc
   1414 Massachusetts Avenue
   Boxborough, MA  01719
   USA

   Email: jpv@cisco.com




























Vasseur                   Expires April 3, 2009                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    draft-vasseur-roll-terminology-02.txt   September 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Vasseur                   Expires April 3, 2009                 [Page 8]


