

   Network Working Group                                                
   Internet-Draft                                           C. Kularski 
   Expires: March 2004                                  Highland School 
                                                          of Technology 
   Category: Informational                               September 2003 
    
    
                   Compound Procedures for SPAM Control 
                                      
                   draft-kularski-spam-spamreduce-04.txt 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This document describes procedures that can be put into place to 
   significantly reduce the amount of SPAM received by a user. The 
   procedures are implemented on the SMTP server.  
 
Copyright Notice 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved. 
 
 
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [i]. 
 
 
KULARSKI                 Expires û March 2004                 [Page 1] 
Internet-Draft     Compound SPAM Control Procedure     September 2003 
 
 
  1. Introduction 
     The procedures outlined in this document require a complex SMTP 
     implementation that is capable of handling the addressing schemes 
     required by this document. The SMTP service itself should remain 
     in compliance with all standards and specifications.  
      
 
  2. Address Structuring Considerations 
     The procedures in this document are easiest to implement using a 
     sub-domain for each user, such as "user.example.net". The sub-
     domain SHOULD NOT be defined explicitly, it should be assigned as 
     a wildcard (*) Mail Exchanger RR.  
      
     To avoid DNS issues completely you can use a dotted (.) or 
     hyphenated naming structure before the "at" (@) symbol. The more 
     creative you are with the design of your address schema the fewer 
     SPAM messages you are likely to receive.  
 
  3. Email Addresses 
     There are three main classifications of email address which must 
     be defined.   
      
     Addresses for Automated and Non-Trusted Sources û This set of 
     addresses is defined by the user. There MUST be a way for the user 
     to easily change his/her list of available addresses quickly and 
     easily. The user will need the ability to add and delete addresses 
     from the list. The user will assign a unique address to each non-
     trusted email source. If the source misuses the address, then the 
     address can be disposed of by deleting it from the list. Mail 
     received by these addresses should be deposited in the user's 
     primary mailbox. If a user needs an excessive amount of non-
     trusted source address a wildcard address can be used for this 
     purpose (with the ability to kill abused addresses), but it is not 
     recommended. 
      
     Address for Personal Communication û The address for personal 
     communication is a single email address defined by either the user 
     or the administrator. This address will most likely be the one 
     used as the primary mailbox for the user. The user should give 
     this address only to human sources that are unlikely to spread the 
     address.  
      
     Addresses for Common Services, Roles and Functions û Addresses 
     defined by RFC 2142[ii] should be directed to the mailbox of the 
     appropriate function on the primary domain (example: 
     abuse@user.example.net is delivered to abuse@example.net). 
 
  4. Considerations for Each Address Type 
     Each address type has its own special needs for them to be used to 
 
 
KULARSKI                 Expires - March 2004                 [Page 2] 
Internet-Draft     Compound SPAM Control Procedure     September 2003 
 
 
     their full potential and to allow the least amount of SPAM in.  
      
     Addresses for Automated and Non-Trusted Sources û These addresses 
     MUST be unique to each source. Mail for these addresses can be 
     filtered to add an additional level of SPAM elimination, but the 
     nature of these addresses will significantly reduce the amount of 
     SPAM received.  
      
     Address for Personal Communication û This address should be 
     protected in several ways. First, the address should not be widely 
     distributed and should NEVER be used for newsgroups, web pages or 
     any purpose where it will be publicly viewable. Additionally the 
     mailbox can use a whitelist (and blacklist) system to authorize 
     senders or you can use a score-based SPAM detection system.  
      
     Addresses for Common Roles, Services and Functions û due to the 
     nature of these addresses they should not be extremely 
     restrictive, but due to the nature of SPAM attacks some protection 
     is advisable.  
 
  5. Possible Special Addresses 
     In addition to the addresses for non-trusted sources temporary 
     addresses that expire after a certain amount of time has elapsed 
     can be used for situations where SPAM is imminent, such as 
     newsgroup communication.  
 
  6. Address Examples 
     Sub-domain Non-trusted source û spammer@user.example.net 
     Dotted-user Non-trusted source û spammer.user@example.net 
     Hyphened-user Non-trusted source û spammer-user@example.net 
     Sub-domain Personal û user@user.example.net 
     Dotted (or Hyphened) Personal û user@example.net 
      
 
Security Considerations 
   The information in this document introduces no Security Concerns.  
 
 
References 
                     
   i  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
   ii Crocker, D., "Mailbox Names for Common Roles, Services and 
      Functions", RFC 2142, May 1997 
    
    


 
 
KULARSKI                 Expires - March 2004                 [Page 3] 
Internet-Draft     Compound SPAM Control Procedure     September 2003 
 
 
Author's Addresses 
    
   Curtis M. Kularski 
   219 Best St 
   Bessemer City, NC 28016-9330 
   United States 
   Phone: +1 (704) 629-2498 
   Email: curtis@kularski.net 
 
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved. 
 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
 
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees. 
 
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 
    

 
 
KULARSKI                 Expires - March 2004                 [Page 4] 

