Network Working Group                                        W. Kruithof
Internet-Draft                                      Unix-AG Uni Hannover
Expires: Juni 14, 2005                                 December 14, 2004


                         Spam reducing protocol
                       draft-kruithof-spam-reducing-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on Juni 14, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).

Abstract

   Emails which are not accepted by the receiver cost the sender money,
   accepted do not.  The system can be used transparantly aside of the
   existing emailsystems.  A central server is needed and clientside
   emailplugins are needed also.  The advantage of the used protocol is
   also the required encrypting of the emails.






Kruithof                 Expires Juni 14, 2005                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Spam reducing protocol            December 2004


Table of Contents

   1.   Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.   The Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.   Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.   References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
        Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 6











































Kruithof                 Expires Juni 14, 2005                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Spam reducing protocol            December 2004


1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].














































Kruithof                 Expires Juni 14, 2005                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Spam reducing protocol            December 2004


2.  The Protocol

   Alice wants to send a email to Bob, whose emailadress she knows.  She
   can send directly an email, but she wants to be sure that it will not
   disappear in the spam folder, and thats why will be read to late or
   not.  Both Alice and Bob have to deposit a certain amount of money to
   a (non-profit) company, which transfers it to virtual money.  In the
   database of the company's server for each emailadress can be seen how
   many it costs to send a mail to the receiving party.  This can also
   be done by clientsoftware.  Now Alice pays for downloading from the
   server the public key of Bob.  She sends her email to Bob, encrypted
   with the public key.  Bob recieves the email, and his client checks
   whether the mail is encryped, if so, his clients connects to the
   server to get the ID of the public key, with which the mail is
   encrypted.  This can be done, by matching the senders emailadress.
   If the emailadress matches, a public key of Alice can also be
   transferred to Bob, to complete the save communication.  If it is not
   encrypted, it can be lead further in the 'normal' mailprocessing
   (spam filters etc).  Now Bob knows which private key he has to use to
   decrypt.  If not, the mail can be lead further in the normal system,
   it could be a normal encrypted message.  If the receiver doesn't
   explicitly reject the email, the cost will be booked back.  Now the
   connection is established, because Alice can setup her clientsoftware
   to accept always from emailadresses for which she paid to get the
   public key.  For each new connection (new person, new emailadress) a
   new public-key/private key will be generated, in case a public key of
   Bob will be known everywhere.  As soon a connection is made, the used
   private key with each emailadress will be saved by client software.
   Bob can reject the mail, and that's why spam will not be send in the
   situation, that the sender cannot make benefit out of the extra cost
   anymore.  This will be reached of course in the equilibrium
   situation, Bob wants his 'to pay' to stay as low as possible, but not
   to low to get spam mail from company's which think they can earn that
   cost back.  In practice, Bob can setup an emailadress for which he
   will exclusively use the new protocol.  Each mail which is not
   encrypted is bounced.  Now Bob can freely distribute this mailadress
   in the internet.














Kruithof                 Expires Juni 14, 2005                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Spam reducing protocol            December 2004


3.  Security Considerations

   None.

4  References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.


Author's Address

   Wilbert Kruithof
   Unix AG Universit»Òt Hannover
   Welfengarten 1
   30167 Hannover
   Germany

   Phone: +495 11 7623226
   EMail: wilbert@stud.uni-hannover.de































Kruithof                 Expires Juni 14, 2005                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Spam reducing protocol            December 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Kruithof                 Expires Juni 14, 2005                  [Page 6]



