Network Working Group                                 Mustapha Aissaoui  
Internet Draft                                         Peter Busschbach 
Expires: May 2009                                        Alcatel-Lucent 
                                                       
                                                              Dave Allan 
                                                                  Nortel 
                                                                         
                                                          Monique Morrow 
                                                            Luca Martini 
                                                      Cisco Systems Inc. 
                                                                         
                                                           Thomas Nadeau 
                                                                      BT 
                                                                         
                                                                 Editors 
 
                                    
                                                        November 3, 2008 
                                      
                   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping 
                    draft-ietf-pwe3-oam-msg-map-08.txt 


Status of this Memo 

    

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 3, 2009. 

Abstract 
 
 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                   [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

This document specifies the mapping of defect states between a Pseudo    
Wire and the Attachment Circuits (AC) of the end-to-end emulated    
service. This document covers the case whereby the ACs and the PWs    
are of the same type in accordance to the PWE3 architecture [RFC3985] 
such that a homogenous PW service can be constructed. 

    

Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119. 

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Acknowledgments................................................3 
   2. Contributors...................................................3 
   3. Introduction...................................................4 
   4. Terminology....................................................4 
   5. Reference Model and Defect Locations...........................7 
   6. Abstract Defect States.........................................8 
   7. OAM Models.....................................................9 
   8. PW Defect States and Defect Notifications.....................11 
      8.1. PW Defect Notification Mechanisms........................11 
         8.1.1. LDP Status TLV......................................12 
         8.1.2. L2TP Circuit Status AVP.............................14 
         8.1.3. BFD Diagnostic Codes................................16 
      8.2. PW Defect State Entry/Exit...............................17 
         8.2.1. PW Forward Defect State Entry/Exit Criteria.........17 
         8.2.2. PW Reverse Defect State Entry/Exit Criteria.........18 
   9. Procedures for ATM PW Service.................................19 
      9.1. AC forward defect state entry/exit criteria..............19 
      9.2. AC reverse defect state entry/exit criteria..............20 
      9.3. Consequent Actions.......................................20 
         9.3.1. PW forward defect state entry/exit..................20 
         9.3.2. PW reverse defect state entry/exit..................21 
         9.3.3. PW defect state in ATM Port Mode PW Service.........21 
         9.3.4. AC forward defect state entry/exit..................21 
         9.3.5. AC reverse defect state entry/exit..................22 
   10. Procedures for Frame Relay PW Service........................23 
      10.1. AC forward defect state entry/exit criteria.............23 
      10.2. AC reverse defect state entry/exit criteria.............23 
      10.3. Consequent Actions......................................23 
         10.3.1. PW forward defect state entry/exit.................23 
         10.3.2. PW reverse defect state entry/exit.................24 
 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                   [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

         10.3.3. PW defect state in the FR Port Mode PW service.....24 
         10.3.4. AC forward defect state entry/exit.................25 
         10.3.5. AC reverse defect state entry/exit.................25 
   11. Procedures for TDM PW Service................................25 
   12. Procedures for CEP PW Service................................26 
   13. Informative Appendix A: Native Service Management............26 
      13.1. Frame Relay Management..................................26 
      13.2. ATM Management..........................................27 
   14. Informative Appendix B: PW Defects and Detection tools.......28 
      14.1. PW Defects..............................................28 
         14.1.1. Packet Loss........................................29 
      14.2. PW Defect Detection Tools...............................29 
   15. Security Considerations......................................30 
   16. IANA Considerations..........................................30 
   17. References...................................................30 
      17.1. Normative References....................................30 
      17.2. Informative References..................................31 
   18. Editor's Addresses...........................................32 
   Full Copyright Statement.........................................33 
   Intellectual Property Statement..................................34 
   Acknowledgment...................................................34 
    
1. Acknowledgments  

   The editors would like to acknowledge the important contributions of    
   Hari Rakotoranto, Eric Rosen, Mark Townsley, Michel Khouderchah, 
   Bertrand Duvivier, Vanson Lim, Chris Metz, Ben Washam, Tiberiu 
   Grigoriu, Neil McGill, and Amir Maleki. 

2. Contributors 

   Thomas D. Nadeau, tom.nadeau@bt.com 
    
   Monique Morrow, mmorrow@cisco.com 
    
   Peter B. Busschbach, busschbach@alcatel-lucent.com 
    
   Mustapha Aissaoui, mustapha.aissaoui@alcatel-lucent.com 
    
   Matthew Bocci, matthew.bocci@alcatel-lucent.co.uk 
    
   David Watkinson, david.watkinson@alcatel-lucent.com 
    
   Yuichi Ikejiri, y.ikejiri@ntt.com 
    
   Kenji Kumaki, kekumaki@kddi.com   
       
 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                   [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

   Satoru Matsushima, satoru@ft.solteria.net  
    
   David Allan, dallan@nortel.com 
    
   Himanshu Shah, hshah@ciena.com 
    
   Simon Delord, simon.delord@gmail.com 
    
   Vasile Radoaca, vasile.radoaca@alcatel-lucent.com 
    
   Carlos Pignataro, cpignata@cisco.com 
    
   Luca Martini, lmartini@cisco.com 
    
3. Introduction 

   This document specifies the mapping of defect states between a Pseudo    
   Wire and the Attachment Circuits (AC) of the end-to-end emulated 
   service. It covers the case whereby the ACs and the PWs    are of the 
   same type in accordance to the PWE3 architecture [RFC3985]    such 
   that a homogeneous PW service can be constructed.  

   This document is motivated by the requirements put forth in [RFC4377] 
   and [RFC3916]. Its objective is to standardize the behavior of PEs 
   with respects to failures on PWs and ACs, so that there is no 
   ambiguity about the alarms generated and consequent actions 
   undertaken by PEs in response to specific failure conditions. 

   This document covers PWE over MPLS PSN, PWE over IP PSN and PWE over   
   L2TP PSN. 

   The Ethernet PW service is covered in a separate document [ETH-OAM-
   IWK]. 

4. Terminology 

         AIS   Alarm Indication Signal 

         AC    Attachment circuit 

         BDI   Backward Defect Indication 

         CC    Continuity Check 

         CE    Customer Edge 

         CPCS  Common Part Convergence Sub-layer 
 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                   [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

         DLC   Data Link Connection 

         FDI   Forward Defect Indication 

         FRBS  Frame Relay Bearer Service 

         IWF   Interworking Function 

         LB    Loopback 

         NE    Network Element 

         NS    Native Service 

         OAM   Operations and Maintenance 

         PE    Provider Edge 

         PW    Pseudowire 

         PSN   Packet Switched Network 

         RDI   Remote Defect Indication 

         SDU   Service Data Unit 

         VCC   Virtual Channel Connection 

         VPC   Virtual Path Connection 

   The rest of this document will follow the following conventions.  

   The words "defect" and "fault" are used inter-changeably to mean a 
   condition which causes user packets not to be forwarded between the 
   CE endpoints of the PW service. 

   The words "defect notification" and "defect indication" are used 
   inter-changeably to mean an OAM message generated by a PE and sent to 
   other nodes in the network to convey the defect state local to this 
   PE. 

   The PW can ride over three types of Packet Switched Network (PSN). A 
   PSN which makes use of LSPs as the tunneling technology to forward 
   the PW packets will be referred to as an MPLS PSN. A PSN which makes 
   use of MPLS-in-IP tunneling [RFC4023], with an MPLS shim header used 
   as PW demultiplexer, will be referred to as an MPLS-IP PSN. A PSN 
   which makes use of L2TPv3 [RFC3931] as the tunneling technology with 
 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                   [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

   the L2TPv3 Session ID as the PW demultiplexer will be referred to as 
   L2TP-IP PSN. 

   If LSP-Ping [RFC4379] is run over a PW as described in [RFC4377], it 
   will be referred to as VCCV-Ping. 

   If BFD is run over a PW as described in [RFC4377], it will be 
   referred to as VCCV-BFD [VCCV-BFD]. 

   In the context of this document a PE forwards packets between an AC 
   and a PW. The other PE that terminates the PW is the peer PE or 
   remote PE and the attachment circuit associated with the far-end PW 
   termination is the remote AC. 

   Defects are discussed in the context of defect states, and the 
   criteria to enter and exit the defect state. The direction of defects 
   is discussed from the perspective of the observing PE. 

   A forward defect is one that impacts information transfer to the 
   observing PE. It impacts the observing PEs ability to receive 
   information.  

   A reverse defect is one that uniquely impacts information sent or 
   relayed by the observing PE. 

   A forward defect generally also impacts information sent or relayed 
   by the observing PE. Therefore the forward defect state is considered 
   to be a superset of the two defect states. Thus, when a PE enters 
   both forward and reverse defect states related to the same PW 
   service, the forward defect takes precedence over reverse defect in 
   terms of the consequent actions. 

   A forward defect indication is sent in the same direction as the user 
   traffic impacted by the defect. A reverse defect indication is sent 
   in the opposite direction of the traffic impacted by the defect. 

   When a PE enters a defect state, it always sends a defect indication 
   that corresponds to that defect to notify nodes which are downstream 
   of the defect. For example, a local PE sends a forward defect 
   indication downstream to the CE when it enters the PW forward defect 
   state. However, in some cases the PE enters this defect state without 
   receiving a defect indication from the peer PE. In this case, the 
   local PE will also send a defect indication to the remote PE to 
   synchronize the states. In the example above, the local PE will send 
   a reverse defect indication to the remote PE. The exact procedures 
   are described later in the document.  

 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                   [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

5. Reference Model and Defect Locations 

   Figure 1 illustrates the PWE3 network reference model with an 
   indication of the possible defect locations. This model will be 
   referenced in the remainder of this document for describing the OAM 
   procedures. 

    

    
         
               ACs             PSN tunnel            ACs 
                      +----+                  +----+ 
      +----+          | PE1|==================| PE2|          +----+ 
      |    |---(a)---(b)..(c)......PW1..(d)..(c)..(f)---(e)---|    | 
      | CE1|   (N1)   |    |                  |    |    (N2)  |CE2 | 
      |    |----------|............PW2.............|----------|    | 
      +----+          |    |==================|    |          +----+ 
           ^          +----+                  +----+          ^ 
           |      Provider Edge 1         Provider Edge 2     | 
           |                                                  | 
           |<-------------- Emulated Service ---------------->| 
     Customer                                                Customer 
      Edge 1                                                  Edge 2 
                  Figure 1: PWE3 Network Defect Locations 

   In all interworking scenarios described in this document, it is 
   assumed the AC and the PW are of the same type at PE1. The procedures 
   described in this document apply to PE1. PE2 implements the identical 
   functionality for a homogeneous service (although it is not required 
   to as long as the notifications across the PWs are consistent). 

   The following is a brief description of the defect locations: 

       a. Defect in the first L2 network (N1). This covers any defect 
          in the N1 which impacts all or a subset of ACs terminating in 
          PE1. The defect is conveyed to PE1 and to the remote L2 
          network (N2) using the native service specific OAM defect 
          indication. 
       b. Defect on a PE1 AC interface. 
       c. Defect on a PE1 PSN interface. 
       d. Defect in the PSN network. This covers any defect in the PSN 
          which impacts all or a subset of PWs terminating in a PE. The 
          defect is conveyed to the PE using a PSN and/or a PW specific 
          OAM defect indication. Note that both data plane defects and 
          control plane defects must be taken into consideration. Even 
          though control messages may follow a different path than the 
 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                   [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

          PW data plane traffic, a control plane failure may affect the 
          PW status. 
       e. Defect in the second L2 network (N2). This covers any defect 
          in N2 which impacts all or a subset of ACs terminating in PE2 
          (which is considered a remote AC defect in the context of 
          procedures outlined in this draft). The defect is conveyed to 
          PE2 and to the remote L2 network (N1) using the native 
          service OAM defect indication. 
       f. Defect on a PE2 AC interface (which is also considered a 
          remote AC defect in the context of this draft). 
    
6. Abstract Defect States 

   PE1 must track four defect states that reflect the observed states of 
   both directions of the PW service on both the AC and the PW sides. 
   Defects may impact one or both directions of the PW service. 

   The observed state is a combination of defects directly detected by 
   PE1 and defects it has been made aware of via notifications. 

    

                              +-----+ 
           ----AC forward---->|     |-----PW reverse----> 
     CE1                      | PE1 |                       PE2/CE2 
           <---AC reverse-----|     |<----PW forward----- 
                              +-----+  
    
     (arrows indicate direction of user traffic impacted by a defect) 
      Figure 2: Forward and Reverse Defect States and Notifications 

   PE1 will directly detect or be notified of AC forward or PW forward 
   defects as they occur upstream of PE1 and impact traffic being sent 
   to PE1. As a result, PE1 enters the AC forward defect state.  

   In Figure 2, PE1 may be notified of a forward defect in the AC by 
   receiving a Forward Defect indication, e.g., ATM AIS, from an ATM 
   switch in L2 network N1. This defect notification indicates that user 
   traffic sent by CE1 may not be received by PE1 due to a defect. PE1 
   can also directly detect an AC Forward Defect if it resulted from a 
   failure of the receive side in the local port or link over which the 
   AC is configured.   

   Similarly, PE1 may detect or be notified of a forward defect in the 
   PW by receiving a Forward Defect indication from PE2. If PW status is 
   used for fault notification, this message will indicate a Local PSN-
   facing PW (egress) Transmit Fault or a Local Attachment Circuit 
 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                   [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

   (ingress) Receive Fault at PE2, as described in Section 8.1.1. . This 
   defect notification indicates that user traffic sent by CE2 may not 
   be received by PE1 due to a defect. As a result, PE1 enters the PW 
   forward defect state.   

   Note that a Forward Defect notification is sent in the same direction 
   as the user traffic impacted by the defect. 

   PE1 will only be notified of AC reverse or PW reverse defects as they 
   universally will be detected by other devices and only impact traffic 
   that has already been relayed by PE1. As a result, PE1 enters the AC 
   reverse defect state. 

   In Figure 2, PE1 may be notified of a reverse defect in the AC by 
   receiving a Reverse Defect indication, e.g., ATM RDI, from CE1. This 
   defect impacts the traffic sent by PE1 to CE1 on the AC.   

   Similarly, PE1 may be notified of a reverse defect in the PW by 
   receiving a Reverse Defect indication from PE2. If PW status is used 
   for fault notification, this message will indicate a Local PSN-facing 
   PW (ingress) Receive Fault or a Local Attachment Circuit (egress) 
   Transmit Fault at PE2, as described in Section 8.1.1. . This defect 
   impacts the traffic sent by PE1 to CE2. As a result, PE1 enters the 
   PW reverse defect state.  

   Note that a Reverse Defect notification is sent in the reverse 
   direction to the user traffic impacted by the defect. 

   The procedures outlined in this document define the entry and exit 
   criteria for each of the four states with respect to the set of PW 
   services within the document scope and the consequent actions that 
   PE1 must perform.  

   When a PE enters both forward and reverse defect states related to 
   the same PW service, then the forward defect takes precedence over 
   reverse defect in terms of the consequent actions. 

7. OAM Models 

   A homogeneous PW service forwards packets between an AC and a PW of 
   the same type. It thus implements both a Native Service OAM 
   mechanism and a PW OAM mechanism. PW OAM defect notification 
   messages are described in Section 8.1. . NS OAM messages are 
   described in Appendix A. 
    


 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                   [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

   This document defines two different modes for operating OAM on a PW 
   service which dictate the mapping between the NS OAM the PW OAM 
   defect notification messages.  
    
   The first one operates a single emulated OAM loop end-to-end between 
   the endpoints of the PW service. This is referred to as "single 
   emulated OAM loop" mode and is illustrated in Figure 3. 
    
       |<----- AC ----->|<----- PW ----->|<----- AC ----->| 
       |                |                |                |  
                     ___ ===============_     
     |CE|---=NS-OAM=>---(---=NS-OAM=>---)---=NS-OAM=>---|CE| 
                         ===============     / 
                            \               /  
                             ---=PW-OAM=>--- 
    
                  Figure 3: Single Emulated OAM Loop mode 

   This mode implements the following behavior: 
        a. A PE node MUST transparently relay NS OAM messages over the 
          PW. 
        b. A PE node MUST signal local failures affecting the AC using a 
          NS defect notification OAM message sent over the PW. 
        c. A PE MUST signal local failures affecting the AC using a PW 
          defect notification OAM message when the defect interferes 
          with NS OAM message generation, e.g., NS processing line card 
          removed. 
        d. A PE node MUST signal local failures affecting the PW using a 
          PW defect notification OAM message. 
        e. A PE node MUST insert a NS defect notification OAM message 
          into the AC when it detects or is notified of a defect in the 
          PW or remote AC. This includes support receiving a PW defect 
          notification message and translating it into a NS defect 
          notification OAM message over the AC. The latter is required 
          for handling defects signaled by a peer PE with PW OAM 
          messaging. 
    
   The "single emulated OAM loop" mode is suitable for PW services 
   which have a widely deployed NS OAM mechanism that operates within 
   the AC. This document specifies the use of this mode for ATM PW, TDM 
   PW, and CEP PW services. It is the default mode of operation for an 
   ATM PW service and the only mode specified for TDM and CEP PW 
   services. 
    
   The second mode operates three OAM loops which join at the AC/PW 
   boundary of a PE. This is referred to as "coupled OAM loops" mode 
   and is illustrated in Figure 4 
 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

                                      
       |<----- AC ----->|<----- PW ----->|<----- AC ----->| 
       |                |                |                |  
                      __ ===============__     
     |CE|---=NS-OAM=>---(---------------)---=NS-OAM=>---|CE| 
                    \    ===============       / 
                     \                        / 
                      \                      / 
                       -------=PW-OAM=>------ 
    
                     Figure 4: Coupled OAM Loops mode 

   This mode implements the following behavior: 
        a. A PE node MUST terminate and translate a received NS defect 
          notification OAM message to a PW defect notification message. 
        b. A PE node MUST signal local failures affecting the AC using 
          using a PW defect notification OAM message. 
        c. A PE node MUST signal local failures affecting the PW using a 
          PW defect notification OAM message. 
        d. A PE node MUST insert a NS defect notification OAM message 
          into the AC when it detects or is notified of a defect in the 
          PW or remote AC. This includes support receiving a PW defect 
          notification message and translating it into a NS defect 
          notification OAM message over the AC. 
    
   This document specifies the use of the "coupled OAM loops" mode for 
   a FR PW service and for ATM PW services of type ATM VCC and AAL5 
   SDU. It does not specify the use of this mode for TDM PW, CEP PW, 
   and the ATM VPC cell mode PW services. In the latter case, a PE node 
   must pass transparently VC-level (F5) ATM OAM cells over the PW 
   while terminating and translating VP-level (F4) OAM cells. Thus, it 
   cannot operate a pure "coupled OAM loops" mode. 
    
8. PW Defect States and Defect Notifications 

8.1. PW Defect Notification Mechanisms 

   For a MPLS PSN and a MPLS-IP PSN, a PE node which establishes a PW 
   using LDP SHALL use LDP status TLV as the mechanism for AC and PW 
   status and defect notification [RFC4447]. Additionally, a PE node MAY 
   use VCCV-BFD Connectivity Verification (CV) types for fault detection 
   only but SHOULD notify the remote PE using LDP Status TLV. These CV 
   types are 0x04 and 0x10 [VCCV-BFD]. 

   A PE node which establishes a PW using other means than LDP, e.g., 
   static configuration, MAY use VCCV-BFD CV types for AC and PW status 
   and defect notification. These CV types are 0x08 and 0x20 [VCCV-BFD]. 
 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

   These CV types SHOULD NOT be used when the PW is established with the 
   LDP control plane. 

   For a L2TP-IP PSN, A PE node SHOULD use the Circuit Status AVP as the 
   mechanism for AC and PW status and defect notification. In its most 
   basic form, the Circuit Status AVP [RFC3931] in a Set-Link-Info (SLI) 
   message can signal active/inactive AC status. The Circuit Status AVP 
   is proposed to be extended to convey status and defects in the AC and 
   the PSN-facing PW in both ingress and egress directions, i.e., four 
   independent status bits without the need to tear down the sessions or 
   control connection [L2TP-Status]. 

   When a PE does not support the Circuit Status AVP, it MAY use the 
   StopCCN and the CDN message to bring down L2TP sessions in a similar 
   way LDP uses the Label Withdrawal to bring down a PW. A PE node may 
   use the StopCCN to shutdown the L2TP control connection, and 
   implicitly all L2TP sessions associated with that control connection 
   without any explicit session control messages. This is in the case of 
   a failure which impacts all L2TP sessions, i.e., all PWs, managed by 
   the control connection. It may use the CDN message to disconnect a 
   specific L2TP session when a failure affects a specific PW.  

   Additionally, a PE node MAY use VCCV-BFD CV types 0x04 and 0x10 for 
   fault detection only but SHOULD notify the remote PE using the 
   Circuit Status AVP. A PE node which establishes a PW using other 
   means than L2TP control plane MAY use VCCV-BFD CV types 0x08 and 0x20 
   for AC and PW status and defect notification. These CV types SHOULD 
   NOT be used when the PW is established with the L2TP control plane. 

8.1.1. LDP Status TLV 

   [RFC4446] defines the following PW status code points: 

   0x00000000 - Pseudo Wire forwarding (clear all failures) 
   0x00000001 - Pseudo Wire Not Forwarding 
   0x00000002 - Local Attachment Circuit (ingress) Receive Fault 
   0x00000004 - Local Attachment Circuit (egress) Transmit Fault 
   0x00000008 - Local PSN-facing PW (ingress) Receive Fault 
   0x00000010 - Local PSN-facing PW (egress) Transmit Fault 
    

   [RFC4447] specifies that "Pseudo Wire forwarding" code point is used 
   to clear all faults. It also specifies that "Pseudo Wire Not 
   Forwarding" code is used to convey any other defect that cannot be 
   represented by the other code points. In general, this applies to a 
   defect that does not cause the PW to be torn down. 

 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

   The code points used in the LDP status TLV in a PW status 
   notification message convey the defect view of the originating PE.  

   The originating PE conveys this state in the form of a forward defect 
   or a reverse defect indication. 

   The forward and reverse defect indication definitions used in this 
   document map to the LDP Status TLV codes as follows: 

            Forward defect indication - corresponds to the logical OR of 

                            Local Attachment Circuit (ingress) 

                            Receive Fault, Local PSN-facing 

                            PW (egress) Transmit Fault, and PW not 

                            Forwarding Fault 

            Reverse defect indication - corresponds to the logical OR of 

                            Local Attachment Circuit (egress) 

                            Transmit Fault and Local PSN-facing 

                            PW (ingress) Receive Fault 

   A PE SHALL thus use PW status notification messages to report all 
   failures affecting the PW service including, but not restricted, to 
   the following: 

            - Failures detected through defect detection mechanisms in 
              the MPLS and MPLS-IP PSN 

            - Failures detected through VCCV-Ping or VCCV-BFD CV types 
              0x04 and 0x10 for fault detection only 

            - Failures within the PE that result in an inability to 
              forward traffic between the AC and the PW 

            - Failures of the AC or in the L2 network affecting the AC 
              as per the rules detailed in Section 7. for the "single 
              emulated OAM loop" mode and "coupled OAM loops" mode. 

   Note that there are a couple of situations which require PW label 
   withdrawal as opposed to a PW status notification by the PE. The 
   first one is when the PW is taken administratively down in accordance 
 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

   to [RFC4447]. The second one is when the Target LDP session 
   established between the two PEs is lost. In the latter case, the PW 
   labels will need to be re-signaled when the Targeted LDP session is 
   re-established. 

8.1.2. L2TP Circuit Status AVP 

   [RFC3931] defines the Circuit Status AVP in the Set-Link-Info (SLI) 
   message to exchange initial status and status changes in the circuit 
   to which the pseudowire is bound. [L2TP-Status] defines extensions to 
   the Circuit Status AVP that are analogous to the PW Status TLV 
   defined for LDP.  Consequently, for L2TP-IP, the Circuit Status AVP 
   is used in the same fashion as the PW Status described in the 
   previous section. 

   If the extended Circuit Status bits are not supported, and instead 
   only the "A-bit" (Active) is used as described in [RFC3931], a PE MAY 
   use CDN messages to clear L2TPv3 sessions in the presence of session-
   level failures detected in the L2TP-IP PSN. 

   A PE MUST set the Active bit in the Circuit Status to clear all 
   faults, and it MUST clear the Active bit in the Circuit Status to 
   convey any defect that cannot be represented explicitly with specific 
   Circuit Status flags from [RFC3931] or [L2TP-Status].   

   The forward and reverse defect indication definitions used in this 
   document map to the L2TP Circuit Status AVP as follows: 

           Forward defect indication - corresponds to the logical OR of 

                            Local Attachment Circuit (ingress) 

                            Receive Fault and Local PSN-facing 

                            PW (egress) Transmit Fault 

           Reverse defect indication- corresponds to the logical OR of 

                            Local Attachment Circuit (egress) 

                            Transmit Fault and Local PSN-facing 

                            PW (ingress) Receive Fault 

   The status notification conveys the defect view of the originating 
   LCCE (PE). 

 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

   When the extended Circuit Status definition of [L2TP-Status] is 
   supported, a PE SHALL use the Circuit Status to report all failures 
   affecting the PW service including, but not restricted, to the 
   following: 

            - Failures detected through defect detection mechanisms in 
              the L2TP-IP PSN. 

            - Failures detected through VCCV-Ping or VCCV-BFD CV types 
              0x04 and 0x10 for fault detection only 

            - Failures within the PE that result in an inability to 
              forward traffic between the AC and the PW 

            - Failures of the AC or in the L2 network affecting the AC 
              as per the rules detailed in Section 7. for the "single 
              emulated OAM loop" mode and the "coupled OAM loops" mode. 

   When the extended Circuit Status definition of [L2TP-Status] is not 
   supported, a PE SHALL use the A-bit in the Circuit Status AVP in SLI 
   to report: 

            - Failures of the AC or in the L2 network affecting the AC 
              as per the rules detailed in Section 7. for the "single 
              emulated OAM loop" mode and the "coupled OAM loops" mode. 

   When the extended Circuit Status definition of [L2TP-Status] is not 
   supported, a PE MAY use the CDN and StopCCN messages in a similar way 
   to an MPLS PW label withdrawal to report: 

            - Failures detected through defect detection mechanisms in 
              the L2TP-IP PSN (using StopCCN) 

            - Failures detected through VCCV (pseudowire level) (using 
              CDN) 

            - Failures within the PE that result in an inability to 
              forward traffic between ACs and PW (using CDN) 

   For ATM L2TPv3 pseudowires, in addition to the Circuit Status AVP, a 
   PE MAY use the ATM Alarm Status AVP [RFC4454] to indicate the reason 
   for the ATM circuit status and the specific alarm type, if any.  This 
   AVP is sent in the SLI message to indicate additional information 
   about the ATM circuit status. 

   L2TP control connections use Hello messages as a keepalive facility. 
   It is important to note that if a PSN failure is such that the loss 
 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 15] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

   of conectivity is detected when it triggers a keepalive timeouts, the 
   control connection is cleared.  L2TP Hello messages are sent in-band 
   with the dataplane, with respect to the source and destination 
   addresses, IP protocol number and UDP port (when UDP is used). 

8.1.3. BFD Diagnostic Codes 

   [BFD] defines a set of diagnostic codes that partially overlap with 
   failures that can be communicated through LDP Status TLV or L2TP 
   Circuit Status AVP. This section describes the behavior of the PE 
   nodes with respect to using one or both methods for detecting and 
   propagating defect state. 

   For a MPLS-PSN, the PEs negotiate the use of the VCCV capabilities 
   when the label mapping messages are exchanged to establish the two 
   directions of the PW. An OAM capability TLV is signaled as part of 
   the PW FEC interface parameters TLV. For L2TP-IP PSNs, the PEs 
   negotiate the use of VCCV during the pseudowire session 
   initialization using the VCCV AVP [RFC5085]. 

   The CV Type Indicators field in this TLV defines a bitmask used to 
   indicate the specific OAM capabilities that the PE can make use of 
   over the PW being established.  

   A CV type of 0x04 or 0x10 indicates that BFD is used for PW fault 
   detection only [VCCV-BFD]. These CV types MAY be used any time the PW 
   is established using LDP or L2TP control planes. 

   In this mode, only the following diagnostic (Diag) codes specified in 
   [BFD] will be used, they are: 

      0 - No diagnostic: 

      1 - Control detection time expired 

      7 - Administratively Down 

   A PE MUST use code 0 to indicate to its peer PE that is correctly 
   receiving BFD control messages. It MUST use the second code to 
   indicate that to its peer it has stopped receiving BFD control 
   messages. A PE shall use "Administrative down" to bring down the BFD 
   session when the PW is brought down administratively. All other 
   defects, such as AC/PW defects and PE internal failures that prevent 
   it from forwarding traffic, MUST be communicated through LDP Status 
   TLV in the case of MPLS PSN or MPLS-IP PSN, or through the 
   appropriate L2TP codes in the Circuit Status AVP in the case of L2TP-
   IP PSN. 
 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 16] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

   A CV type of 0x08 or 0x20 in the OAM capabilities TLV indicates that 
   BFD is used for both PW fault detection and Fault Notification. In 
   addition to the above diagnostic codes, a PE used the following codes 
   to signal AC defects and other defects impacting forwarding over the 
   PW service: 

      6 -- Concatenated Path Down 

      8 -- Reverse Concatenated Path Down 

      TBD -- PW not forwarding 

   A PE MAY use the "PW not forwarding" code to convey any other defect 
   that cannot be represented by code points 6 and 8. In general, this 
   applies to a defect that does not cause the PW to be torn down. This 
   implies the BFD session must not be brought down when this defect 
   exists. 

   The forward and reverse defect indication definitions used in this 
   document map to the BFD codes as follows: 

           Forward defect indication - corresponds to the logical OR of 

                          Concatenated Path Down and PW not forwarding 

           Reverse defect indication- corresponds to Reverse  

                           Concatenated Path Down 

   These diagnostic codes are used to signal forward and reverse defect 
   states respectively when the PEs negotiated the use of BFD as the 
   mechanism for AC and PW fault detection and status signaling 
   notification. As stated in Section 8.1. , these CV types SHOULD NOT 
   be used when the PW is established with the LDP or L2TP control 
   plane. 

8.2. PW Defect State Entry/Exit 

8.2.1. PW Forward Defect State Entry/Exit Criteria 

   PE1 will enter the PW forward defect state if one or more of the 
   following occurs: 

            - It receives a forward defect indication from PE2, which 
              indicates PE2 detected or was notified of a PW fault 
              downstream of it or that there was a forward defect on 
              remote AC. 
 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 17] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

            - It detects loss of connectivity on the PSN tunnel 
              upstream of PE1 which affects the traffic it receives 
              from PE2. 

            - It detects a loss of PW connectivity through VCCV-BFD or 
              VCCV-PING which affects the traffic it receives from PE2. 

   Note that if the PW control session between the PEs fails, the PW is 
   torn down and needs to be re-established. This includes failure of 
   the T-LDP session, the L2TP session, or the L2TP control connection. 
   However, the consequent actions towards the ACs are the same as if 
   the PW entered the forward defect state. 

   PE1 will exit the PW forward defect state when the following 
   conditions are true. Note that this may result in a transition to the 
   PW operational state or the PW reverse defect state. 

            - All defects it had previously detected have disappeared, 
              and 

            - PE2 cleared the forward defect indication if applicable.  

8.2.2. PW Reverse Defect State Entry/Exit Criteria 

   PE1 will enter the PW reverse defect state if the following 
   conditions are true: 

            - it receives a reverse defect indication from PE2 which 
              indicates that PE2 detected or was notified of a PW fault 
              upstream of it or that there was a reverse fault on the 
              remote AC, and  

            - it is not already in the PW forward defect state. 

   PE1 will exit the reverse defect state if it receives an OAM message 
   from PE2 clearing the reverse defect indication, or it has entered 
   the PW forward defect state. 

   For a PWE3 over a L2TP-IP PSN using the basic Circuit Status AVP 
   [RFC3931], the PW reverse defect state is not valid and a PE can only 
   enter the PW forward defect state. 

    




 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 18] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

9. Procedures for ATM PW Service 

9.1. AC forward defect state entry/exit criteria 

   When operating in the "coupled OAM loops" mode, PE1 enters the AC 
   forward defect state if any of the following conditions are met: 

               a. It detects or is notified of a physical layer fault on 
                 the ATM interface. 

               b. It receives a segment or end-to-end F4 AIS OAM flow on 
                 a VP AC, or a segment or end-to-end F5 AIS OAM flow on 
                 a VC AC, indicating that the ATM VPC or VCC is down in 
                 the adjacent L2 ATM network. 

               c. It detects loss of connectivity on the ATM VPC/VCC 
                 while terminating segment or end-to-end ATM continuity 
                 check (ATM CC) cells with the local ATM network and 
                 CE. 

   When operating in the "coupled OAM loops" mode, PE1 exits the AC 
   Forward Defect state when all defects it had previously detected have 
   disappeared.  

   When operating in the "single emulated OAM loop" mode, PE1 enters the 
   AC forward defect state if any of the following conditions are met: 

               a. It detects or is notified of a physical layer fault on 
                 the ATM interface. 

               b. It receives a segment F4 AIS OAM flow on a VP AC, or a 
                 segment F5 AIS OAM flow on a VC AC, indicating that 
                 the ATM VPC or VCC is down in the adjacent L2 ATM 
                 network. 

               c. It detects loss of connectivity on the ATM VPC/VCC 
                 while terminating segment ATM continuity check (ATM 
                 CC) cells with the local ATM network and CE. 

   When operating in the "single emulated OAM loop" mode, PE1 exits the 
   AC Forward Defect state when all defects it had previously detected 
   have disappeared. 

   The exact conditions under which a PE enters and exits the AIS state, 
   or declares that connectivity is restored via ATM CC are defined in 
   Section 9.2 of ITU-T Recommendation I.610 [ITU-T I.610]. 

 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 19] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

9.2. AC reverse defect state entry/exit criteria 

   PE1 enters the AC reverse defect state if any of the following 
   conditions are met: 

               a. It terminates an F4 RDI OAM flow, in the case of a 
                 VPC, or an F5 RDI OAM flow, in the case of a VCC, 
                 indicating that the ATM VPC or VCC is down in the 
                 adjacent L2 ATM. 

   PE1 exits the AC Reverse Defect state if the AC state transitions to 
   working or to the AC forward defect state. The exact conditions for 
   exiting the RDI state are described in Section 9.2 of ITU-T 
   Recommendation I.610 [ITU-T I.610]. 

   Note that the AC reverse defect state is not valid when operating in 
   the "single emulated OAM loop" mode as PE1 transparently forwards the 
   received RDI cells as user cells over the ATM PW to the remote CE. 

9.3. Consequent Actions 

   In the reminder of this section, the text refers to AIS, RDI and CC 
   without specifying whether it is an F4 (VP-level) flow or an F5 (VC-
   level) flow, or whether it is an end-to-end or a segment flow.  
   Precise ATM OAM procedures for each type of flow are specified in 
   Section 9.2 of ITU-T Recommendation I.610 [ITU-T I.610]. 

9.3.1. PW forward defect state entry/exit 

   On entry to the PW forward defect state: 

               a. PE1 MUST commence AIS insertion into the corresponding 
                 AC. 

               b. PE1 MUST terminate any CC cell generation on the 
                 corresponding AC. 

               c. If the PW failure was detected by PE1 without 
                 receiving a forward defect notification from PE2, PE1 
                 MUST assume PE2 has no knowledge of the defect and 
                 MUST notify PE2 in the form of a reverse defect 
                 notification. 

   On exit from the PW forward defect state: 

               a. PE1 MUST cease AIS insertion into the corresponding 
                 AC. 
 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 20] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

               b. PE1 MUST resume any CC cell generation on the 
                 corresponding AC. 

               c. PE1 MUST clear the reverse defect notification to PE2 
                 if applicable. 

9.3.2. PW reverse defect state entry/exit 

   On entry to the PW Reverse Defect State: 

               a. PE1 MUST commence RDI insertion into the corresponding 
                 AC. 

               b. If the PW failure was detected by PE1 without 
                 receiving a reverse defect notification from PE2, PE1 
                 MUST assume PE2 has no knowledge of the defect and 
                 MUST notify PE2 in the form of a forward defect 
                 notification. 

   On exit from the PW Reverse Defect State: 

               a. PE1 MUST cease RDI insertion into the corresponding 
                 AC. 

               b. PE1 MUST clear the forward defect notification to PE2 
                 if applicable. 

9.3.3. PW defect state in ATM Port Mode PW Service 

   In case of transparent cell transport PW service, i.e., "port mode", 
   where the PE does not keep track of the status of individual ATM VPCs 
   or VCCs, a PE cannot relay PW defect state over these VCCs and VPCs. 
   If ATM CC is run on the VCCs and VPCs end-to-end (CE1 to CE2), or on 
   a segment originating and terminating in the ATM network and spanning 
   the PSN network, it will timeout and cause the CE or ATM switch to 
   enter the ATM AIS state. 

9.3.4. AC forward defect state entry/exit 

   On entry to the AC forward defect state and when operating in the 
   "coupled OAM loops" mode: 

               a. PE1 MUST send a forward defect notification to PE2. 

               b. PE1 MUST commence insertion of ATM RDI cells into the 
                 AC towards CE1. 

 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 21] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

   On entry to the AC forward defect state and when operating in the 
   "single emulated OAM loop" mode: 

               a. PE1 MUST commence insertion of ATM AIS cells into the 
                 corresponding PW towards CE2.  

               b. If the defect interferes with NS OAM message 
                 generation, PE1 must send a forward defect 
                 notification to PE2. 

               c. PE1 MUST terminate any CC cell generation on the 
                 corresponding PW. 

   On exit from the AC forward defect state and when operating in the 
   "coupled OAM loops" mode:  

               a. PE1 MUST clear the forward defect notification to PE2. 

               b. PE1 MUST cease insertion of ATM RDI cells into the AC. 

   On exit from the AC forward defect state and when operating in the 
   "single emulated OAM loop" mode: 

               a. PE1 MUST cease insertion of ATM AIS cells into the 
                 corresponding PW. 

               b. PE1 MUST clear the forward defect notification to PE2 
                 if applicable. 

               c. PE1 MUST resume any CC cell generation on the 
                 corresponding PW if applicable. 

9.3.5. AC reverse defect state entry/exit 

   On entry to the AC reverse defect state and when operating in the 
   "coupled OAM loops" mode: 

               a. PE1 MUST send a reverse defect notification to PE2. 

   On exit from the AC reverse defect state and when operating in the 
   "coupled OAM loops" mode:  

               a. PE1 MUST clear the reverse defect notification to PE2. 




 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 22] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

10. Procedures for Frame Relay PW Service 

10.1. AC forward defect state entry/exit criteria 

   PE1 enters the AC Forward Defect state if one or more of the 
   following conditions are true: 

               a. A PVC is not deleted from the Frame Relay network and 
                 the Frame Relay network explicitly indicates in a full 
                 status report (and optionally by the asynchronous 
                 status message) that this Frame Relay PVC is inactive 
                 [ITU-T Q.933]. In this case, this status maps across 
                 the PE to the corresponding PW only. 

               b. The Link Integrity Verification (LIV) indicates that 
                 the link from the PE to the Frame Relay network is 
                 down [ITU-T Q.933]. In this case, the link down 
                 indication maps across the PE to all corresponding 
                 PWs. 

               c. A physical layer alarm is detected on the FR 
                 interface. In this case, this status maps across the 
                 PE to all corresponding PWs.  

   PE1 exits the AC Forward Defect state when all defects it had 
   previously detected have disappeared. 

10.2. AC reverse defect state entry/exit criteria 

   The AC reverse defect state is not valid for a FR AC. 

10.3. Consequent Actions 

10.3.1. PW forward defect state entry/exit 

   On entry to the PW forward defect state: 

               a. PE1 MUST set the Active bit = 0 for the corresponding 
                 FR AC in a full status report, and optionally in an 
                 asynchronous status message, as per Q.933 annex A 
                 [ITU-T Q.933].  

               b. If the PW failure was detected by PE1 without 
                 receiving a forward defect notification from PE2, PE1 
                 MUST assume PE2 has no knowledge of the defect and 
                 MUST notify PE2 in the form of a reverse defect 
                 notification. 
 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 23] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

   On exit from the PW Forward defect state: 

               a. PE1 MUST set the Active bit = 1 for the corresponding 
                 FR AC in a full status report, and optionally in an 
                 asynchronous status message, as per Q.933 annex A. PE1 
                 does not apply this procedure on a transition from the 
                 PW forward defect state to the PW reverse defect 
                 state. 

               b. PE1 MUST clear the reverse defect notification to PE2 
                 if applicable. 

10.3.2. PW reverse defect state entry/exit 

   On entry to the PW reverse defect state: 

               a. PE1 MUST set the Active bit = 0 for the corresponding 
                 FR AC in a full status report, and optionally in an 
                 asynchronous status message, as per Q.933 annex A.  

               b. If the PW failure was detected by PE1 without 
                 receiving a reverse defect notification from PE2, PE1 
                 MUST assume PE2 has no knowledge of the defect and 
                 MUST notify PE2 in the form of a forward defect 
                 notification. 

   On exit from the PW reverse defect state: 

               a. PE1 MUST set the Active bit = 1 for the corresponding 
                 FR AC in a full status report, and optionally in an 
                 asynchronous status message, as per Q.933 annex A. PE1 
                 does not apply this procedure on a transition from the 
                 PW reverse defect state to the PW forward defect 
                 state. 

               b. PE1 MUST clear the forward defect notification to PE2 
                 if applicable. 

10.3.3. PW defect state in the FR Port Mode PW service 

   In case of port mode PW service, STATUS ENQUIRY and STATUS messages 
   are transported transparently over the PW. A PW Failure will 
   therefore result in timeouts of the Q.933 link and PVC management 
   protocol at the Frame Relay devices at one or both sites of the 
   emulated interface. 


 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 24] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

10.3.4. AC forward defect state entry/exit 

   On entry to the AC forward defect: 

               a. PE1 MUST send a forward defect notification to PE2. 

   On exit from the AC forward defect state:  

               a. PE1 MUST clear the forward defect notification to PE2. 

10.3.5. AC reverse defect state entry/exit 

   The AC reverse defect state is not valid for a FR AC. 

11. Procedures for TDM PW Service 

   From an OAM perspective, the PSN carrying a TDM PW provides the same 
   function as that of SONET/SDH or ATM network carrying the same low-
   rate TDM stream. Hence the interworking of defect OAM is similar. 

   For structure-agnostic TDM PWs, the TDM stream is to be carried 
   transparently across the PSN, and this requires TDM OAM indications 
   to be transparently transferred along with the TDM data.  

   For structure-aware TDM PWs the TDM structure alignment is terminated 
   at ingress to the PSN and regenerated at egress, and hence OAM 
   indications may need to be signaled by special means. In both cases 
   generation of the appropriate emulated OAM indication may be required 
   when the PSN is at fault. 

   Since TDM is a real-time signal, defect indications and performance 
   measurements may be classified into two classes, urgent and 
   deferrable. Urgent messages are those whose contents may not be 
   significantly delayed with respect to the TDM data that they 
   potentially impact, while deferrable messages may arrive at the far 
   end delayed with respect to simultaneously generated TDM data. For 
   example, a forward indication signifying that the TDM data is invalid 
   (e.g. TDM loss of signal, or MPLS loss of packets) is only of use 
   when received before the TDM data is to be played out towards the far 
   end TDM system. It is hence classified as an urgent message, and we 
   can not delegate its signaling to a separate maintenance or 
   management flow.  On the other hand, the forward loss of multi-frame 
   synchronization, and most reverse indications do not need to be acted 
   upon before a particular TDM frame is played out. 

   From the above discussion it is evident that the complete solution to 
   OAM for TDM PWs needs to have at least two, and perhaps three 
 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 25] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

   components. The required functionality is transparent transfer of 
   native TDM OAM and urgent transfer of indications (by flags) along 
   with the impacted packets.  Optionally there may be mapping between 
   TDM and PSN OAM flows. 

   TDM AIS generated in the TDM network due to a fault in that network 
   is generally carried unaltered, although the TDM encapsulations allow 
   for its suppression for bandwidth conservation purposes. Similarly, 
   when the TDM loss of signal is detected at the PE, it will generally 
   emulate TDM AIS. 

   SAToP and the two structure-aware TDM encapsulations have converged 
   on a common set of defect indication flags in the PW control word. 

   When the PE detects or is informed of lack of validity of the TDM 
   signal, it raises the local ("L") defect flag, uniquely identifying 
   the defect as originating in the TDM network. The remote PE must 
   ensure that TDM AIS is delivered to the remote TDM network. When the 
   defect lies in the MPLS network, the remote PE fails to receive 
   packets. The remote PE generates TDM AIS towards its TDM network, and 
   in addition raises the remote defect ("R") flag in its PSN-bound 
   packets, uniquely identifying the defect as originating in the PSN. 

   Finally, defects in the remote TDM network that cause RDI generation 
   in that network, may optionally be indicated by proper setting of the 
   field of valid packets in the opposite direction. 

12. Procedures for CEP PW Service 

   Loss of Connectivity and other SONET/SDH protocol failures on the PW 
   are translated to alarms on the ACs and vice versa. In essence, all 
   defect management procedures are handled entirely in the emulated 
   protocol. There is no need for an interaction between PW defect 
   management and SONET layer defect management. 

13. Informative Appendix A: Native Service Management 

13.1. Frame Relay Management 

   The management of Frame Relay Bearer Service (FRBS) connections can 
   be accomplished through two distinct methodologies:  
      
       a. Based on ITU-T Q.933 Annex A, Link Integrity Verification 
          procedure, where STATUS and STATUS ENQUIRY signaling messages 
          are sent using DLCI=0 over a given UNI and NNI physical link. 
          [ITU-T Q.933] 

 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 26] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

       b. Based on FRBS LMI, and similar to ATM ILMI where LMI is 
          common in private Frame Relay networks.  
     
   In addition, ITU-T I.620 addresses Frame Relay loopback, but the 
   deployment of this standard is relatively limited [ITU-T I.620].  
         
   It is possible to use either, or both, of the above options to 
   manage Frame Relay interfaces. This document will refer exclusively 
   to Q.933 messages.  
        
   The status of any provisioned Frame Relay PVC may be updated 
   through:  
          
        a. STATUS messages in response to STATUS ENQUIRY messages, these 
          are mandatory.  
        
        b. Optional unsolicited STATUS updates independent of STATUS 
          ENQUIRY (typically under the control of management system, 
          these updates can be sent periodically (continuous 
          monitoring) or only upon detection of specific defects based 
          on configuration.  
         
   In Frame Relay, a DLC is either up or down. There is no distinction 
   between different directions. To achieve commonality with other 
   technologies, down is represented as a forward defect. 
    
   Frame relay connection management is not implemented over the PW 
   using either of the techniques native to FR, therefore PW mechanisms 
   are used to synchronize the view each PE has of the remote NS/AC. A 
   PE will treat a remote NS/AC failure in the same way it would treat 
   a PW or PSN failure; that is using AC facing FR connection 
   management to notify the CE that FR is down. 
    

13.2. ATM Management 

   ATM management and OAM mechanisms are much more evolved than those 
   of Frame Relay.  There are five broad management-related categories, 
   including fault management (FT), Performance management (PM), 
   configuration management (CM), Accounting management (AC), and 
   Security management (SM). ITU-T Recommendation I.610 describes the 
   functions for the operation and maintenance of the physical layer 
   and the ATM layer, that is, management at the bit and cell levels 
   [ITU-T I.610]. Because of its scope, this document will concentrate 
   on ATM fault management functions. Fault management functions 
   include the following:  
         
 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 27] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

        a. Alarm indication signal (AIS)  
        b. Remote Defect indication (RDI).  
        c. Continuity Check (CC).  
        d. Loopback (LB)  
         
   Some of the basic ATM fault management functions are described as 
   follows: Alarm indication signal (AIS) sends a message in the same 
   direction as that of the signal, to the effect that an error has 
   been detected.  
        
   Remote defect indication (RDI) sends a message to the transmitting 
   terminal that an error has been detected. RDI is also referred to as 
   the far-end reporting failure. Alarms related to the physical layer 
   are indicated using path AIS/RDI. Virtual path AIS/RDI and virtual 
   channel AIS/RDI are also generated for the ATM layer.  
         
   OAM cells (F4 and F5 cells) are used to instrument virtual paths and 
   virtual channels respectively with regard to their performance and 
   availability. OAM cells in the F4 and F5 flows are used for 
   monitoring a segment of the network and end-to-end monitoring. OAM 
   cells in F4 flows have the same VPI as that of the connection being 
   monitored. OAM cells in F5 flows have the same VPI and VCI as that 
   of the connection being monitored.  The AIS and RDI messages of the 
   F4 and F5 flows are sent to the other network nodes via the VPC or 
   the VCC to which the message refers. The type of error and its 
   location can be indicated in the OAM cells. Continuity check is 
   another fault management function. To check whether a VCC that has 
   been idle for a period of time is still functioning, the network 
   elements can send continuity-check cells along that VCC. 
    

14. Informative Appendix B: PW Defects and Detection tools 

14.1. PW Defects 

   Possible defects that impact PWs are the following: 

         a. Physical layer defect in the PSN interface 

         b. PSN tunnel failure which results in a loss of connectivity 
           between ingress and egress PE. 

         c. Control session failures between ingress and egress PE 

   In case of an MPLS PSN and an MPLS-IP PSN there are additional 
   defects: 

 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 28] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

         a. PW labeling error, which is due to a defect in the ingress 
           PE, or to an over-writing of the PW label value somewhere 
           along the LSP path. 

         b. LSP tunnel Label swapping errors or LSP tunnel label merging 
           errors in the MPLS network. This could result in the 
           termination of a PW at the wrong egress PE. 

         c. Unintended self-replication; e.g., due to loops or denial-
           of-service attacks. 

14.1.1. Packet Loss 

   Persistent congestion in the PSN or in a PE could impact the proper 
   operation of the emulated service. 

   A PE can detect packet loss resulting from congestion through several 
   methods. If a PE uses the sequence number field in the PWE3 Control 
   Word for a specific Pseudo Wire [RFC3985], it has the ability to 
   detect packet loss.  Translation of congestion detection to PW defect 
   states is outside the scope of this specification. 

   Generally, there are congestion alarms which are raised in the node 
   and to the management system when congestion occurs. The decision to 
   declare the PW Down and to select another path is usually at the 
   discretion of the network operator. 

14.2. PW Defect Detection Tools 

   To detect the defects listed above, Service Providers have a variety 
   of options available. 

   Physical Layer defect detection and notification mechanisms such as 
   SONET/SDH LOS, LOF,and AIS/FERF. 

   PSN Defect Detection Mechanisms: 

   For PWE3 over an L2TP-IP PSN, with L2TP as encapsulation protocol, 
   the defect detection mechanisms described in [RFC3931] apply. This 
   includes for example the keepalive mechanism performed with Hello 
   messages for detection of loss of connectivity between a pair of 
   LCCEs (i.e., dead PE peer and path detection).  Furthermore, the 
   tools Ping and Traceroute, based on ICMP Echo Messages apply [RFC792] 
   and can be used to detect defects on the IP PSN.  Additionally, ICMP 
   Ping [RFC5085] and BFD [VCCV-BFD] can also be used with VCCV to 
   detect defects at the individual pseudowire level. 

 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 29] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

   For PWE3 over an MPLS PSN and an MPLS-IP PSN, several tools can be 
   used. 

         a. LSP-Ping and LSP-Traceroute( [RFC4379]) for LSP tunnel 
           connectivity verification. 

         b. LSP-Ping with Bi-directional Forwarding Detection ([BFD]) 
           for LSP tunnel continuity checking. 

         c. Furthermore, if RSVP-TE is used to setup the PSN Tunnels 
           between ingress and egress PE, the hello protocol can be 
           used to detect loss of connectivity [RFC3209], but only at 
           the control plane. 

   PW specific defect detection mechanisms: 

   [RFC4377] describes how LSP-Ping and BFD can be used over individual 
   PWs for connectivity verification and continuity checking 
   respectively. When used as such, we will refer to them as VCCV-Ping 
   and VCCV-BFD respectively. 

   Furthermore, the detection of a fault could occur at different points 
   in the network and there are several ways the observing PE determines 
   a fault exists: 

        a. egress or ingress PE detection of failure (e.g. BFD) 

        b. ingress PE detection of failure (e.g. LSP-PING) 

        c. ingress PE notification of failure (e.g. RSVP Path-err) 

15. Security Considerations 

   The mapping messages described in this document do not change the 
   security functions inherent in the actual messages. 

16. IANA Considerations 

   There is none at this time. 

17. References  

17.1. Normative References 

  [BFD] Katz, D., Ward, D., "Bidirectional Forwarding Detection", 
       Internet Draft <draft-ietf-bfd-base-03.txt>, July 2005  
       
 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 30] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

  [FRF.19] Frame Relay Forum, "Frame Relay Operations, Administration, 
       and Maintenance Implementation Agreement", March 2001 
       
  [ICMP] Postel, J. "Internet Control Message Protocol" RFC 792  
   
  [ITU-T I.610] Recommendation I.610 "B-ISDN operation and maintenance 
       principles and functions", February 1999  
       
  [ITU-T I.620] Recommendation I.620 "Frame relay operation and 
       maintenance principles and functions", October 1996  
       
  [ITU-T Q.933] Recommendation Q.933 "ISDN Digital Subscriber 
       Signalling System No. 1 (DSS1) Signalling specifications for 
       frame mode switched and permanent virtual connection control and 
       status monitoring" February 2003 
           
  [RFC3931] Lau, J., et. al. "Layer Two Tunneling Protocol (Version 3", 
       RFC 3931, March 2005 
       
  [RFC4023] Worster. T., et al., "Encapsulating MPLS in IP or Generic 
       Routing Encapsulation (GRE)", RFC 4023, March 2005 
   
  [RFC4379] Kompella, K., et. al., "Detecting MPLS Data Plane 
       Failures", RFC4379, February 2006 
       
  [RFC4447] Martini, L., Rosen, E., Smith, T., "Pseudowire Setup and 
       Maintenance using LDP", RFC4447, April 2006 
   
  [RFC5085] Nadeau, T., et al., "Pseudo Wire Virtual Circuit Connection 
       Verification (VCCV)", RFC 5085, December 2007 
   
  [VCCV-BFD] Nadeau, T., Pignataro, C., "Bidirectional Forwarding 
       Detection (BFD) for the Pseudowire Virtual Circuit Connectivity 
       Verification (VCCV)", draft-ietf-pwe3-vccv-bfd-02, June 2008 
   
17.2. Informative References 

  [CONGESTION] Rosen, E., Bryant, S., Davie, B., "PWE3 Congestion 
       Control Framework", draft-ietf-pwe3-congestion-frmwk-01.txt, May 
       2008  
   
  [ETH-OAM-IWK] Mohan, D., et al., "MPLS and Ethernet OAM 
       Interworking", draft-mohan-pwe3-mpls-eth-oam-iwk-01, July 2008 
   
  [L2TP-Status] McGill, N. Pignataro, C., "L2TPv3 Extended Circuit 
       Status Values", draft-nmcgill-l2tpext-circuit-status-extensions- 
       01 (work in progress), June 2008. 
 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 31] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

   
  [RFC3916] Xiao, X., McPherson, D., Pate, P., "Requirements for   
       Pseudo Wire Emulation Edge to-Edge (PWE3)", RFC 3916, September 
       2004  
   
  [RFC3985] Bryant, S., Pate, P., "PWE3 Architecture", RFC 3985, March 
       2005  
   
  [RFC4377] Nadeau, T. et.al., "OAM Requirements for MPLS Networks", 
          RFC4377, February 2006 
   
  [RFC4446] Martini, L., et al., "IANA Allocations for pseudo 
          Wire Edge to Edge Emulation (PWE3)", RFC4446, 
          April 2006 
   
  [RFC4454]  Singh, S., Townsley, M., and C. Pignataro, "Asynchronous 
          Transfer Mode (ATM) over Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol 
          Version 3 (L2TPv3)", RFC 4454, May 2006 
   
  [RFC4717] Martini, L., et al., "Encapsulation Methods for Transport 
          of ATM Cells/Frame Over IP and MPLS Networks", RFC4717, 
          December 2006 
   
  [RFC4842] Malis, A., et. al., "SONET/SDH Circuit Emulation over 
       Packet (CEP)", RFC 4842, April 2007  
    

18. Editor's Addresses 

   Mustapha Aissaoui   
   Alcatel-lucent   
   600 March Rd   
   Kanata, ON, Canada K2K 2E6   
   Email: mustapha.aissaoui@alcatel-lucent.com   
    
   Peter B. Busschbach  
   Alcatel-Lucent 
   67 Whippany Road              
   Whippany, NJ, 07981           
   Email: busschbach@alcatel-lucent.com 
    
   David Allan 
   Nortel Networks 
   3500 Carling Ave., 
   Ottawa, Ontario, CANADA 
   Email: dallan@nortel.com 

 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 32] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

    
   Luca Martini 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   9155 East Nichols Avenue, Suite 400 
   Englewood, CO, 80112 
   Email: lmartini@cisco.com 
    
   Thomas D. Nadeau 
   BT 
   BT Centre 
   81 Newgate Street 
   London  EC1A 7AJ 
   United Kingdom 
   EMail: tom.nadeau@bt.com 
    
    
   Monique Morrow 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   Glatt-com 
   CH-8301 Glattzentrum 
   Switzerland 
   EMail: mmorrow@cisco.com 
    
    
    
Full Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights.  

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

    




 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 33] 

Internet-Draft   Pseudo Wire (PW) OAM Message Mapping     November 2008 
    

Intellectual Property Statement 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

       

Acknowledgment 

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 

    















 
 
Nadeau, et al.           Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 34] 

