


Network Working Group                        Tomonori Takeda (Editor)
Internet Draft                                                    NTT
Proposed Status: Informational
Expires: September 2006                                    March 2006


       Applicability analysis of Generalized Multiprotocol Label
    Switching (GMPLS) protocols to Layer 1 Virtual Private Networks

                 draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet
   Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working
   groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working
   documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
   other documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use
   Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite them other
   than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be
   accessed at http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document provides an applicability analysis on the use of
   Generalized Multiprotocol Label Switching (GMPLS) protocols and
   mechanisms to satisfy the requirements of Layer 1 Virtual Private
   Networks (L1VPNs).

   In addition, this document identifies areas where additional
   protocol extensions or procedures are needed to satisfy the
   requirements of L1VPNs, and provides guidelines for potential
   extensions.


T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006            [Page 1]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006



Contents

   1.     Contributors .............................................  3
   2.     Terminology ..............................................  3
   3.     Introduction .............................................  3
   3.1.   Work Items ...............................................  4
   3.2.   Existing Solution Drafts .................................  4
   4.     General Guidelines .......................................  5
   5.     Applicability to Management-based Service Model ..........  6
   5.1.   Overview of the Service Model ............................  6
   5.2.   Applicability of Existing Solutions ......................  6
   5.3.   Additional Work Area(s) ..................................  6
   6.     Applicability to Signaling-based Service Model (Basic
          Mode)  ...................................................  9
   6.1.   Overlay Service Model ....................................  9
   6.1.1. Overview of the Service Model ............................  9
   6.1.2. Applicability of Existing Solutions ......................  9
   6.1.3. Additional Work Area(s) .................................. 10
   7.     Applicability to Signaling and Routing Service Model
          (Enhanced Mode) .......................................... 13
   7.1.   Overlay Extension Service Model .......................... 13
   7.1.1. Overview of the Service Model ............................ 13
   7.1.2. Applicability of Existing Solutions ...................... 13
   7.1.3. Additional Work Area(s) .................................. 14
   7.2.   Virtual Node Service Model ............................... 15
   7.2.1. Overview of the Service Model ............................ 15
   7.2.2. Applicability of Existing Solutions ...................... 15
   7.2.3. Additional Work Area(s) .................................. 16
   7.3.   Virtual Link Service Model ............................... 16
   7.3.1. Overview of the Service Model ............................ 16
   7.3.2. Applicability of Existing Solutions ...................... 16
   7.3.3. Additional Work Area(s) .................................. 16
   7.4.   Per-VPN Peer Service Model ............................... 17
   7.4.1. Overview of the Service Model ............................ 17
   7.4.2. Applicability of Existing Solutions ...................... 17
   7.4.3. Additional Work Area(s) .................................. 17
   8.     Recovery Aspects ......................................... 19
   8.1.1. Overview of Recovery Requirements ........................ 19
   8.1.2. Applicability of Existing Solutions ...................... 19
   8.1.3. Additional Work Area(s) .................................. 20
   9.     Control Plane Connectivity between CEs ................... 21
   10.    Management Aspects ....................................... 21
   11.    Discussion ............................................... 22
   12.    Manageability Considerations ............................. 23
   13.    Security Considerations .................................. 24
   14.    IANA Considerations ...................................... 24
   15.    Acknowledgement .......................................... 24
   16.    Normative References ..................................... 24


T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006            [Page 2]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006


   17.    Informative References ................................... 24
   18.    Authors' Addresses ....................................... 27
   Appendix I: Network Usage of L1VPN Service Models ............... 27
   Intellectual Property Considerations ............................ 29
   Full Copyright Statement ........................................ 29

1. Contributors

   The details of this document are the result of contributions from
   several authors who are listed here in alphabetic order. Contact
   details for these authors can be found in a separate section near
   the end of this document.

   Deborah Brungard (AT&T)
   Adrian Farrel (Old Dog Consulting)
   Hamid Ould-Brahim (Nortel Networks)
   Dimitri Papadimitriou (Alcatel)
   Tomonori Takeda (NTT)

2. Terminology

   The reader is assumed to be familiar with the terminology in
   [RFC3031], [RFC3209], [RFC3471], [RFC3473], [RFC4202], [RFC4026]
   and [L1VPN-FW].

3. Introduction

   This document shows the applicability of existing Generalized
   Multiprotocol Label Switching (GMPLS) protocols and mechanisms to
   Layer 1 Virtual Private Networks (L1VPNs). In addition, this document
   identifies several areas where additional protocol extensions or
   modifications are needed to meet the L1VPN service requirements set
   out in [L1VPN-FW].

   In particular, this document shows section by section (from section 5
   to 7) the applicability of GMPLS protocols and mechanisms to each
   L1VPN service model mentioned in [L1VPN-FW], along with additional
   work areas needed to fully support the requirements for each service
   model. Note that recovery aspects and management aspects, some of
   which are common over various service models, are described
   separately in sections 8 and 9 respectively.
   
   Additional, non-normative information regarding network usage of
   L1VPN service models is provided in the appendix.

   Note that discussion in this document is limited to areas where GMPLS
   protocols and mechanisms are relevant.

   As will be described in this document, support of the


T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006            [Page 3]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006


   Management-based service model, the Signaling-based service model,
   the Overlay Extension service model and the Virtual Node service
   model are well covered by existing protocol mechanisms already
   described in other documents, with only minor protocol extensions
   required. The Virtual Link service model and the Per-VPN Peer service
   model are not explicitly covered by existing documents, but can be
   realized by extending current GMPLS protocols and mechanisms as
   described in this document.

   The following section lists areas where additional work may be
   required to fully support the requirements for each L1VPN service
   model. Some of the requirements are optional therefore the additional
   work is also optional. Also, some items below may have more than one
   existing mechanism (with possible extensions). For those items, the
   required work is to choose the minimum set of mechanisms.

   Commonalities of mechanisms over various service models need to be
   considered. Also, various mechanisms should be coordinated in such a
   way that services are provided in a fully functional manner.

3.1. Work Items

   This list of additional work areas is a summary derived from the main
   body of this document. The list will be updated in later versions of
   this document along with the development of the additional or
   enhanced requirements and increased understanding of the issues. As
   work progresses on protocol extensions, it is expected that this list
   will be updated to remove completed items, and the body of this
   document will be updated to describe the analysis of protocol
   extensions.

   o MIB module for soft-permanent connection (SPC) LSPs
   o Resource management per VPN
   o Signaling mechanisms
   o VPN membership information exchange within the provider network
   o CE-PE TE link information exchange within the provider network
   o VPN membership information exchange between a CE and a PE
   o CE-PE TE link information exchange between a CE and a PE
   o Routing representation (how a VPN should be represented in routing,
     e.g., single area, multi-area, multi-AS)
   o Control plane routing (routing information exchange related to
     control plane topology, per-VPN control packet routing)
   o Signaling and routing for support of the Per-VPN Peer service model
   o Recovery aspects (PE-PE recovery, CE-CE recovery)
   o Management aspects (operational tools, including MIB modules)

3.2. Existing Solutions Drafts

   This section lists existing solution documents that describe how


T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006            [Page 4]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006


   L1VPNs may be constructed using the mechanisms of GMPLS. This
   document draws on those solutions and explains their applicability
   and suggests further extensions to make the solutions more closely
   match the framework described in [L1VPN-FW]. Further solution
   documents may be listed in a future version of this document.

   o [GVPN] describes a suite of port-based Provider-provisioned VPN
     services called Generalized VPNs (GVPNs) that use BGP for VPN
     auto-discovery and GMPLS as a signaling mechanism.

   o [RFC4208] addresses the application of GMPLS to the overlay model.
     The document provides a description of how the overlay model may be
     used to support VPN connections across a core GMPLS network.

   Note that there is ongoing discussion in the protocol space for the
   L1VPN basic mode (or the Signaling-based service model) [L1VPN-BM]
   [L1VPN-DISC]. As discussion progresses, applicability analysis of
   those documents may be added in a future version of this document,
   along with other potential documents, and this document will turn
   into an applicability statement.

4. General Guidelines

   This section provides general guidelines for L1VPN solutions. Note
   that applicability to specific service models will be separately
   described in following sections.

   One important general guideline is that protocol mechanisms should be
   re-used where possible. This means that solutions should be
   incremental, building on existing protocol mechanisms rather than
   developing wholly new protocols. Further, as service models are
   extended or developed resulting in the requirement for additional
   functionalities, deltas should be added to the protocol mechanisms
   rather than developing new techniques. [L1VPN-FW] describes how the
   service models can be seen to provide "cascaded" functionality, and
   this should be leveraged to achieve re-use of protocol extensions so
   that, for example, it is highly desirable that the same signaling
   protocols and extensions are used in both the Signaling-based service
   model and the Signaling and Routing service model.

   In addition, the following are general guidelines.

   - The support of L1VPNs should not necessitate any change to core (P)
     devices. Therefore, any protocol extensions made to facilitate
     L1VPNs need to be made in a backward compatible way allowing GMPLS
     aware P devices to continue to function.
   - Customer (C) devices not directly involved in providing L1VPN
     services should also be protected from protocol extensions made to
     support L1VPNs. Again, such protocol extensions need to be backward


T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006            [Page 5]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006


     compatible. Note however, that some L1VPN service models allow for
     VPN connectivity between C devices rather than between CE devices:
     in this case, the C devices may need to be aware of protocol
     extensions.
   - Solutions should aim to minimize the protocol extensions on CE
     devices.
   - Solutions should be scalable and manageable. Solutions should not
     require L1VPN state to be maintained on the P devices.
   - Solutions should be secure. Providers should be able to screen and
     protect information based on their operational policies.
   - Solutions should provide an operational view of the L1VPN for the
     customer and provider. There should be a common operational and
     management perspective in regard to other (L2 and L3) VPN services.

   Note that some deployments may wish to support multiple L1 connection
   types (such as VC3, VC4, etc.) at the same time. Specific
   functionalities may need to be considered for these scenarios.

5. Applicability to Management-based Service Model

5.1. Overview of the Service Model

   The customer and the provider communicate via a management interface.
   The provider management system(s) communicate with the PE/P to set up
   a connection.

   Note that in this service model the PE-PE connections may be signaled
   using GMPLS under management control at the ingress PE, or may be
   statically provisioned through management control of the PEs and Ps.
   Thus, it remains appropriate to describe signaling and routing
   mechanisms within this service model.

5.2. Applicability of Existing Solutions

   SNMP MIB modules are one way to realize connection
   setup/deletion/modification from the management system(s). In
   particular, GMPLS-LSR-STD-MIB [LSR MIB] can control static
   connections, while GMPLS-TE-STD-MIB [TE MIB] can control signaled
   connections.

   As indicated in [L1VPN-FW], the specification of interface(s) between
   management system(s) (i.e. customer and provider) is out of the scope
   of this document.

5.3. Additional Work Area(s)

   The following additional work areas are identified to support the
   Management-based Service Model.



T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006            [Page 6]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006


   o MIB module for SPC (Soft Permanent Connection)

     The notion of an SPC only applies if the PE-PE connection is
     signaled.

     There are no required extensions to the MIB modules to support the
     static parts of the connections (CE-PE links) since they can be
     managed as normal static links using [LSR-MIB].

     For the signaled part of the connection (PE-PE), the ingress and
     egress PEs need to know which (static) CE-PE TE links to use. This
     information can be carried to the egress PE using egress control
     [RFC4003], but needs to be configurable at the ingress PE.
     There are two alternatives.

     Option1: MIB module extension

        Define two new MIB objects as part of the specification of the
        TE LSP [TE-MIB] to specify the ingress and egress CE-PE TE links
        to be used.

     Option2: MIB object usage extension

        Use the current MIB objects, but define new, extended meanings.
        There are two possible ways to do this.
        
        (1) Set the mplsTunnelIngressLSRId in the mplsTunnelTable (that
            corresponds to the Tunnel Sender Address in the Sender
            Template object of RSVP-TE) to the ingress CE-PE TE link
            address. Set the mplsTunnelHopIpAddr of the final
            MplsTunnelHopEntry in the mplsTunnelHopTable to the egress
            CE-PE TE link address.

        (2) Set the mplsTunnelHopIpAddr of the first MplsTunnelHopEntry
            in the mplsTunnelHopTable to the ingress CE-PE TE link
            address. This may require a new mplsTunnelHopAddrType value
            to be defined in order to give precise meaning. Set the
            mplsTunnelHopIpAddr of the final MplsTunnelHopEntry in the
            mplsTunnelHopTable to the egress CE-PE TE link address.

     Detailed analysis of options 1 and 2 is for further study.

   o Resource management per VPN

     In the Management-based service model, the data plane may be
     managed to create two optional functional requirements.

     - Resource management to create a dedicated per-VPN data plane. The
       provider network partitions link resources per-VPN for exclusive


T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006            [Page 7]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006


       use by a particular VPN.
     - Resource management to share part of the data plane among a
       specific sub-set of VPNs. The provider network assigns link
       resources to a specific sub-set of VPNs.

     The default behavior, without this option, is that all resources
     are available for use by any VPN.

     If either of these options is applied with a statically managed
     PE-PE connection then the required function is a matter for policy
     within the network management tool for the core network. No
     extensions are required.

     There are two alternatives to achieve this function for signaled
     PE-PE connections.

     Option 1: Policy

        A simple way to meet this requirement is to implement resource
        management functionalities as a policy solely in the entity that
        computes a path. No protocol extensions are needed because links
        and resources can be explicitly configured using [TE-MIB] and
        signaled using [RFC3473].

        This scheme is especially effective when path computation is
        done in a centralized manner (e.g., in the management system(s))
        and is similar to the policy applied to achieve these functional
        options using statically configured PE-PE connections.

     Option 2: Routing extension

        The other alternative is advertise the amount of resources
        available to each VPN using extensions to the TE information
        flooding performed by the routing protocol within the core
        provider network.

        In this scheme, the PE/P can compute a path in a distributed
        way, thus this scheme is especially beneficial in the case of
        restoration without resource reservation in advance (i.e., full
        LSP rerouting).

        Note that link coloring might be used for this purpose, but this
        would eliminate the opportunity to use link coloring for other
        purposes (e.g., link coloring within VPNs).

     Detailed analysis of options 1 and 2 is for further study.

   o Other considerations



T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006            [Page 8]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006


     When path computation is done in a centralized entity (e.g.,
     management system(s)), it is important that resource information is
     synchronized between the core provider network and such an entity.

6. Applicability to Signaling-based Service Model (Basic Mode)

6.1. Overlay Service Model

6.1.1. Overview of the Service Model

   In this service model, there is no routing exchange between the CE
   and the PE. Connections are setup by GMPLS signaling between the CE
   and the PE, and then across the provider network.

   Note that routing operates within the provider network and may be
   used by PEs to exchange information specific to the VPNs supported by
   the provider network.

6.1.2. Applicability of Existing Solutions

   The following are required in this service model.

   - VPN membership information exchange: CE-PE TE link address exchange
     between PEs, along with information associated with a VPN. The TE
     link addresses may be customer assigned private addresses.
   - Signaling: CE-CE LSP setup, deletion and modification
   - Others: Resource management per VPN etc.

   [GVPN] and [RFC4208] cover most of the requirements.

   Specifically, [GVPN] covers VPN membership information exchange by
   BGP running on the PEs. Customer assigned private addresses for
   customer site CEs are configured on the PE that provides VPN access
   to the customer site, and are exchanged by BGP along with a
   provider network address (which is reachable in the provider
   network's routing) and an ID associated with the VPN (i.e., Route
   Target). This allows PEs to perform address translation/mapping and
   connectivity restriction.

   The other possibility is to use IGP-based VPN membership information
   exchange (e.g., similar to an AS external route, or based on
   [OSPF-NODE-ADDR], with extensions for VPN applications).

   In addition, [GVPN] and [RFC4208] suggest two signaling mechanisms
   for VPN connections.

   o Shuffling [GVPN]

     Information carried in RSVP-TE messages identifying an LSP (i.e.,


T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006            [Page 9]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006


     SESSION and SENDER_TEMPLATE objects) is translated by the ingress
     and egress PE. There is one end-to-end session (i.e., CE-CE), but
     the identifiers of that session change along the path of the LSP.

   o Nesting [GVPN][RFC4208][RFC4206]

     When Path message arrives at the ingress PE, the ingress PE checks
     whether there is appropriate PE-PE connectivity. If there is
     not, it initiates a PE-PE FA-LSP. The CE-CE LSP is carried nested
     hierarchically within the FA-LSP. There are two sessions (i.e.,
     CE-CE and PE-PE).

   LSP stitching [STITCHING] operates in a similar manner to LSP
   nesting. The properties of the PE-PE LSP segment are such that
   exactly one end-to-end LSP can be stitched to the LSP segment i.e.,
   the PE-PE LSP and the CE-CE LSP correspond exactly one to one.
   There are two sessions (i.e., CE-CE and PE-PE).

   LMP [RFC4204] may be running between a CE and a PE. In that case, the
   PE is able to obtain customer assigned private addresses on directly
   attached CEs automatically. This eliminates manual configuration of
   the customer-assigned private addresses on PEs, which are distributed
   by membership information exchange mechanisms.

6.1.3. Additional Work Area(s)

   The following additional work areas are identified to support the
   Overlay service model.

   o Signaling mechanisms

     As described in section 6.1.2, there are two possible signaling
     mechanisms for VPN connections.

     Option 1: Shuffling

        In this mechanism, objects need to be translated at the ingress
        and egress PEs. It is necessary to specify rules for this
        translation and mechanisms to ensure that the information is
        available in order to perform the translation.

     Option 2: Nesting or Stitching

        In this mechanism, there is a need to set up a PE-PE FA-LSP.

        In the case of nesting or stitching, PE-PE direct signaling
        message exchange takes place, and this message exchange may use
        the provider network addressing space, or the VPN addressing
        space. It may be necessary to specify an addressing space to be


T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006           [Page 10]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006


        used.

        When the provider network addressing space is used, there must
        be a mechanism to identify which VPN each message is associated
        with at PEs. Otherwise, the PE that receives the message is not
        able to process the message further (i.e., session
        identification, and next hope resolution). This mechanism needs
        to be specified.

        When the VPN addressing space is used by forming per-VPN control
        channels between PEs, the identification of VPNs is
        straightforward. However, the mechanisms to realize per-VPN
        control channels need to be specified (e.g., IP-based tunnel,
        physically separate control channels).

     Detailed analysis, including under which condition signaling
     mechanisms (shuffling or nesting/stitching) should be used, is for
     further study.

   o VPN membership information exchange within the provider network

     As described in section 6.1.2, there are two existing mechanisms
     for the functional option of exchanging VPN membership information
     within the provider network. This model does not support VPN
     membership exchange between CE and PE (see section 7.1) and so such
     information is assumed to be configured within the provider
     network, usually on the PEs.

     Option 1: BGP-based

        [GVPN] specifies a BGP-based mechanism to realize VPN membership
        information exchange between PEs without informing core Ps.
        Configuration of this information is performed at the PEs that
        provide access to a VPN. There is no additional work required,
        except to update [GVPN] for detailed specification of format and
        encoding.

     Option 2: IGP-based

        OSPF allows AS external routes to be advertised. In addition,
        [OSPF-NODE-ADDR] extends OSPF-TE to advertise a router's local
        addresses. These mechanisms can be used to advertise CE-PE TE
        link addresses within the core provider network. In order to
        support customer assigned private addresses and connectivity
        restrictions, this mechanism needs to be extended to exchange
        information similar to an RT (Route Target) and possibly an RD
        (Route Distinguisher), along with CE-PE TE link addresses.

        Similar extensions could be made for IS-IS.


T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006           [Page 11]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006



     Detailed analysis of options 1 and 2 is for further study.

   o Resource management per VPN

     Section 5.2 describes how provider network resources can be
     partitioned for use by a single VPN or a sub-set of VPNs. Note that
     in option 1 of section 5.2, when path computation is done in a
     separate entity, the interface to the PCE (Path Computation
     Element) [PCE ARCH] may need to be extended for VPN identification.

     Note also that it is also possible to apply resource partitioning
     in the CEs and on the CE-PE links in this model. It will be
     necessary, however, to ensure consistent configuration through the
     network management tools of both the customer and provider
     equipment to provide this function.

   o CE-PE TE link information exchange within the provider network

     In the Signaling-based service model, it may be useful for path
     computation to consider not only TE link information within the
     provider network (PE-P, PE-PE TE links), but also remote CE-PE TE
     link information. This prevents connection setup failure due to
     lack of resources on remote CE-PE TE links and allows route choice
     when a remote CE may be reached through more than one remote PE.
     Therefore, CE-PE TE link information should be optionally
     propagated within the provider network to be used for path
     computation.

     There are two alternatives for this.

     Option1: BGP-based

        [GVPN] describes potential use of BGP for exchanging CE-PE TE
        link information. Detailed protocol specifications are needed as
        additional work. This option is consistent with the BGP-based
        membership exchange described above.

     Option 2: IGP-based

        An alternative is to use IGP to advertise CE-PE TE links. Since
        a CE does not participate in routing protocol exchange with the
        provider network, TE link information must be properly
        constructed by the PE advertising full CE-PE TE link
        information. This option is consistent with the IGP-based
        membership exchange described above.

     Detailed analysis of options 1 and 2 is for further study.



T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006           [Page 12]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006


   o Other considerations

     Note, there could be an L1VPN solution where connectivity
     restriction, address translation/mapping, etc. are performed not in
     PEs, but in other entities, such as a centralized policy server. In
     this case, the interface between the PE and the other entity may
     need to be specified. This could utilize existing mechanisms such
     as COPS or LDAP.

     Also note that [GVPN] assumes that a PE and a CE communicate using
     separate control channels for each VPN (i.e., a CE-PE control
     channel is not shared by multiple VPNs). As described above, this
     facilitates easy separation of VPN signaling messages, but is
     achieved at the cost of extra configuration at the CE and PE. If
     a shared control channel is desired in the [GVPN] solution,
     additional mechanisms such as VPN identification within signaling
     messages, may be required.

7. Applicability to Signaling and Routing Service Model (Enhanced Mode)

7.1. Overlay Extension Service Model

7.1.1. Overview of the Service Model

   This service model is a slight extension from the Overlay service
   model (section 6.1) and may assume all of the requirements, solutions
   and work items for that model.

   In this service model, a CE receives from its attached PEs a list of
   TE link addresses to which it can request a VPN connection (a list of
   CE addresses within the same VPN).

   The CE may also receive some TE information concerning these CE-PE
   links within the VPN (e.g., switching type).

   The CE does not receive any of the following from the PE.

   - Routing information about the core provider network.
   - Information about P device addresses.
   - Information about P-P, PE-P or PE-PE TE links.
   - Routing information about other customer sites. The CE may have
     access to routing information about the remainder of the VPN (C-C
     and CE-C links), but this is exchanged by control plane tunneling
     on the CE-CE connections and is not passed to the CE in the control
     plane exchange between PE and CE.

7.1.2. Applicability of Existing Solutions

   The following are required in this service model.


T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006           [Page 13]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006



   - VPN membership information exchange between a CE and PE.
   - CE-PE TE link information exchange between a CE and a PE.

   [GVPN] covers the requirement to exchange membership information
   between the CE and the PE.

   The other possibility is to use IGP-based VPN membership information
   exchange (e.g., similar to an AS external route, or based on
   [OSPF-NODE-ADDR], with extensions for VPN applications). 

7.1.3. Additional Work Area(s)

   o VPN membership information exchange between a CE and a PE

     As described in section 7.1.2, there are two existing mechanisms
     based on which VPN membership information exchange is realized.

     Option 1: BGP-based

        [GVPN] suggests a BGP-based mechanism to realize VPN membership
        information exchange between a CE and a PE.

     Option 2: IGP-based

        OSPF allows AS external routes to be advertised. In addition,
        [OSPF-NODE-ADDR] extends OSPF-TE to advertise a router's local
        addresses. These mechanisms can be used to advertise CE-PE TE
        link addresses between a CE and a PE.

        Similar extensions could be made to IS-IS.

     Detailed analysis of options 1 and 2 is for further study.

   o CE-PE TE link information exchange between a CE and a PE

     As just mentioned [GVPN] suggests a BGP-based mechanism to realize
     VPN membership information exchange, and potential usage of BGP to
     exchange CE-PE TE link information between PEs. Such a mechanism
     could be extended to carry CE-PE TE link information between a CE
     and a PE.

     An alternative is to use an IGP mechanism to distribute this
     information. [GVPN] does not constrain the CE-PE routing protocol
     to be BGP, so this option could be used in either of the options
     listed for membership exchange.

   Note that the additional membership and TE information might be
   considered as superfluous within the core provider network were it to


T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006           [Page 14]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006


   be flooded by an IGP to all P devices. An option, in this case might
   be to run a separate instance of the IGP including only the CEs and
   PEs.

   Mechanisms other than routing protocols (for example, a directory
   protocol such as LDAP, or LMP) could be used to exchange
   reachability/TE information between the CE and the PE.

7.2. Virtual Node Service Model

7.2.1. Overview of the Service Model

   In this service model, there is a private routing exchange between
   the CE and the PE, or to be more precise between the CE routing
   protocol instance and the VPN routing protocol instance running on
   the PE. The provider network is considered as one private node from
   the customer's perspective. The routing information exchanged between
   the CE and the PE includes CE-PE TE link information, CE sites, and
   may include TE links (Forwarding Adjacencies) connecting CEs (or Cs)
   across the provider network as well as control plane topology
   information from CE sites.

7.2.2. Applicability of Existing Solutions

   The followings are required in this service model.

   - VPN routing.
   - Signaling: CE-CE LSP setup, deletion, and modification.
   - Others: Resource management per VPN, etc.

   [GVPN] covers most of the requirements.

   Specifically, [GVPN] handles VPN routing by a per VPN database called
   the GVSI (Generalized Virtual Switching Instance) held in each PE.
   GVSIs are inter-connected by tunnel-based control channels, and
   routing adjacencies are established between them. BGP is used for
   auto-discovery of remote GVSIs (VPN auto-discovery) in the same VPN.
   GVSIs advertise VPN routing information by using a single ROUTER_ID
   to represent the provider network as one node.

   In addition, [GVPN] supports nested signaling (as in the case of the
   Signaling-based service model).

   There are other ways to realize VPN auto-discovery. One such way is
   to use an IGP-based mechanism (e.g., based on [OSPF-CAP] or
   [OSPF-NODE-ADDR] with extensions). Other possibilities are to use a
   server based approach (e.g., DNS based on [DNS DISCOVERY], or RADIUS
   based on [RADIUS DISCOVERY]) and multicast (e.g., based on
   [RFC2917]).


T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006           [Page 15]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006



7.2.3. Additional Work Area(s)

   The following additional work areas are identified to support the
   Virtual Node service model.

   o Routing representation

     In the Virtual Node service model, one item that should be
     considered is how to represent a VPN in routing (e.g., single IGP
     area, multiple IGP areas, multiple ASes). Depending on the routing
     representation, solution details may differ (e.g., use of
     auto-discovery). This requires further discussion.

   o Resource management per VPN

     See section 6.1.3

   o Control plane routing

     An explicit decision must be taken about whether the provider
     network's control plane topology information should be leaked to
     the CE. If it is, it may be necessary to separate the address
     spaces.

7.3. Virtual Link Service Model

7.3.1. Overview of the Service Model

   In this service model, virtual links are established between PEs. The
   routing information exchanged between the CE and the PE includes
   CE-PE TE links, CE sites, virtual links (i.e., PE-PE links), and may
   include CE-CE (or C-C) Forwarding Adjacencies as well as control
   plane topology from the CE sites.

7.3.2. Applicability of Existing Solutions

   Currently, there is no solution document for this type of service
   model.

7.3.3. Additional Work Area(s)

   Simple modifications of [GVPN], in addition to enhancements mentioned
   in section 7.2.3, may realize this type of service model.
   Modifications could be:

   - Do NOT modify the ROUTER_ID of the TE link information when
     advertising a CE-PE TE link to the CE (in the OSPF packet header as
     well as in the LSA header).


T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006           [Page 16]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006



   - Set up FA-LSPs (GVSI-LSPs in [GVPN] terms) between PEs to construct
     virtual links, and advertise these FAs in VPN routing. Note these
     FAs (virtual links) may be assigned private addresses, which means
     customer assigned addresses (or that customers are allowed to
     configure addresses). This may require extensions to current IGP
     behavior.

   Note there could be other ways to construct virtual links (e.g.,
   virtual links without actually setting up an FA-LSP [MRN REQ]).

   There is no additional work area beyond the work already identified
   for the Virtual Node service model mentioned in section 7.2.3, and
   that described above.

   Note that resource management for a dedicated data plane is a
   mandatory requirement for the Virtual Link service model. This could
   be realized by assigning pre-configured FA-LSPs to each VPN routing
   protocol instance (no protocol extensions needed) in order to
   instantiate the necessary FAs.

   Note: as in the case of the Virtual Node service model, solution
   details may differ depending on the routing representation. This
   requires further discussion.

7.4. Per-VPN Peer Service Model

7.4.1. Overview of the Service Model

   In this service model, the provider partitions TE links within the
   provider network per VPN. The routing information exchanged between
   the CE and the PE includes CE-PE TE links, CE sites, as well as
   partitioned portions of the provider network, and may include CE-CE
   (or C-C) Forwarding Adjacencies and control plane topology from the
   CE sites. Note that PEs may abstract routing information about the
   provider network and advertise it to CEs.

   Note scalability must be carefully considered for advertising
   provider network routing information to the CE [INTER-DOMAIN FW].

7.4.2. Applicability of Existing Solutions

   Currently, there is no solution document for this type of service
   model. However, [GVPN] provides several functionalities to meet this
   type of service model, as described in section 7.2.2. One way is to
   extend mechanisms for the Virtual Node service model. The other way
   is to extend mechanisms for the Virtual Link service model.

7.4.3. Additional Work Area(s)


T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006           [Page 17]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006



   As described in section 7.4.2, there are two approaches for this
   service model.

   Note that as in the case of the Virtual Node service mode, solution
   details may differ depending on routing representation. This requires
   further discussion.

   o Signaling and routing for support of the per-VPN Peer service
     model

     Option 1: Virtual node-based

        The Per-VPN Peer service model may be realized by extending the
        virtual node technique so that PEs selectively advertise
        provider internal TE links to CEs. There are several extensions
        needed for this.

        - Topology filtering

          The PE must choose TE links that are assigned to a specific
          VPN, and then advertise these TE links to a specific set of
          CEs corresponding to that VPN.

        - Topology abstraction

          The PE may abstract routing information of the provider
          network, and then advertise abstracted topology information to
          the CE. It means that the PE may construct a TE link where a
          direct physical link does not exit, or the PE may construct a
          single node to represent multiple nodes and TE links.

          Note scalability must be carefully considered [INTER-DOMAIN
          FW].

        - ERO/RRO expansion/modification

          The CE may specify an ERO with abstracted topology. The
          provider network must expand this ERO to match the provider
          network topology. Note this must be done even if a strict
          route is specified in the ERO passed from the CE.

          At the same time, when an RRO is requested, the RRO passed to
          the CE must be either edited to match the abstracted topology,
          or removed.

        - Private address

          The provider network may support private addresses for routing


T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006           [Page 18]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006


          information provided to the customer. This means that the
          customer is able to assign private addresses to a partitioned
          portion of the TE links within the provider network.

   Option 2: Virtual link-based

      The Per-VPN Peer service model may be realized by extending the
      virtual link technique so that not only PEs but also Ps that
      contain end points of virtual links in the abstracted topology
      contain VPN routing instances. There may be no additional protocol
      extensions needed from the Virtual Link service model.

   Detailed analysis of options 1 and 2 is for further study.

8. Recovery Aspects

8.1.1. Overview of Recovery Requirements

   Section 9.1 of [L1VPN-FW] describes various recovery scenarios in
   L1VPNs. In particular, it describes various recovery scopes (PE-PE,
   CE-PE, CE-CE), as well as various backup resource sharing schemes
   (shared recovery, extra traffic).

8.1.2. Applicability of Existing Solutions

   GMPLS provides various recovery techniques, such as link recovery
   [RFC3743], end-to-end recovery [E-E P&R] and segment recovery
   [SEG P&R]. Also, it provides various recovery resource sharing
   schemes, such as shared recovery and extra traffic.

   o PE-PE recovery

     GMPLS segment recovery could provide PE-PE recovery. As an
     alternative, link recovery could provide PE-PE recovery, since the
     PE-PE part of a VPN connection can be considered as a link.

     PE-PE recovery can be used in any L1VPN service model. Where a
     PE-PE connection is presented to the CE as a TE link, PE-PE
     protection may be represented as link-level protection [RFC3473].

   o CE-PE recovery

     GMPLS link recovery could provide CE-PE recovery.

     CE-PE recovery can be used in any L1VPN service model, assuming
     recovery operation does not require control message exchange
     between the CE and the PE.

   o CE-CE recovery


T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006           [Page 19]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006



     GMPLS end-to-end recovery could provide CE-CE recovery.

     Full LSP rerouting requires signaling between the CE and the PE,
     thus can be used in the Signaling-based service model or the
     Signaling and Routing service model.

     LSP restoration with resource reservation in advance (e.g., shared
     mesh restoration) requires signaling between the CE and the PE,
     plus disjoint path setup, thus can be used in the Signaling-based
     service model or the Signaling and Routing service model, with
     specific consideration for disjoint path setup.

     LSP protection requires disjoint path setup, thus can be used in
     any L1VPN service model with specific consideration for disjoint
     path setup.

   o Shared recovery and extra traffic

     GMPLS provides various recovery resource sharing schemes, including
     shared recovery and extra traffic.

     It should be possible to configure recovery resource sharing
     schemes per VPN (e.g., whether to allow sharing recovery resources
     between VPN connections that serve only the same VPN, a specific
     set of VPNs, or any VPN). This should be achieved by configuration,
     and there is no additional requirement for GMPLS protocols.

8.1.3. Additional Work Area(s)

   The following additional work areas are identified to support
   recovery requirements.

   o PE-PE recovery

     It should be clarified how customers specify the desired level of
     PE-PE recovery.

     In the Management-based service model, the customer-provider
     interface is not based on GMPLS, thus this is out of scope of this
     document.

     However, in the Signaling-based service model and the Signaling and
     Routing service model, the CE-PE interface is based on GMPLS, so
     there must be a standard way for CEs to specify the desired level
     of PE-PE recovery. Namely, it should be possible for CEs to specify
     whether segment recovery or link recovery is used for PE-PE
     recovery. Detailed analysis, including need for potential protocol
     extensions, is for further study.


T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006           [Page 20]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006



     In addition, optionally, the provider network may support the CEs
     specifying the desired recovery level in a way that is agnostic of
     the recovery technique.

     Also, care must be taken to allow CEs to specify the desired level
     of CE-PE recovery and PE-PE recovery in combination.

   o CE-CE recovery

     Some forms of CE-CE recovery (i.e., LSP protection and LSP
     restoration with resource reservation in advance) require disjoint
     path setup. This is straightforward in the case of the peer model,
     but requires further study in the case of L1VPNs (limited
     visibility) because the paths determined by distinct ingress PEs
     must be coordinated to ensure disjointness.

9. Control Plane Connectivity between CEs.

   As described in [L1VPN-FW], there are some scenarios where VPN
   connections are treated as TE links within the customer network. In
   such cases, there must be control plane (IP level) connectivity
   between the CEs, so that control messages, such as signaling and
   routing messages, can be exchanged between the CEs.

   [L1VPN-FW] describes several options. Out of those options, the use
   of CE-PE control channels requires careful consideration, since this
   option relies on the provider network to reliably transfer control
   messages over the provider network.

   Specifically, the provider network should be careful not to
   accidentally intercept the CE-CE control plane messages. One possible
   solution for this is to use IP-based tunnels (e.g., IP-in-IP, GRE)
   between CEs.

   Note there is another concern that using this option may congest the
   provider network control plane. In that case, use of other options,
   such as use of control channel specific VPN connections, should be
   considered for exchanging control plane messages between CEs.

   Detailed analysis is for further study.

10. Management Aspects

   Section 11 of [L1VPN-FW] describes manageability considerations.

   They are mostly related to operational tools, including MIB modules.
   More detailed applicability analysis of GMPLS protocols in terms of
   management aspects is for further study.


T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006           [Page 21]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006



11. Discussion

   This section summarizes items for which existing solutions may need
   to be extended in order to fulfill the full set of L1VPN service
   model functionalities.

   Note that several of these items are in support of optional features.
   For the Management-based service model, the Signaling-based service
   model, the Overlay Extension service model and the Virtual Node
   service model, the existing solutions can be applied with few
   extensions.

   As described in sections 7.3.2 and 7.4.2, there are no existing
   solutions to support the Virtual Link service model and the Per-VPN
   Peer service model. For the Virtual Link service model, however,
   minor extensions from existing solutions are expected to meet the
   requirements.

   Note that the list of additional work areas will be updated in later
   versions of this document with the development of additional or
   enhanced requirements and further understanding of the issues.

   o MIB module for SPC LSPs
     - Optional, but highly required for the Management-based service
       model
     - Two alternatives (MIB module extension or MIB object usage
       extension)
     - Impact: MIB module or none

   o Resource management per VPN
     - Optional requirement for the Management-based, the
       Signaling-based, the Overlay extension and the Virtual Node
       service models
     - Mandatory requirement for the Virtual Link and the Per-VPN Peer
       service models (support of resource management for dedicated data
       plane)
     - Two alternatives (policy or routing extension)
     - For the Virtual Link service model, can be realized by no
       protocol extensions (assign pre-configured FA-LSPs to each VPN
       routing instance).
     - Impact: None or IGP

   o Signaling mechanisms
     - Mandatory requirement for the Signaling-based service model and
       the Signaling and Routing service model
     - Two alternatives (shuffling or nesting)
     - Impact: Signaling



T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006           [Page 22]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006


   o VPN membership information exchange within the provider network
     - Mandatory requirement for the Signaling-based service model and
       the Overlay Extension service model
     - Two alternatives (BGP or IGP)
     - Impact: BGP or IGP

   o CE-PE TE link information exchange within the provider network
     - Optional requirement for the Signaling-based service model and
       the Overlay Extension service model
     - Two alternatives (BGP or IGP)
     - Impact: BGP or IGP

   o VPN membership information exchange between a CE and a PE
     - Mandatory requirement for the Overlay Extension service model
     - Two alternatives (BGP or IGP)
     - Impact: BGP or IGP

   o CE-PE TE link information exchange between a CE and a PE
     - Optional requirement for the Overlay Extension service model
     - Two alternatives (BGP or IGP)
     - Impact: BGP or IGP

   o Routing representation
     - One building block for the Signaling and Routing service model
     - Further discussion required (single area, multi areas, multi
       ASes, etc.)
     - Impact: Details to be studied (routing, use of auto-discovery,
       etc.)

   o Control plane routing
     - Optional requirement for the Signaling and Routing service model
     - Impact: Routing

   o Signaling and routing for support of the Per-VPN Peer service model
     - Two options (virtual node-based, virtual link-based)
     - Impact: Routing, signaling (details to be studied)

   o Recovery aspects (PE-PE recovery, CE-CE recovery)
    - Optional requirement for any service model
    - Impact: Details to be studied

   o Management aspects
     - Impact: mostly on operational tools, including MIB modules
       (impacts on protocols to be studied)

12. Manageability Considerations

   Section 11 of [L1VPN-FW] describes manageability considerations for
   L1VPNs. This document does not define any new manageability


T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006           [Page 23]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006


   requirements for L1VPNs. A future revision of this document will
   examine how the manageability considerations for L1VPNs can be
   addressed using the available protocol solutions.

13. Security Considerations

   Section 12 of [L1VPN-FW] describes security considerations for
   L1VPNs. This document does not define any new security requirements
   for L1VPNs. A future revision of this document will examine how the
   security considerations for L1VPNs can be addressed using the
   available protocol solutions.

14. IANA Considerations

   This document defines no new protocols or extensions and makes no
   requests to IANA for registry management.

15. Acknowledgement

   We would like to thank Marco Carugi, Ichiro Inoue and Takumi Ohba for
   their useful comments and suggestions.

16. Normative References

   [RFC3668]          Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF
                      Technology", BCP 79, RFC 3668, February 2004.

   [L1VPN-FW]         Takeda, T., Editor "Framework and Requirements for
                      Layer 1 Virtual Private Networks", draft-ietf-
                     l1vpn-framework, work in progress.

17. Informative References

   For information on the availability of this document, please see
   http://www.itu.int.

   [Y.1312]           Y.1312 - Layer 1 Virtual Private Network Generic
                      requirements and architecture elements, ITU-T
                      Recommendation, September 2003.

   For information on the availability of this document, please see
   http://www.itu.int.

   [Y.1313]           Y.1313 - Layer 1 Virtual Private Network
                      service and network architectures, ITU-T
                      Recommendation, July 2004.

   [RFC4208]          Swallow, G., et al., "Generalize Multiprotocol
                      Label Switching(GMPLS) User-Network Interface


T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006           [Page 24]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006


                      (UNI): Resource ReserVation Protocol-Traffic
                      Engineering (RSVP-TE) Support for the Overlay
                      Model", RFC 4208, October 2005.

   [GVPN]             Ould-Brahim, H., and Rekhter, Y. (editors), "GVPN
                      Services: Generalized VPN Services using BGP and
                      GMPLS Toolkit", draft-ouldbrahim-ppvpn-gvpn-
                      bgpgmpls, work in progress.

   [L1VPN-BM]         Fedyk, D., and Rekhter, Y. (Editors), " Layer 1
                      VPN Basic Mode," draft-fedyk-l1vpn-basic-mode,
                      work in progress.

   [L1VPN-DISC]       Ould-Brahim, H., Fedyk, D., and Rekhter, Y., 
                      "BGP-based Auto-Discovery for L1VPNs," work in
                      progress.

   [RFC4206]          Kompella, K., Rekhter, Y., "Label Switched Paths
                      (LSP) Hierarchy with Generalized Multi-Protocol
                      Label Switching (GMPLS) Traffic Engineering (TE)",
                      RFC 4206, October 2005.

   [STITCHING]        Ayyangar, A. (editor), "Label Switched Path
                      Stitching with Generalized MPLS Traffic
                      Engineering", draft-ietf-ccamp-lsp-stitching, work
                      in progress.

   [INTER-DOMAIN FW]  Farrel, A., et al., "A Framework for Inter-Domain
                      MPLS Traffic Engineering", draft-ietf-ccamp-
                      inter-domain-framework, work in progress.

   [LSR MIB]          Nadeau, T., et al., "Generalized Multiprotocol
                      Label Switching (GMPLS) Label Switching Router
                      (LSR) Management Information Base", draft-ietf-
                      ccamp-gmpls-lsr-mib, work in progress.

   [TE MIB]           Nadeau, T., et al., "Generalized Multiprotocol
                      Label Switching (GMPLS) Traffic Engineering
                      Management Information Base", draft-ietf-ccamp-
                      gmpls-te-mib, work in progress.

   [RFC3031]          Rosen, E., Viswanathan, A. and R. Callon,
                      "Multiprotocol label switching Architecture", RFC
                      3031, January 2001.

   [RFC3209]          Awduche, D., Berger, L., Gan, D., Li, T.,
                      Srinivasan, V.  and G. Swallow, "RSVP-TE:
                      Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels", RFC 3209,
                      December 2001.


T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006           [Page 25]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006



   [RFC3471]          Berger, L., Editor, "Generalized Multi-Protocol
                      Label Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Functional
                      Description", RFC 3471, January 2003.

   [RFC3473]          Berger, L., Editor "Generalized Multi-Protocol
                      Label Switching (GMPLS) Signaling - Resource
                      ReserVation Protocol-Traffic Engineering (RSVP-TE)
                      Extensions", RFC 3473, January 2003.

   [RFC4202]          Kompella, K., et al., "Routing Extensions in
                      Support of Generalized Multi-Protocol Label
                      Switching (GMPLS)", RFC 4202, October 2005.

   [RFC4003]          Berger, L., "GMPLS Signaling Procedure For Egress
                      Control", RFC 4003, February 2005.

   [OSPF-CAP]         Lindem, A. (editor), "Extensions to OSPF for
                      Advertising Optional Router Capabilities",
                      draft-ietf-ospf-cap, work in progress.

   [OSPF-NODE-ADDR]   Aggarwal, R., Kompella, K., "Advertising a
                      Router's Local Addresses in OSPF TE Extensions",
                      draft-ietf-ospf-te-node-addr, work in progress.

   [RFC4204]          Lang, J., "Link Management Protocol (LMP)",
                      RFC 4204, October 2005.

   [DNS DISCOVERY]    Squire, M., et al., "Using DNS for VPN Discovery",
                      draft-luciani-ppvpn-vpn-discovery (Expired).

   [RADIUS DISCOVERY] Weber, G., Editor "Using RADIUS for PE-Based VPN
                      Discovery", draft-ietf-l2vpn-radius-pe-discovery
                      (Expired).

   [RFC2917]          Muthukrishnan, K., Malis, A., " A Core MPLS IP VPN
                      Architecture", RFC2917, September 2000.

   [RFC4026]          Anderssion, L., and Madsen, T., "Provider
                      Provisioned Virtual Private Network (VPN)
                      Terminology", RFC 4026, March 2005.

   [E-E P&R]          Lang, J., Rekhter, Y., Papadimitriou, D.,
                      (Editors), "RSVP-TE Extensions in support of
                      End-to-End Generalized Multi-Protocol Label
                      Switching (GMPLS)-based Recovery", draft-ietf-
                      ccamp-gmpls-recovery-e2e-signaling, work in
                      progress.



T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006           [Page 26]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006


   [SEG P&R]          Berger, L., et al., "GMPLS Based Segment
                      Recovery", draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-segment-
                      recovery-02, work in progress.

   [PCE ARCH]         Ash, J., et al., "Path Computation Element (PCE)
                      Architecture", draft-ietf-pce-architecture, work
                      in progress.

   [MRN REQ]          Shiomoto, K., et al., "Requirements for GMPLS-
                      based multi-region and multi-layer networks",
                      draft-shiomoto-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-reqs, work in
                      progress.

18. Authors' Addresses

   Deborah Brungard (AT&T)
   Rm. D1-3C22 - 200 S. Laurel Ave.
   Middletown, NJ 07748, USA
   Phone: +1 732 4201573
   Email: dbrungard@att.com

   Adrian Farrel
   Old Dog Consulting
   Phone:  +44 (0) 1978 860944
   Email:  adrian@olddog.co.uk

   Hamid Ould-Brahim
   Nortel Networks
   P O Box 3511 Station C
   Ottawa, ON K1Y 4H7 Canada
   Phone: +1 (613) 765 3418
   Email: hbrahim@nortel.com

   Dimitri Papadimitriou (Alcatel)
   Francis Wellensplein 1,
   B-2018 Antwerpen, Belgium
   Phone: +32 3 2408491
   Email: dimitri.papadimitriou@alcatel.be

   Tomonori Takeda
   NTT Network Service Systems Laboratories, NTT Corporation
   3-9-11, Midori-Cho
   Musashino-Shi, Tokyo 180-8585 Japan
   Phone: +81 422 59 7434
   Email: takeda.tomonori@lab.ntt.co.jp

Appendix I: Network Usage of L1VPN Service Models

   This appendix provides additional information concerning network


T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006           [Page 27]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006


   usage of the L1VPN service models.

   o Management-based service model

     In this model, the provider network can support non-GMPLS capable
     CEs. Therefore, this model is best suited when customer networks
     are non-GMPLS, e.g., legacy SONET/SDH and IP/MPLS networks.

     It is expected that the provider network requires no or minimal
     GMPLS extensions for L1VPN specific functions.

   o Signaling-based service model

     In this model, by implementing GMPLS signaling functions in CEs,
     the customer can request an LSP setup/deletion/modification to the
     provider by signaling. Other customer site nodes (C devices) do not
     need to be GMPLS-capable. Customers will receive rapid failure
     notifications of an LSP by using notification mechanisms available
     in GMPLS RSVP-TE.

     There are some L1VPN specific extensions required within the
     provider network. Concerning customer network routing information,
     since only CE-PE TE link addresses are contained within the
     provider network, it is expected that there is less concern on
     scalability. Trust relationships between the customer and the
     provider may need to be carefully considered.

   o Signaling and Routing service model

     In this model, a customer can seamlessly operate its VPN using
     end-to-end GMPLS. Therefore, this model is best suited when
     customer networks are operated by GMPLS.

     For the service model where the provider network's routing
     information is not provided to customers (i.e., Virtual Node
     service model), a customer can outsource routing complexity within
     the provider network to the provider. On the other hand, in the
     service model where the provider network routing information is
     provided to customers (i.e., Virtual Link service model and Per-VPN
     Peer service model), customers play more of a role. For example, by
     allowing customers to assign SRLG IDs for virtual links, customers
     can compute and set up end to end disjoint LSPs in their VPN.

     There are some L1VPN specific extensions required within the
     provider network. Concerning customer network routing information,
     since the customer network routing information is contained within
     the provider network, scalability must be carefully considered.
     Trust relationships between the customer and the provider may need
     to be carefully considered as well.


T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006           [Page 28]

Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l1vpn-applicability-01.txt    March 2006



Intellectual Property Considerations

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights. Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.













T.Takeda, et al.            Expires September 2006           [Page 29]