 



MPLS Working Group                                         Santosh Esale
INTERNET-DRAFT                                             Yakov Rekhter
Intended Status: Proposed Standard                       Raveendra Torvi
                                                        Juniper Networks

                                                             Luyuan Fang
                                                               Microsoft

                                                              Luay Jalil
                                                                 Verizon

                                                          March 24, 2015


           Fast Reroute for Node Protection in LDP-based LSPs
                      draft-esale-ldp-node-frr-00


Abstract

   This document describes procedures to support node protection for
   (unicast) Label Switched Paths(LSPs) established by LDP("Label
   Distribution Protocol"). In order to protect a node N, the Point of
   Local Repair (PLR) of N must discover the Merge Points(MPTs) of node
   N such that traffic can be redirected to them in case node N fails.
   Redirecting the traffic around the failed node N depends on existing
   point-to-point LSPs originated from the PLR to the MPTs while
   bypassing the protected node N.  The procedures described in this
   document are topology independent in a sense that they provide node
   protection in any topology. 


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
 


Esale, et al.          Expires September 25, 2015               [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT         <draft-esale-ldp-node-frr>         March 24, 2015


   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html


Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Table of Contents

   1. Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2. Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3. Merge Point (MPT) Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   4. Constructing Bypass LSPs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   5. Obtaining Label Mapping from MPT  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   6. Forwarding Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   7. Synergy with node protection in mLDP  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   8. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   9. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   10. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   11. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   12. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6










 


Esale, et al.          Expires September 25, 2015               [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT         <draft-esale-ldp-node-frr>         March 24, 2015


1. Terminology

    PLR:  Point of Local Repair (the LSR that redirects the traffic to
          one or more Merge Point LSRs).
    MPT:  Merge Point. Any LSR on the LDP-signaled (multi-point to 
          point) LSP, provided that the path from that LSR to the 
          egress of that LSP is not affected by the failure of the 
          protected node
    tLDP: Targeted LDP session.

2. Introduction

   This document describes procedures to support node protection for
   (unicast) Label Switched Paths (LSPs) established by LDP ("Label
   Distribution Protocol") [RFC5036]. In order to protect a node N, the
   Point of Local Repair (PLR) of N must discover the Merge Points
   (MPTs) of node N such that traffic can be redirected to them in case
   node N fails.  Redirecting the traffic around the failed node N
   depends on existing Point-to-Point (P2P) LSPs originating from the
   PLR LSR to the MPTs while bypassing node N. The procedures to setup
   these P2P LSPs are outside the scope of this document, but one option
   is to use RSVP-TE based techniques [RFC3209] to accomplish this.
   Finally, sending traffic from the PLR to the MPTs requires the PLR to
   obtain FEC-label mappings from the MPTs.  The procedures described in
   this document relies on Targeted LDP (tLDP) session [RFC5036] for the
   PLR to obtain such mappings. The procedures for node protection
   described in this document fall into the category of local
   protection. The procedures described in this document apply to LSPs
   bound to either an IPv4 or IPv6 Address Prefix FEC. The procedures
   described in this document are topology independent in a sense that
   they provide node protection in any topology. Thus these procedures
   provide topology independent fast reroute.

3. Merge Point (MPT) Discovery

   For a given LSP that traverses the PLR, the protected node N, and a
   particular neighbor of the protected node, we'll refer to this
   neighbor as the "next next-hop". Note that from the PLR's perspective
   the protected node N is the next hop for the FEC associated with that
   LSP. Likewise, from the protected node's perspective the next next-
   hop is the next hop for that FEC.  If for a given <LSP, PLR, N>
   triplet the next next-hop is in the same IGP area as the PLR, then
   that next next-hop acts as the MPT for that triplet. For a given LSP
   traversing a PLR and the node protected by the PLR, the PLR discovers
   the next next-hops (MPTs) that are in the same IGP area as the PLR
   from either its Traffic Engineering database or Link State database.
   The Traffic Engineering database or Link State database is populated
   by either ISIS or OSPF. The discovery of the next next-hop (depending
 


Esale, et al.          Expires September 25, 2015               [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT         <draft-esale-ldp-node-frr>         March 24, 2015


   on an implementation) may not involve any additional SPF, above and
   beyond what would be needed by ISIS/OSPF anyway, as the next next-
   hop, just like the next-hop, is a by-product of SPF computation. If
   for a given <LSP, PLR, N> triplet the node protected by the PLR is an
   Area Border Router (ABR), then the PLR and the next next-hop may end
   up in different IGP areas (this could happen when an LSP traversing
   the PLR and the protected node does not terminate in the same IGP
   area as the PLR).  In this situation the PLR may not be able to
   determine the next next-hop from either its Traffic Engineering
   database or Link State database, and thus may not be able to use the
   next next-hop as the MPT.  In this scenario the PLR uses an
   "alternative" ABR as the MPT, where an alternative ABR is defined as
   follows. For a given LSP that traverses the PLR and the (protected)
   ABR, an alternative ABR is defined as any ABR that advertises into
   PLR's own IGP area reachability to the FEC associated with the LSP.
   Note that even if a PLR protects an ABR, for some of the LSPs
   traversing the PLR and the ABR, the next next-hops may be in the same
   IGP area as the PLR, in which case these next next-hops act as MPTs
   for these LSPs. Note that even if the protected node is not an ABR,
   if an LSP traversing the PLR and the protected node does not
   terminate in the same IGP area as the PLR, then for this LSP the PLR
   MAY use an alternative ABR (as defined above), rather than the next
   next-hop as the MPT. 

4. Constructing Bypass LSPs

   As we mentioned before, redirecting traffic around the failed node N
   depends on existing Point-to-Point (P2P) LSPs originating from the
   PLR to the MPTs while bypassing node N. We'll refer to these LSPs as
   "bypass LSPs". While the procedures to setup these bypass LSPs are
   outside the scope of this document, this document assumes use of
   RSVP-TE LSPs [RFC3209] to accomplish this. Once a PLR that protects a
   given node N discovers the set of MPTs associated with itself and the
   protected node, (at the minimum) the PLR MUST (automatically)
   establish bypass LSPs to all these MPTs. The bypass LSPs MUST be
   established before the failure of the protected node. One could
   observe that if the protected node is not an ABR and the PLR does not
   use alternative ABR(s) as MPT(s), then the set of all the IGP
   neighbors of the protected node forms a superset of the MPTs. Thus it
   would be sufficient for the PLR to establish bypass LSPs with all the
   IGP neighbors of the protected node, even though some of these
   neighbors may not be MPTs for any of the LSPs traversing the PLR and
   the protected node. The bypass LSPs MUST avoid traversing the
   protected node, which means that the bypass LSPs are explicitly
   routed LSPs (of course, using RSVP-TE to establish bypass LSPs allows
   these LSPs to be explicitly routed). As a given router may act as an
   MPT for more than one LSP traversing the PLR, the protected node, and
   the MPT, the same bypass LSP will be used to protect all these LSPs.
 


Esale, et al.          Expires September 25, 2015               [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT         <draft-esale-ldp-node-frr>         March 24, 2015


5. Obtaining Label Mapping from MPT 

   As we mentioned before, sending traffic from the PLR to the MPTs
   requires the PLR to obtain FEC-label mappings from the MPTs. The
   solution described in this document relies on Targeted LDP (tLDP)
   session [RFC5036] for the PLR to obtain such mappings. Specifically,
   for a given PLR and the node protected by this PLR, at the minimum
   the PLR MUST (automatically) establish tLDP with all the MPTs
   associated with this PLR and the protected node. These tLDP sessions
   MUST be established before the failure of the protected node. One
   could observe that if the protected node is not an ABR and the PLR
   does not use alternative ABR(s) as MPT(s), then the set of all the
   IGP neighbors of the protected node forms a superset of the MPTs.
   Thus it would be sufficient for the PLR to (automatically) establish
   tLDP with all the IGP neighbors of the protected node that are in the
   same area as the PLR, even though some of these neighbors may not be
   MPTs for any of the LSPs traversing the PLR and the protected node.
   At the minimum for a given tLDP peer the PLR MUST obtain FEC-label
   mapping for the FEC(s) for which the peer acts as an MPT. The PLR
   MUST obtain this mapping before the failure of the protected node. To
   obtain this mapping for only these FECs (and no other FECs that the
   peer may maintain) the PLR MAY rely on the LDP Downstream on Demand
   (DoD) procedures [RFC5036]. Otherwise, without relying on the DoD
   procedures, the PLR may end up receiving from a given tLDP peer FEC-
   label mappings for all the FECs maintained by the peer, even if the
   peer does not act as an MPT for some of these FECs. If the LDP DoD
   procedures are not used, then for the purpose of the procedures
   specified in this draft the only label mappings that SHOULD be
   exchanged are for the Address Prefix FECs whose PreLen value is
   either 32 (IPv4), or 128 (IPv6); label mappings for the Address
   Prefix FECs with any other PreLen value SHOULD NOT be exchanged. 
   When a PLR has one or more ABRs acting as MPTs, the PLR MAY use the
   procedures specified in [draft-ietf-mpls-app-aware-tldp] to limit the
   set of FEC-label mappings received from non-ABR MPTs to only the
   mappings for the FECs associated with the LSPs that terminate in the
   PLR's own IGP area.

6. Forwarding Considerations

   When a PLR detects failure of the protected node then rather than
   swapping an incoming label with a label that the PLR received from
   the protected node, the PLR swap the incoming label with the label
   that the PLR receives from the MPT, and then pushes the label
   associated with the bypass LSP to that MPT. To minimize micro-loop
   during the IGP global convergence PLR may continue to use the bypass
   LSP during network convergence by adding small delay before switching
   to a new path.

 


Esale, et al.          Expires September 25, 2015               [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT         <draft-esale-ldp-node-frr>         March 24, 2015


7. Synergy with node protection in mLDP

   Both the bypass LSPs and tLDP sessions described in this document
   could also be used for the purpose of mLDP node protection, as
   described in  [draft-ietf-mpls-mldp-node-protection].

8. Security Considerations

   The same security considerations apply as those for the base LDP
   specification, as described in [RFC5036].

9. IANA Considerations

   This document introduces no new IANA Considerations.

10. Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Hannes Gredler, Aman Kapoor, Minto
   Jeyananth and Eric Rosen for their contributions to this document.

11. Normative References

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3209] D. Awduche, et al., "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP
              Tunnels", RFC3209, Decembet 2001

   [RFC5036] Andersson, L., Minei, I., and B. Thomas, "LDP
              Specification",   RFC 5036, October 2007.

   [draft-ietf-mpls-app-aware-tldp] Esale, S., et al.,"Application-
              aware Targeted LDP", draft-esale-mpls-app-aware-tldp, work
              in progress

12. Informative References

   [draft-ietf-mpls-mldp-node-protection], IJ. Wijnands, et al., "mLDP
              Node Protection", draft-ietf-mpls-mldp-node-protection,
              work in progress

Authors' Addresses

              Santosh Esale
              Juniper Networks
              EMail: sesale@juniper.net


 


Esale, et al.          Expires September 25, 2015               [Page 6]

INTERNET DRAFT         <draft-esale-ldp-node-frr>         March 24, 2015


              Yakov Rekhter
              Juniper Networks
              Email: yakov@juniper.net


              Raveendra Torvi
              Juniper Networks
              EMail: rtorvi@juniper.net


              Luyuan Fang
              Microsoft
              Email: lufang@microsoft.com


              Luay Jalil
              Verizon
              Email: luay.jalil@verizon.com

































Esale, et al.          Expires September 25, 2015               [Page 7]
