     
     NEWTRK Working Group                              Spencer Dawkins
     INTERNET DRAFT                                          MCSR Labs
     24 March 2004                                 Charles E. Perkins
                                                 Nokia Research Center
                                                          Dave Crocker
                                           Brandenburg InternetWorking
     
     
     
     
                                
                     Working Group Snapshot (WGS)
                               
                   draft-dawkins-newtrk-wgs-00.txt



     STATUS OF THIS MEMO
     
     This document is a submission to the Solutions Mailing List,
     which is not an official mailing list of the Internet
     Engineering Task Force, but is the best place we∆ve found to
     discuss process change proposals.  Comments should be
     submitted to the solutions@alvestrand.no mailing list.
     
     Distribution of this memo is unlimited.
     
     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full
     conformance with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.
     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet
     Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working
     groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working
     documents as Internet-Drafts.
     
     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
     six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
     other documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use
     Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite them other
     than as "work in progress."
     
     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
     
     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be
     accessed at http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.
     
     
     
     ABSTRACT
     
     This proposal defines an optional label that can be 
     affixed to an Internet-Draft, for working group internal 
     synchronization.  It is pointedly not an IETF standards 
     label. Rather it is an optional part of the working group 
     evelopment process, permitting the working group to 
     synchronize on a particular version of a draft.



1.   INTRODUCTION     
     
     Working group document development often requires 
     coordination among participants and coordination with 
     those outside the working group, such as external reviewers 
     and developers of test implementations. Currently, working 
     groups have no way to formally mark these events, to ensure 
     that the correct version of the document is used.

     Current difficulties include:           

     *    The version of the specification that is used may be
          immature, and may change markedly between revisions. 
          This can cause confusion about the choice of version 
          subject to common review, testing, or the like.
          
     *    Different implementers may choose different
          revisions of the specification as a basis for
          development.
            
     *    The "running code" component of the IETF culture
          clearly means that it is good to base a standard on
          implementation history.  The implementation results
          need to be discussed and documented in order for
          this history to have its greatest value.
          
     Discussion venue:  Online discussion of this draft should take 
     place on the newtrk@lists.uoregon.edu mailing list.



2.   WORKING GROUP SNAPSHOT (WGS)
     
     Working Group Snapshot (WGS) is an optional label that can 
     be affixed to an Internet-Draft, for working group internal 
     synchronization.  It is pointedly not an IETF standards 
     label. Rather it is an optional part of the working group 
     evelopment process, permitting the working group to 
     synchronize on a particular version of a draft.
     
     WGS can be assigned for any use the a working group finds 
     helpful. Example uses include: 
     
     *     Marking which version of a working group document is 
           now felt to be appropriate for reviewing
        
     *     Marking the end of an iterative specification burst, 
           to focus discussion or testing on a particular 
           version
           
     *     Defining a charter milestone for particular document 
           writing efforts
     
     *     Marking a final working group stage, such as assigning 
           the label as part of a working group Last Call.
   
     A WGS is an Internet-Draft that achieves "rough consensus" 
     based on a Working Group Last Call.
            
     A working group may assign WGS status at any time, for any 
     of its working group Internet-Drafts.
     
     The document is subject to all normal I-D rules. When a WGS 
     specification needs more time, active effort on it will 
     usually result in changes to the specification being needed, 
     with a resulting new version of the document, and (possibly) 
     another working group decision to assign it WGS status.
     
     COMMENT:  This label augments the current situation with I-
               Ds. It imposes minimal delay and it permits 
               participants, reviewers, vendors and others to
               be better . The label makes clear that the
               specification is a WG product, not an IETF
               product, and it does not imply long-term stability
               to the specification. The use of a non-archival
               version (I-D) should encourage folks to revise
               and progress the specification.
     
     COMMENT:  It is worth considering extending the I-D time-
               limit to 9 months. This will be more convenient
               for WGS documents -- for example, it provides two 
               full IETF meeting cycles -- and will have no 
               substantive effect on other I-Ds.



3.   FORMAL EDITING CHANGES
     
     This proposal would be put into effect by making the
     following formal changes to official IETF process and
     procedures specifications. Specifically:
          
     *    Add text to the end of section 7.2 of [GUIDE],
          according to text provided later in this section
                 
     *    Perform other edits required for consistency


3.1. [RFC2418-7.2] Internet-Drafts (I-D)
     
     A working group may wish to synchronize its activities
     according to particular versions of its Internet-Drafts.
     The label "Working Group Snapshot" (WGS) may be affixed to
     an Internet-Draft, for this purpose. The label does not
     indicate that the Internet Draft is ready for widespread
     deployment.
     
     A WGS is an Internet-Draft that achieves "rough consensus" 
     based on a Working Group Last Call. A working group may 
     assign WGS status at any time, for any of its working group 
     Internet-Drafts.
          
     The document is subject to all normal I-D rules, except that
     the time before deletion is extended to be 9 months.



4.   DISCUSSION
     
     This proposal defines a new label for use with Internet-Drafts, 
     within working groups.
      
     The suggested scheme has a label that represent:
          
          WGS:      Working group project management milestone
     
     Simplistically this means that WGS is the goal for working
     group internal coordination.
    
     This proposal adds to the concept of of "working group
     document", by enabling working groups to label stages of 
     internal specification efforts. In particular, this will 
     permit working group participants, and the rest of industry, 
     to coordinate their development and testing efforts.
     
     However working group documents need to be kept formally
     fluid (unstable) in case major changes are needed. This is
     accomplished by giving the specification no formal IETF-wide
     status and by not publishing it as an RFC. If folks want to
     record the specification for posterity, even if it∆s not
     acceptable as a Proposed Standard, then they can issue it as
     an Informational RFC.
     
     Working groups are provided a formal and public means of
     circulating their work for technical evaluation, before it
     is complete.  The process to achieve this is streamlined,
     which is balanced by imparting no IETF-wide status to the
     document and issuing it only through the non-archival
     Internet-Drafts process.



5.   SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
     
     This document contains no text with security issues, except
     perhaps the security of the IETF standards process.



6.   REFERENCES
     
     Informative
     
     [BRAD]    Bradner, S., "An Idea for an Alternate IETF
               Standards Track", draft-bradner-ietf-stds-trk-
               00.txt, July 2003.
     
     [DAWK]    Dawkins, S., C. E. Perkins, "Two Stage
               Standardization Approach", draft-dawkins-pstmt-
               twostage-00.txt
     
     [STD]     Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process --
               Revision 3", RFC 2026, October 1996.
     
     Normative
     
     [GUIDE]   Bradner, S., "Working Group Guidelines", RFC 2418,
               September 1998



7.   AUTHOR CONTACT INFORMATION

     Spencer Dawkins
     Mobile Communications and Security Research Labs
     1547 Rivercrest Blvd.
     Allen, TX 75002
     
     Email:    spencer@mcsr-labs.org
     Phone:    +1.214.755.3870
     
     Charles E. Perkins
     Communications Systems Lab
     Nokia Research Center
     313 Fairchild Drive
     Mountain View, California 94043

     Email:    charles.perkins@nokia.com
     Phone:    +1.650.625.2986
     Fax:      +1.650.625.2502

     Dave Crocker
     Brandenburg InternetWorking
     675 Spruce Dr.
     Sunnyvale, CA  94086
     
     Email:    dcrocker@brandenburg.com
     Tel:      +1.408.246.8253

