

Internet Draft                                                 E. McCoy
Document: draft-mccoy-pppext-pppoephy-00.txt                   J. Sauer
Category: Informational                                        Tellabs


Expiration Date: August 2002

                                                          February 2002


      PPP over Full Duplex Point-to-Point Ethernet Physical Layers

                   draft-mccoy-pppext-pppoephy-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026[1].

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

1. Abstract

   This document provides a definition for encapsulating the PPP
   protocol directly on the various full duplex point-to-point Ethernet
   physical layers. The later includes transmission bit rates of
   10Mbps, 100Mbps, 1Gbps, and 10Gbps. Note this is a distinct protocol
   from PPPoE, as the Ethernet frame is not existent here.  All PPP
   packet semantics and syntax are retained. The proposed methods in
   this document may be especially useful for low cost, high bandwidth
   physical channel implementations. In particular it specifies and
   redefines all necessary Ethernet Medium Independent Interface
   functional "clauses."

2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2].

3. Introduction

McCoy                 Expires August 2001                     1
         draft-mccoy-pppext-pppoephy-00.txt              February 2002


   This document proposes a simplified Physical Layer for the Internet.
   The rational is to simplify and reduce the cost of Internet packet
   switching infrastructure, consistent with these architectural
   principles found in the Internet Architecture Board`s RFC 1958 [3]:

       "3.2 If there are several ways of doing the same thing, choose
   one. If a previous design, in the Internet context or elsewhere, has
   successfully solved the same problem, choose the same solution
   unless there is a good technical reason not to.  Duplication of the
   same protocol functionality should be avoided as far as possible,
   without of course using this argument to reject improvements.

       3.3 All designs must scale readily to very many nodes per site
   and to many millions of sites.

       3.4 Performance and cost must be considered as well as
   functionality.

       3.5 Keep it simple. When in doubt during design, choose the
   simplest solution.

       4.1 Avoid any design that requires addresses to be hard coded or
   stored on non-volatile storage (except of course where this is an
   essential requirement as in a name server or configuration server).
   In general, user applications should use names rather than
   addresses."

   The authors firmly believe that these architectural characteristics
   have served the Internet community extremely well, and indeed, are
   the fundamental reason for the Internet`s great success.  However,
   the authors also believe that unnecessary complexity has been
   introduced that have moved away from these principles. See [4] for a
   discussion of the larger issues involved.  One issue is the lack of
   explicit "Internet" Layer 1, physical channels.

   By historically not defining an Internet physical layer, many link
   technologies have been defined. This is in itself good, however they
   have also defined packet switching capability "under" IP as well.
   Examples are all the switched Layer 2 Ethernet LAN technologies.
   Even the latest of these, ANSI`s Generic Framing Procedure [5], has
   an optional packet switching capability.

   However, the Internet/IETF community has defined a non-switched
   Layer 2 interface, namely PPP [6]. This protocol provides link
   management and layer 1 encapsulation procedures, essential to
   logically distinguish these functions from the Layer 3 functions of
   IP.  Consequently, in an IP context, we often informally say "packet
   over SONET" when one actually means IP/PPP over SONET (or whatever).

   Note that PPP is not considered "sub IP" in the usual sense.




McCoy                 Expires August 2001                     2
         draft-mccoy-pppext-pppoephy-00.txt              February 2002


   Thus by not defining an Internet physical layer, IP (or IP/PPP) is
   often encapsulated in some other packet switching protocol, leaving
   the unwarranted and unintended impression that IP "needs" some other
   switching capability.  There also has been the impression that IP is
   somehow insufficient, or even "broken", for actual common carrier
   service provisioning.

   The authors believe, consistent with the architectural principles of
   RFC 1985 enumerated above, that a definition of "PPP over Ethernet
   Layer 1" is mandated. Driving this conclusion is the current network
   implementation economics, namely a need for a lower cost interface
   structure.

 4. Terminology

   ANSI    - American National Standards Institute
   AUI     - Attachment Unit Interface
   EIA/TIA - Electronic/Telecommunication Industry Association
   GMII    - Gigabit MII
   MAC     - Medium Access Control
   MLPPP   - Multi Link PPP
   MMF     - Multi Mode Fiber
   MMI     - Medium-Independent Interface
   PCS     - Physical Coding Sublayer
   PLS     - Physical Layer Signaling
   PMA     - Physical Medium Sublayer
   PPP     - Point to Point Protocol
   PPPoE   - PPP over Ethernet
   RPR     - Resilient Packet Ring
   RS      - Reconciliation Sublayer
   SDH     - Synchronous Digital Hierarchy
   SMF     - Single Mode Fiber
   SONET   - Synchronous Optical Network
   STP     - Shielded Twisted Pair
   TDM     - Time Division Multiplexing
   UTP     - Unshielded Twisted Pair
   WIS     - Wide Area Network Interface Sub-layer
   XAUI    - Extended AUI
   XGMII   - Extended GMII
   XGXS    - XGMII Extender Sublayer


 5. Overview of the Issues


   The dominant cost associated with a data network is that of its
   constituent physical interfaces.  In particular the wide area
   network (WAN) digital hierarchies, for example SONET and SDH, are
   designed for high bit-rate TDM sub-channel time slot cross-
   connection, a difficult task requiring extremely precise externally-
   provided timing.  Consequently such interfaces are necessarily
   expensive.


McCoy                 Expires August 2001                     3
         draft-mccoy-pppext-pppoephy-00.txt              February 2002


   PPP is currently defined for SONET/SDH encapsulation [7], as well as
   other physical layers.  In addition, methods are defined to
   encapsulate PPP into still other packet switching protocols, such as
   Ethernet [8], RPR [9], Frame Relay [10], ATM [11], etc.  The former
   two are likely to be widely implemented.

   Compared to a PPP over SONET interface, an Ethernet layer 1 physical
   interface is much less costly, as the packet switch terminates the
   physical layer, obviating the need for externally-provided precision
   timing and other costly complexities.  The disadvantage is that the
   delay experienced in a packet switch is necessarily higher and more
   variable than in a TDM cross-connect.

   Consequently the use of Ethernet physical layer interfaces is
   attractive, but Ethernet (and its variations like RPR [12]) also are
   essentially redundant packet switching technologies.  Thus a service
   provider ends up implementing and managing both IP and Ethernet/RPR
   switching capabilities.

   This duplicated capability violates the enumerated Internet IAB
   architecture principles, and can only add complexity and cost into a
   network service offering.  Clearly only a single packet switching
   technology is sufficient, by definition.  Only trivial semantics
   distinguish IP and Ethernet/RPR switching protocols, and only IP is
   known to scale.

   This places the data service industry in a dilemma, namely wishing
   the less costly physical interface of Ethernet layer 1, but not
   actually needing or wanting Ethernet`s redundant layer 2 packet
   switching capability, scaling problems, etc.

   One solution, already underway, is to define "PPPoE", "PPPoRPR", as
   well as some day defining "PPPoGFP", "PPPoMPLS", etc., as stated
   above.  However this increases complexities and costs rather than
   simplifying operations and reducing cost.

   Alternatively, and proposed here, is to retain Ethernet`s full
   duplex point-to-point physical interface alternatives, but define
   PPP encapsulation directly - leaving out the redundant MAC frame and
   hence all Ethernet Layer 2 functionality.  The authors believe this
   is the best of both worlds, and consistent with the Internet`s
   proven architectural principles.

5.1 Overview of PPP


   For completeness here is a summarization of the overall structure of
   PPP.  The best way to accomplish this is to literally quote the
   following four paragraphs from RFC 1474 [13]:

     "The PPP is not one single protocol but a large family of
     protocols. Each of these is, in itself, a fairly complex protocol.
     The PPP protocols may be divided into three rough categories:

McCoy                 Expires August 2001                     4
         draft-mccoy-pppext-pppoephy-00.txt              February 2002



     Control Protocols
     The Control Protocols are used to control the operation of the
     PPP. The Control Protocols include the Link Control Protocol(LCP),
     the Password Authentication Protocol (PAP), the Link Quality
     Report (LQR), and the Challenge Handshake Authentication Protocol
     (CHAP).

     Network Protocols
     The Network Protocols are used to move the network traffic over
     the PPP interface.  A Network Protocol encapsulates the datagrams
     of a specific higher-layer protocol that is using the PPP as a
     data link.  Note that within the context of PPP, the term `Network
     Protocol` does not imply an OSI Layer-3 protocol; for instance,
     there is a Bridging network protocol.

     Network Control Protocols (NCPs)
     The NCPs are used to control the operation of the Network
     Protocols. Generally, each Network Protocol has its own Network
     Control Protocol; thus, the IP Network Protocol has its IP
     ControlProtocol, the Bridging Network Protocol has its Bridging
     Network Control Protocol and so on."

   Note all of this protocol family use the same physical layer
   encapsulation; hence our proposed "PPP over Ethernet Layer 1"
   applies to the entire PPP family of protocols.

   MultiLink PPP (MLPPP) is mentioned for completeness [14].  This
   protocol is an extension to PPP allowing for a "bundle" of physical
   links, implementing inverse multiplexing.  Note IP would then see a
   single link at layer 3, but that link would really be multiple
   physical links. MLPPP employs the same packet encapsulation
   technology, as does ordinary PPP, so the protocol proposed here
   applies to both PPP and MLPPP.

   PPP multiplexing capabilities as described in [15] would also apply.

 5.2 PPP Layer 1 Encapsulation


   PPP layer 1 encapsulation is reviewed for completeness.

   PPP operation on "slow" asynchronous links is very similar to
   historic Ethernet, with "start bits" and "stop bits" encapsulating
   each byte of the PPP frame, with no signal power otherwise.  This is
   not relevant to our purpose.

   However, "synchronous PPP" uses "HDLC encapsulation".  Here
   "idleness octets" are employed; the link is transmitting bits
   constantly, so receiver and transmitter always remain synchronized.
   Thus an Ethernet preamble-type encapsulation is not needed or
   desired.


McCoy                 Expires August 2001                     5
         draft-mccoy-pppext-pppoephy-00.txt              February 2002


   Note "octet stuffing" is needed so the PPP frame may consist of an
   arbitrary bit string, just as in the case of Ethernet`s WIS
   protocol.

   In order to retain the defined Ethernet layer 1 encoding, the "PPP
   over Ethernet Layer 1" protocol MUST necessarily adopt Ethernet`s
   layer 1 method of encapsulation.

   Thus this document defines how PPP must be encapsulated within Layer
   1 Ethernet`s preamble scheme, and for 10GbE, PPP must be
   encapsulated as Ethernet`s WIS scheme.

6. Ethernet Media Independence


   While the original Ethernet did not specify "media independence" for
   its own sake, it did separate the controller and the transceiver,
   having the same effect.  The result was the 10Mbps Ethernet
   Attachment Unit Interface (AUI).

   Subsequently 100Mbps Ethernet explicitly defined media independence
   via its Medium-Independent Interface (MII).  This successful
   exercise continued with the logically equivalent 1GbE Gigabit MII
   (GMII), and the 10GbE Extended GMII (XGMII).

   In Ethernet, the AUI is optional for all 10Mbps Ethernet interfaces,
   MII is optional for 10Mbps DTE interfaces and for 100Mbps DCE
   interfaces, GMII is optional for 1Gbps DTE interfaces, and XGMII is
   required for 10GbE DCE.  However, this document considers these
   entities as MUSTs, as the emphasis is upon DCE operation.

   In all cases the MAC controller (or Ethernet controller) provided a
   sequence of bit strings as input to the Ethernet physical layer,
   which by definition generates the physical layer encapsulation.

   The PPP over Layer 1 Ethernet protocol proposed here MUST retain
   physical media independence.  This is done by specifying all Medium-
   Independent Interface clauses requiring modification for the
   encapsulation of PPP frames.


6.1 Ethernet Full Duplex Layer 1 Alternatives

   The following is a brief review of the various Ethernet physical
   layer encoding and decoding protocol in the full duplex, point-to-
   point context.

   The IEEE defines 16 physical layer interfaces capable of full duplex
   point-to-point operation, namely:

   10BASE-T             2-pair Category 3/4/5 UTP
   10BASE-FL            2 optical fibers (62.5 um; 850 nm)
   100BASE-TX           2-pair Category 5 UTP, 2-pair STP

McCoy                 Expires August 2001                     6
         draft-mccoy-pppext-pppoephy-00.txt              February 2002


   100BASE-FX           2 optical fibers (62.5 um; 850 nm)
   100BASE-T2           2-pair Category 3/4/5 UTP
   1000BASE-SX          2 optical fibers (62.5/50 um; 850 nm)
   1000BASE-LX          2 optical fibers (62.5/50/10 um; 1300 nm)
   1000BASE-CX          2-pair STP
   1000BASE-T           4-pair Category 5 UTP
   10GBASE-SR           2 optical fibers (850 nm)
   10GBASE-LR           2 optical fibers (1310 nm)
   10GBASE-ER           2 optical fibers (1550 nm)
   10GBASE-LX4          2 optical fibers (1310 nm WWDM)
   10GBASE-SW           2 optical fibers (850 nm WIS)
   10GBASE-LW           2 optical fibers (1310 nm WIS)
   10GBASE-EW           2 optical fibers (1550 nm WIS)

   Note 10Mbps, 100Mbps, 1Gbps, and 10Gbps rates are defined, and there
   is also consideration of a further 40Gbps definition.  Note also,
   that in the "telco" sense, these do not constitute a digital
   hierarchy.  That is, 100Mbps Ethernet does not consist of ten 10Mbps
   Ethernet sub-channels, etc.

   Note that most of these definitions are for LAN use, but
   increasingly link lengths of up to 40km (even 70km) over single mode
   fibers (SMF) are now possible.  Also,the 10 um fiber is SMF by
   definition; others are multi-mode. As stated below, the WIS
   interface is explicitly defined for compatibility with common
   carrier "telco" SONET and SDH protocols.

   Note also that none of these full duplex serial line implementations
   make use of the Media Access Control protocol, even though they
   retain the MAC frame.  That is, in full duplex serial line mode,
   Ethernet no longer uses the Carrier Sense Multiple Access/Collision
   Detect algorithm, which is sometimes thought of as the "heart and
   soul" of Ethernet.

6.2 Ethernet Layer 1 Encapsulation


   For completeness a review of how the Ethernet frame is encapsulated
   on a layer 1 signal, as this implies how PPP will necessarily be
   encapsulated follows.

   Historically, the Ethernet Layer 1 signal power is literally "off"
   between adjacent MAC frames hence its "idleness code" is indicated
   by lack of any signal.  A consequence of this is that a receiver
   must necessarily resynchronize with the transmitter every time an
   Ethernet frame is sent over a physical link.

   Resynchronization is accomplished by pre-pending a "preamble/start-
   of-frame" field to each Ethernet frame, consisting of 64 bits
   101010...1011. This allows the receiver to synchronize to the bit
   stream and then with the actual beginning of an Ethernet frame.



McCoy                 Expires August 2001                     7
         draft-mccoy-pppext-pppoephy-00.txt              February 2002


   If link utilization is low and packets relatively large (as is
   typical in statistical multiplexing) this is a perfectly acceptable
   overhead, and works very well.

   Recently a new Ethernet encapsulation has been defined for 10GbE,
   termed the WAN Interface Sublayer officially, and sometimes SONET-
   Lite informally [16].  Here the usual Ethernet preamble technique is
   not employed, as SONET layer 1 framing is used, which is a byte
   synchronous constant bit rate technology.  That is, the OC-192c rate
   is essentially 10Gbps, and so a single concatenated Synchronous
   Payload Envelope is sufficient.  This allows WIS encapsulation to be
   backward compatible with the huge installed base of SONET ADM and
   DCS, constituting the worldwide WAN.

   An important point of WIS is that idleness octets are transmitted
   along with the particular flow of Ethernet frames.  Thus idleness is
   a particular encoding, that might also occur in an Ethernet frame.
   Consequently some sort of stuffing is needed within an Ethernet
   frame to permit it to be an arbitrary bit string.

6.3 Ethernet Physical Encodings


   Many physical layer encodings have been defined for the various
   Ethernet incarnations.  PPP over Ethernet Layer 1 will necessarily
   employ these, so they are enumerated here.

   10BASE-T and 10BASE-FL employed Manchester encoding, with 2
   baud/bit. Optical fiber interfaces use a EIA/TIA 568 connector.

   100BASE-xX employed 4B/5B encoding, meaning 1.25 baud/bit. 100BASE-
   T2 employed PAM 5x5 at 0.5 baud/bit. This also uses the EIA/TIA 568
   optical fiber connector.

   Current Gigabit Ethernet employs 8B/10B encoding, also meaning 1.25
   baud/bit, designed originally for Fibre Channel. The SC connector is
   used for the fiber optic interfaces.

   The proposed 10GBASE-x will use 64B/66B encoding, with the exception
   of 10GBASE-LX4, which will use 8B/10B encoding.

7.0  Defining a PPP over Layer 1 Ethernet Encapsulation

   This document now defines the logical implementation of PPP over
   Ethernet Layer 1.  Precisely this means submitting PPP frames to
   Ethernet`s Medium Independent Interface, in place of Ethernet MAC
   frames, thereby allowing PPP over all and each of the full duplex
   point-to-point Ethernet Layer 1 encapsulations.  Of course this
   requires some changes "beneath" the MII interface, such as finite
   state machines, etc.

   The actual physical implementation of the logical interface is
   beyond the scope of this document.

McCoy                 Expires August 2001                     8
         draft-mccoy-pppext-pppoephy-00.txt              February 2002



   All of the Ethernet "clauses" requiring change for the PPP over
   Ethernet Layer 1 encapsulation are enumerated below.  All clauses
   not enumerated above do not require modification for the proper
   encapsulation of PPP.

     Clauses 6 and 7, Physical Layer Signaling (PLS)

   This sublayer is a MUST, as it provides the 10Mpbs Manchester
   encoding/decoding to the AUI cable.  However, the Carrier Sense and
   Collision Detection capability MUST NOT be implemented.

     Clause 7 Attachment Unit Interface

   The cable capability MUST be implemented.

     Clause 35: Reconciliation Sublayer and MII/GMII/XGMII

   The state machine necessary for PPP MUST replace the MAC state
   machine.

        Clause 36, Physical Coding sublayer and Physical Media
   Attachment

   This sublayer (1000BASE-X) MUST be accomplished.

        Clause 37: Auto-Negotiation

   Auto-Negotiation, Clause 37, MUST NOT be accomplished. Thus there
   are no Ethernet parameters to set, such as "duplicity" and "flow
   control". PPP has its own negotiation capability, which MUST be
   retained.


        Clause 38, Physical Medium-Dependent

   These baseband medium types 1000BASE-LX and 1000BASE-SX (fiber) MUST
   be accomplished.

        Clause 39, Physical Medium-Dependent

   These medium sublayer and baseband medium type 1000BASE-CX (STP
   copper) MUST be accomplished.

        Clause 40, Physical Medium-Dependent

   This sublayer and baseband medium type 1000BASE-T (UTP copper) MUST
   be accomplished.

        Clause 41, Repeater for 1000Mbps Baseband Networks

   This capability MAY be accomplished.


McCoy                 Expires August 2001                     9
         draft-mccoy-pppext-pppoephy-00.txt              February 2002


        Clause 42, System considerations for multisegment 1000 Mbps
   Baseband Networks

   This capability MAY be accomplished.

        Clause 46, Reconciliation Sublayer (RS) and 10 Gigabit Media
   Independent Interface (XGMII).

   This provides interconnection between the MAC layer and the Physical
   Layer; a MUST except the serial input is from PPP.

        Clause 47, XGMII Extender Sublayer (XGXS) and 10 Gigabit
   Attachment Unit Interface (XAUI)

   This capability is optional in Ethernet and is a MAY for this
   protocol.

        Clause 48, Physical Coding Sublayer (PCS) and Physical Medium
   Attachment (PMA)

        This sublayer, for Ethernet type 10GBASE-X, is a MUST.


7. Security Considerations


   This document does not discuss the security implications of PPP over
   Layer 1 Ethernet.  It is assumed that PPP authentication and
   encryption/decryption schemes are adequate and applicable.  IPsec
   also applies as needed.

8. References

   1 Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP
   9, RFC 2026, October 1996

   2 Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   3 Carpenter, B, Editor, "Architectural Principles of the Internet",
   RFC 1958, June 1996

   4 Deering, Steve, "51st IETF Plenary Presentation," August 2001.

   5 ANSI T1X1.5/2001-024R4, "Synchronous Optical Network
      (SONET)Generic Framing Procedure (GFP)", June 2001

   6 Simpson, W., "The Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP)", RFC 1661, July
   1994

   7 Malis, A., et. al., "PPP over SONET/SDH", RFC 2615, June 1999



McCoy                 Expires August 2001                    10
         draft-mccoy-pppext-pppoephy-00.txt              February 2002



   8 Mamakos, L., et. al., "A Method for Transmitting PPP Over Ethernet
      (PPPoE)", RFC 2516, February 1999

   9 Herrera, A, et. al.,  "A Framework for IP over RPR",draft-ietf-
      ipor-pr-framework, February 2001

   10 Simpson, W., "PPP in Frame Relay," RFC 1973, June 1996.

   11 Gross, G., et. al., "PPP over AAL5," RFC 2364, July 1998

   12 IEEE 802.17 Resilent Packet Ring Working Group(not yet released)

   13 Kastenholz, F., "The Definitions of Managed Objects for the
      Bridge Network Control Protocol of the Point-to-Point Protocol,"
      RFC 1474, June 1993

   14 Sklower K., et. al., "The PPP Multilink Protocol (MP)," RFC 1717
      August 1996

   15 Pazhyannur R., et.al, "PPP Multiplexing," RFC 3153 August, 2001.

   16 IEEE Draft Standard 802.3z, Media Acess Control (MAC)
      Parameters,Physical, Repeater and Management Parameters for 1000
      Mb/s Operation(not approved at time of writing)

9. Acknowledgments

   The authors extend our appreciation to our Tellabs management for
   encouraging its employees to participate in standards body forms.

10. Author`s Addresses

         Earl McCoy
         Tellabs Operations, Inc.
         One Tellabs Center
         1415 Diehl Road
         Naperville, IL 60563
         Phone: +1 630-798-3673
         Email: Earl.McCoy@tellabs.com

         John Sauer
         Tellabs Operations, Inc.
         One Tellabs Center
         1415 Diehl Road
         Naperville, IL 60563
         Phone: +1 630-798-5581
         Email: John.Sauer@tellabs.com


Full Copyright Statement

         This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to

McCoy                 Expires August 2001                    11
                draft-mccoy-pppext-pppoephy-00.txt              February 2002



         others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
         or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
         and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
         kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
         are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
         document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
         the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
         Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
         developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
         copyrights defined in the Internet languages other than English.

         The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
         revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

         This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
         "AS IS" basis. THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
         TASK ORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
         BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
         HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
         MERCHANTABILITY OR ITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."

































      McCoy                  Expires August 2002              12

