

Internet Engineering Task Force                             Simon Tsang 
Internet Draft                                               Stan Moyer 
draft-tsang-appliances-discuss-00.txt                      Dave Marples 
February, 2001                              Telcordia Technologies, Inc 
Expires: August, 2001                                                   
                                                    Henning Schulzrinne 
                                                    Columbia University 
                                                                        
                                                     Arjun Roychowdhury 
                                                Hughes Software Systems 
    
    
         Internet Personal Appliances Control (IPAC) Discussion 
    
    
STATUS OF THIS MEMO 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  Comments should be 
   submitted to the appliances@research.telcordia.com mailing list. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as work in progress. 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
 
Abstract 
    
   This document introduces the concept of the Internet Personal 
   Appliance (IPA) and the relationships between it and control entities 
   in the Internet for command and control, and communication purposes. 
    
   Within this document a number of issues to be addressed in the area 
   of IPAs are outlined. This document is not intended to be an 
   exhaustive treatment of all of these issues, but merely to introduce 
   them for discussion in the widest possible context of using Internet 
   protocols to communicate with small computation and I/O devices. 
    
   Comments on this document should be directed to the appliances 
   mailing list:  appliances@research.telcordia.com. 
    
 
S. Tsang et al                                                [Page 1] 
 

 
Internet Draft             IPAC Discussion              February 2001 
 
    
1. IPAC Overview 
 
1.1. What Are Internet Personal Appliances (IPAs)? 
 
   The definition of an IPA is difficult in that the exact limitations 
   of applicability of the term are poorly defined. The authors consider 
   simple, dedicated purpose, limited configuration, devices such as 
   washing machines, refrigerators, lamps, and televisions as IPAs. 
   Other devices such as personal computers (PCs), workstations, and 
   personal digital assistants (PDAs) have much more general 
   applicability and higher levels of configurability and are normally 
   considered as computational devices. These would not meet the 
   definition of an IPA. Devices such as Digital Cameras and MP3 players 
   are in the Êgrey space∆ between an IPA and general purpose device. Of 
   course, there is no reason why general computation devices cannot use 
   the capabilities that are defined for IPAs, but it is important to 
   design for the IPA target.  
    
   We consider that Internet Personal Appliances (IPAs) are networked 
   devices which have the following characteristics:  
    
   1) Dedicated functionality with limited configurability and optimized 
   user interface - an Internet connected Calculator might be considered 
   an IPA, a Palm Pilot running a calculator application would not. 
    
   2) The ability to interact with the physical environment through 
   sensors and actuators; thus, a Network Attached Storage (NAS) device 
   would not be considered an IPA. 
    
   3) Limited (or restricted) general purpose computational power, 
   though the devices may possess high-computation power for specific 
   tasks such as image processing, or audio processing as in the case of 
   an MP3 player. 
    
   In general, IPAs will be devices with sensors and/or actuators with 
   limited computational power, but they will always have some form of 
   permanent or temporary network connectivity.  IPAs may be portable 
   and may provide service in multiple locations.  Some may be mobile 
   and may provide service while stationary or in transit.  Note that 
   these portability and mobility issues may introduce new constraints 
   or novel operational modes for specific IPAs - a typical example 
   might be a MP3 player capable of relaying an Internet Radio Station 
   while stationary and network connected, but only being able to play 
   cached content when mobile without any network connection.  
    
   Note that IPAs are also known as networked appliances, Internet 
   appliances, IP appliances, and networked devices. In the following, 
   we will only discuss the computational and network capabilities of 
   IPAs and ignore their interaction with the physical environment. 
    

 
S. Tsang et al                                                [Page 2] 
 

 
Internet Draft             IPAC Discussion              February 2001 
 
1.2. Where Is the Intelligence? 
    
   The capabilities of IPAs span a wide range, from Êfat∆ IPAs, which 
   contain sufficient processing power and memory to operate stand-alone 
   (and perhaps only require network connectivity to collect new content 
   or to enhance their own functionality), to Êthin∆ IPAs which can only 
   operate with the aid of another network-attached host. We will 
   consider the extremes of this range in order to illustrate the kinds 
   of IPA support that may be required. 
    
   A fat IPA comprises a network interface, computational capabilities, 
   embedded software, and I/O.  The network interface is required for 
   communication with the Internet.  The software allows the IPA to 
   operate autonomously, providing a degree of independence from other 
   devices, the network, and the Êintelligence∆ for the device. It may 
   provide its own local or networked user interface, such as a web 
   server. 
    
   Furthermore, the embedded software allows the IPA to interact with 
   other IPAs or applications through the network interface.  I/O 
   enables the IPA to interact with its environment through actuators 
   and sensors.  This is illustrated in Figure 1. 
    
        IPA = [network interface][application control][I/O control] 
                                      

                      Figure 1:  Anatomy of a fat IPA 

    
   Figure 2 shows the modes of operation for this autonomous IPA. It can 
   communicate as a peer with applications and with other IPAs.  This 
   may be likened to application/application interaction and 
   collaboration. 
    
                                (peer-to-peer) 
                          Application <-----> IPA 
    
    
                               (peer-to-peer) 
                              IPA <-----> IPA 
                                      

                Figure 2:  Modes of operation for a fat IPA 

    
   A thin IPA (see Figure 3) comprises the same elements as its fat 
   counterpart but the application is reduced to the absolute minimum 
   necessary to marshal its I/O capabilities and to allow it to connect 
   to real application functionality provided outside of it. 
    
                Thin IPA = [network interface][I/O control] 
    

                     Figure 3:  Anatomy of a thin IPA 

 


 
S. Tsang et al                                                [Page 3] 
 

 
Internet Draft             IPAC Discussion              February 2001 
 
   Figure 4 shows the modes of operation for the thin IPA.  Since it 
   does not offer application level functionality, all intelligence is 
   provided outside of the IPA, normally by a proxy function.  The IPA 
   executes the commands requested by the proxy. 
 
                              (client-server) 
                    Proxy Application ----->  Thin IPA 
    
                   (peer-to-peer)          (client-server) 
           Application ----->  Proxy Application ----> Dumb IPA 
                                      

                Figure 4:  Modes of operation for thin IPA. 

    
    
1.3. How Do We Want to Interact with IPAs? 
 
   We (people, applications, and other IPAs) will need to interact with 
   IPAs in many ways. The main reason for interacting with an IPA is to 
   request a service that the IPA provides. This service could be: 
    
   - the type of function for which the IPA was primarily designed, 
   e.g., Êtoast the bread∆, Êmake the coffee∆, Êturn on the light∆, Êset 
   the temperature∆, Êtalk with the desired user∆ etc. 
    
   - reporting the status or state of the IPA, e.g., Êwhat's the 
   temperature?∆, Êis the light on?∆, Êare there any intruders?∆, etc. 
    
   - a function for which the device was not primarily designed, but 
   capable of anyway, e.g., using a stereo system for a network-based 
   alarm clock, displaying a text message/page on a microwave display. 
    
   These types of interactions are at the application layer. To request 
   an IPA service, we don't need to know the IP address (or DNS name) of 
   the IPA, but rather the service name. Note that the service name may 
   include a DNS name as part of the name. This is analogous to a web 
   page URL. 
    
   As discussed in the previous sections, people may interact directly 
   with an IPA, for example, through an application on a PC. 
   Interactions with IPAs may be automated by host-based applications 
   that reside either in the network or at the edge of the network. 
   These host-based applications could be services offered to IPA 
   owners. In addition, IPAs may interact with each other. For example, 
   the alarm clock could turn on the coffee maker or a rain sensor turn 
   off the lawn sprinkler system. Since not all interactions will be 
   with human operators, the ability to interact with IPAs in a 
   Êmachine-friendly∆ manner is necessary. Thus, simply providing a web 
   page interface to IPAs is not likely to be sufficient. 
    
   The type of communication used when interacting with IPAs will differ 
   depending on the type of service/application. Some examples are: 

 
S. Tsang et al                                                [Page 4] 
 

 
Internet Draft             IPAC Discussion              February 2001 
 
    
   - Control of an IPA, e.g., Êturn off the light(s)∆.  This type of 
   interaction implies a simple control message sequence - send a 
   command and get a response back. 
    
   - Queries to an IPA, e.g., Êis there milk in the refrigerator∆ or 
   Êwhat's the temperature?∆  This type of interaction also implies a 
   simple message sequence - send a query receive a reply. 
    
   - Notification of an event occurring at an IPA, e.g., Ênotify me when 
   the security alarm goes off∆ or Ênotify me when someone rings the 
   doorbell∆.  This type of interaction will probably require an event-
   based communication mechanism. 
    
   - Media streaming (or sessions), e.g, Êview the front door camera∆ or 
   Êtalk with Bob (on the phone)∆.  Supporting media streaming will most 
   likely require some sort of mechanism for establishing sessions 
   (e.g., negotiating participants, transport parameters, media types, 
   etc.). 
    
   Protocols that support these different types of communication 
   paradigms will need to be implemented in IPAs and/or IPA controllers 
   and interworking units. 
 
 
1.4. Where Will IPAs Be Found? 
    
   At a minimum, IPAs require access to the Internet in order to operate 
   and can be located wherever network connectivity is available. In 
   particular, home networking [2-4,6] and the increasing interest in 
   providing internet access in automobiles makes it likely that homes 
   and automobiles are likely locations for IPAs. In addition, IPAs may 
   visit networks other than their own. We describe each environment in 
   turn. 
    
    
1.4.1 The Home Environment (HE) 
 
   Many IPAs will be household items (such as refrigerators, 
   televisions, AC units, or lamps) and will thus reside within a home 
   environment (HE).  The HE is essentially a private LAN with network 
   layer access to the Internet through a device such as a Residential 
   Gateway (RGW).  The RGW may include firewall and/or network address 
   translator (NAT) functionality, effectively partitioning the HE from 
   the rest of the Internet. NAT and firewalls aim to achieve security, 
   privacy and IP address conservation.  IPAs will use IP at the network 
   layer for packet communication within the HE.   
    
   There will be many appliances that are based on existing home 
   networking technologies [2-4,6]. These devices will frequently not be 
   IP capable [6] and will require an Interworking Unit (IWU) to provide 
   network layer interworking (IP). This is illustrated in Figure 5.  
 
S. Tsang et al                                                [Page 5] 
 

 
Internet Draft             IPAC Discussion              February 2001 
 
   The IWU may also be an appropriate point to provide transport and 
   application layer interworking and proxying.  
    
                 (Home Environment) || (non-IP home network) 
    
              IPA <--------------> IWU <--> non-IP home network 
    

            Figure 5:  Home Environment with non-IP appliances 

    
    
1.4.2 Automobile Environment (AE) 
    
   Many IPAs will be used within an automobile environment (AE).  
   Although the AE may be very different from the HE, it is assumed that 
   at the network layer and above there will be no fundamental 
   differences.  The authors therefore consider that in the automobile 
   environment, the communication between IPAs and applications will be 
   the same as in the HE, but with additional limitations introduced by 
   connectivity issues; for example, the car might go through a tunnel 
   and thus suddenly or temporarily lose network connectivity. 
    
    
1.4.3 Visited Domains 
    
   Given that IPAs are personal devices and many will be portable, it is 
   likely that users will wish to take them wherever they go.  For 
   example, consider an Internet alarm clock which checks a user∆s 
   Internet-based calendar and preferences.  It would be convenient for 
   the Internet alarm clock user to keep their IPA with them so that 
   they will continue to be reminded of meetings, social events, and 
   woken up at appropriate times.  The visited domain may be another HE 
   or automobile environment, for example. 
    
   This opens the possibility that an IPA may be deployed into a domain 
   which is owned or administered by another party.  The problems of 
   access to a device installed into such a network needs to be 
   investigated, especially with respect to the requirements that such a 
   device may impose upon the network in which it is installed (for 
   example, it may require more expensive QoS capabilities than the 
   network would by default provide). 
    
    
2. General Issues 
    
2.1. Who Owns the IPA? 
    
   The ownership relationship between IPAs in the home domain is 
   unclear. The simplest solution is for the responsible authority for 
   the domain to have administrative control for it and to control all 
   of the devices within it, but this will potentially require a 
   significant level of administration. 

 
S. Tsang et al                                                [Page 6] 
 

 
Internet Draft             IPAC Discussion              February 2001 
 
    
   Several questions in this area remain open: 
    
   1) Subcontract and rental arrangements ˚ how can transitory 
      ownership relationships be modeled and accommodated? 
   2) Access to owned devices in a non-owned domain. 
   3) Impact of non-owned devices on the operation of the owned 
      environment in which it operates. 
   4) Responsibility for maintenance of non-owned IPAs in an owned 
      network. 
    
2.2. Information Privacy Issues 
    
   All communication between IPAs should be secure so that no 
   unauthorized parties can eavesdrop on the messages to glean any 
   information about the (type of) IPAs and what is being done with 
   them. The implication of this requirement is that not only does the 
   payload (i.e., requested actions/queries) of the communications need 
   to be protected, but also the name(s) of the IPAs may need to somehow 
   be obfuscated. 
    
   Further, the release of information contained on an IPA is subject to 
   preferences that the owner of the IPA selects. Techniques need to be 
   developed to describe the privacy and security restrictions that the 
   user wishes to place upon this data. 
    
    
3. IPA Issues 
    
3.1. Connectivity Issues 
    
3.1.1 Network Connectivity 
    
   Appliances could be connected to the Internet through network level 
   services (IPv4 or IPv6) or through some application controller (or 
   interworking unit) that resides in the same premises. Each of these 
   solutions brings its own problems: 
    
   - IPv4: Typically with IPv4, there will not be enough addresses for 
   every IPA. IPAs will thus need to go through a network address 
   translator (NAT) and the NAT will have to configured for incoming 
   requests. 

   - IPv6: With IPv6, there will be enough addresses, but not enough 
   networks (yet).  As this situation changes, IPAs will need to go 
   through an IPv6 IWU if not IPv6 native. 
    
   - Application relay: This approach is typically not transparent, and 
   encourages stove-piping. 
    
   Network connectivity problems can be solved by finding a way to 
   resolve limitations, such as techniques for providing a large number 
 
S. Tsang et al                                                [Page 7] 
 

 
Internet Draft             IPAC Discussion              February 2001 
 
   of IPv4 addresses, or applying techniques for actually deploying 
   IPv6.  Alternatively, it may be more suitable to simply cope with the 
   limitations through techniques such as designing applications that 
   only use the outgoing TCP connections that NAT and firewalls support. 
    
3.1.2 Issues With Thin and Fat IPAs 
    
   IPAs differ significantly in their requirements for network 
   availability and QoS. 
    
   It is often asserted that, because they are less programmable, it is 
   easier for external parties (other than the owner) to trust thin 
   clients. Yet, the AT&T DOSA architecture makes the argument that, 
   since the client is in the user premises (e.g. a residential gateway 
   for DOSA), then that client cannot be trusted, no matter how limited 
   its programmability is. 
    
3.1.3 Intermittent Access 
    
   Some devices may only be able to communicate intermittently, e.g., 
   because their batteries are dead. In the automobile environment (AE), 
   devices that may be continuously reachable at home, may suddenly show 
   intermittent reachability due to power being turned off or network 
   connectivity being interrupted. 
    
    
3.2. Security Issues 
    
3.2.1 Trust Zones and Domains of Control 
    
   What trust will the user place on the appliance and appliance 
   provider when the provider/seller retains some access to the 
   appliance while it is in the user∆s domain?  For instance, the 
   washing machine seller might be able to access the washing machine to 
   detect when it breaks, or the insurance company might want to access 
   the smoke detectors. Does the person trust that these devices don't 
   also contain microphones to record what happens in the house? Or, 
   more likely, that the washing machine doesn't report back incoming 
   hot water temperature so that the seller can offer a larger water 
   heater based on having seen not-so-hot water in the past? 
    
   Will all personal appliances within one domain (e.g., behind one RGW) 
   trust each other? How does that relate to different entities having 
   different levels of access and control of different devices? (Do I 
   really want the company I lease the washing machine from be able to 
   tell what movies I'm watching or what is in my refrigerator?) 
    
   All of these examples motivate the need to authenticate and authorize 
   each message to an IPA. IPAs may have different levels of trust and 
   belong to different domains of control. Therefore, the originator of 
   each communication with an IPA must be determined and the requested 

 
S. Tsang et al                                                [Page 8] 
 

 
Internet Draft             IPAC Discussion              February 2001 
 
   action checked to verify that the requestor has permission to perform 
   that action. 
    
3.2.2 Authentication of IPAs 
    
   In some cases, devices may need to be authenticated, particularly for 
   sensors. For example, spoofing the output of alarm sensors may allow 
   intruders to foil a home alarm monitoring system. 
    
3.2.3 Privacy 
    
   Messages sent to and from IPAs may reveal intimate details about a 
   person∆s actions and behaviors. Thus, they need to be protected from 
   interception by third parties. In some cases, even the act of 
   communicating with a particular home or device may reveal information 
   that a user considers private. 
    
    
3.3. Operational Issues 
    
3.3.1 Configuration and Provisioning 
    
   The issues of provisioning appliances in a multiple-appliance 
   environment may be considerable. A device needs to be associated with 
   its owner or user. In addition, the limited human interface 
   capabilities of the device may mean that an additional entity needs 
   to be used to configure or control it. For example, an alarm clock 
   may be configured through a web interface rather than scrolling 
   through time settings. 
    
3.3.2 Billing 
    
   In some deployment scenarios, systems may need to be developed to 
   allow users to be billed for services. However, this is not likely to 
   be a subject for IETF standardization or concern, beyond providing 
   suitable AAA mechanism. 
    
3.3.3 Faults and Remote Diagnosis 
    
   Fault diagnosis, fault control and resolution need to be 
   investigated. Since IPAs interact with each other, an IPA may appear 
   to behave incorrectly, even though the fault lies with another IPA. 
   Thus, it must be possible to diagnose individual IPAs as well as 
   observe their interaction. 
    
3.3.4 Distributed Agreements 
    
   Servers will provide reliable repositories for data. This data 
   includes user profile, service data, bank balances, etc. Fat IPAs may 
   cache data. Consider (for example) a PC phone (IP phone) user whose 
   cache resides on the phone, and (s)he migrates the call to a cell 
   phone, perhaps wanting to walk out of the office while continuing the 
 
S. Tsang et al                                                [Page 9] 
 

 
Internet Draft             IPAC Discussion              February 2001 
 
   call.  In this case either the cache has to migrate (based on the 
   capability of the new device) or user queries have to go to another 
   server/cache.  
    
   A management system for synchronization and migration of data will be 
   needed in this circumstance.  Synchronization is needed for cache 
   validation/invalidation. Devices disconnected from the network will 
   contain newer versions of the data. For instance, updating data while 
   on an airplane or updating data locally due to intermittent or slow 
   connection. User data could be updated in the server when the user is 
   disconnected. Upon re-connect the network/server, all data should be 
   made consistent.  
    
   Distributed database techniques such as two-phase commits are not 
   suitable for distributed agreement in a disconnected network. Two-
   phase commit is extremely slow and conservative especially in cases 
   on disconnected systems. What is needed is application and service 
   specific agreement for a network of intermittently connected 
   'databases'. 
    
3.3.5 Restricted I/O 
    
   A management system has to handle unreliable, slow messaging as well 
   as limited capabilities to provide an acceptable service environment. 
   For example, the presentation layer may present a different view 
   based on device capability and connectivity.  
    
3.3.6 Multiplicity 
    
   The number of IPAs may well exceed the current number of 
   Êtraditional∆ networked devices such as hosts and routers. It remains 
   to be investigated how well traditional network management approaches 
   scale to such environments, in particular where these devices are not 
   externally reachable and may change network addresses. 
    
3.3.7 Initial Deployment 
 
   Can we deploy appliances? In order to connect appliances to the 
   network, we need to invest in a connection device, such as a 
   residential gateway or a set-top box whose price may well exceed the 
   price of the appliance itself. There are a few options for reducing 
   the initial investment for the end user: 
    
   1) Provide an inexpensive direct connection to an existing network. 
   This is the approach in the e-book (modem) and in the Palm VII 
   (wireless). 
    
   2) Reuse an existing computing device as a hub, such as the home PC. 
   This is the approach chosen by RIO, and by Palm IIIs and Vs.  
    
   4) Get someone, such as a network provider, to fund the platform 
   deployment. This approach is common in the CATV industry. 
 
S. Tsang et al                                               [Page 10] 
 

 
Internet Draft             IPAC Discussion              February 2001 
 
    
3.3.8 Decomposition of IPAs 
 
   An IPA is generally composed of an I/O component, of a logic 
   component and of a storage component.  There are three broad ways to 
   deploy services between an appliance and network-based servers: 
    
   - Everything in same place: autonomy, high security.  
    
   - Storage in the network: data sharing. In some circumstance, 
   performance, reliability.  
    
   - Application in the network: reduced network bandwidth if lots of 
   data transactions. New services can be deployed from within the 
   network. Less power in I/O device, improves portability, reduces 
   price. 
    
    
4. IPAC Problem Statement 
    
   Given the issues highlighted in the previous sections, it is clear 
   that there is a need within the IETF to understand the issues 
   surrounding IPA application control, and to define a framework for 
   IPA service-layer communication which takes these issues into 
   consideration.  This work should also identify or define protocols 
   which will enable control of service layer communication with IPAs 
   from the Internet.  In particular, the following issues need to be 
   resolved: 
    
   - Service layer naming and addressing for IPAs. 
   - IPA service and application discovery and registration mechanisms. 
   - Application security for IPAs. 
   - Service/Application layer protocols for IPA communications. 
    
    
5. Relation to IETF Working Groups and Other Organizations 
    
   IETF ZeroConf Working Group 
   As stated in section 1.3, we are concerned with interactions with 
   IPAs at the services layer. To enable services layer communication, 
   network layer communication must first be established. Therefore, for 
   the purpose of this document, we assume that all IP-layer networking 
   (e.g., address assignment, DNS configuration, etc.) has been 
   configured. This could be done either manually or automatically, 
   using existing tools such as DHCP or server-less mechanisms as are 
   being discussed in the ZeroConf WG). 
    
   OSGi 
   The Open Services Gateway initiative seeks to define the Application 
   Programming Interfaces (APIs) of a service execution platform that 
   interfaces the many wide area networking protocol standards with the 
   different in-home networking protocols. As such, an OSGi gateway 
 
S. Tsang et al                                               [Page 11] 
 

 
Internet Draft             IPAC Discussion              February 2001 
 
   becomes an integral component in IPA communication but does not 
   provide any functionality to enable this communication. Functionality 
   could be deployed on an OSGi gateway that facilitates this 
   communication and in fact that is the charter of a new Interest Group 
   with OSGi on Êdevice excitation.∆ This is a newly formed group and 
   nothing has been agreed upon yet. However, even if a mechanism is 
   created to enable communication with IPAs behind an OSGi gateway, the 
   solution will be OSGi gateway-based and require the existence of a 
   gateway. This is a restriction for the general case deployment of 
   IPAs. 
    
   UPnP 
   The Universal Plug and Play (UPnP) forum provides a framework and a 
   set of open interfaces for controlling appliances within the home.  
   UPnP proposes a set of application and session layer protocols built 
   over TCP/IP.  These protocols provide device discovery and control.  
   UPnP uses HTTP for transporting its control messages. 
    
   Salutation 
   Salutation enables the broadcast and discovery of services provided 
   by IPAs, but it does not provide for command and control type 
   communication with IPAs. The service information provided by 
   Salutation protocols is necessary and useful for IPA services and 
   applications, but is only solving part of the puzzle. 
    
    
6. Some Service Examples 
    
   Finally, this section provides some brief (high-level) service 
   examples which illustrate how the capability for controlling IPAs 
   over the internet may be used. 
    
6.1. Power Management 
    
   With the increasing demand for power consumption (particularly in 
   North America), and dwindling natural resources, there is a clear 
   need for intelligent power management.  This may take two forms (or a 
   combination of the two): (1) centralized power management, by the 
   utility company for example, and (2) in-home power management by the 
   appliances themselves. 
    
   1)  Centralized power management 
    
   The utility company is aware of two key facets of information:  the 
   available power for a particular area or region, and the power 
   demands placed by consumers∆ homes and appliances.  Based on this 
   information, the utility company could turn on or off appliances 
   within consumer∆s homes to reduce the demand.  Of course, this 
   capability must be exercised as part of a service level contract with 
   the consumer.  The consumer may register high and low priority 
   appliances to control what stays on during peak demand periods.  
   Fundamentally, this service example requires that the utility company 
 
S. Tsang et al                                               [Page 12] 
 

 
Internet Draft             IPAC Discussion              February 2001 
 
   can query and control the status of appliances within the home 
   securely from the internet. 
    
   2)  In-home power management 
    
   Another approach is to have the appliances intelligently control 
   their power consumption.  For example, numerous sensors within the 
   home could be used to detect the presence of people and pets.  If 
   there is no presence detected, the sensors will send commands to the 
   appliances within their vicinity to switch to stand-by mode.  Once a 
   presence is detected, the sensors will command the same appliances to 
   revert to Êon∆ mode.  Users may choose to have such a service 
   provided and managed remotely by a third party provider.   In this 
   case, the ability to query and control appliances within the home 
   securely from the internet is required. 
    
    
6.2. Security Management 
    
   Home security is another important issue in people's lives today, 
   particularly as we spend so much time either traveling or working at 
   other locations.  Therefore, it may be useful to maintain a Êvirtual∆ 
   presence within the home, and be able to monitor who approaches or 
   enters the home. 
    
   This could be achieved by placing sensors (e.g. motion or heat) 
   around the home to detect approaching visitors, and strategically 
   mounting cameras with streaming media capabilities.  Whenever someone 
   approaches or enters the home, the sensors will alert the user 
   wherever they may be.  The alert will be sent securely over the 
   internet and will be rendered according to the user∆s preferences and 
   devices at hand.  The alert may take the form of a message on a PC, a 
   PDA pop-up, a telephone ring, lights flashing on and off, etc.  Once 
   alerted, the user may choose to set up a streaming video session to 
   one or all of the cameras in their home to assess the threat, and 
   choose an appropriate course of action. 
    
   Again, this service may be provided and managed by a third party 
   provider.  In all cases, the ability to query and control appliances 
   within the home, and set up media sessions is required.  Furthermore 
   it must be possible to do this securely from the internet. 
    
    
7. Acknowledgements 
    
   The authors wish to gratefully acknowledge the ideas, comments and 
   suggestions provided by Erik Nordmark and Thomas Narten during the 
   writing of this document. 
    
    
8. References 
    
 
S. Tsang et al                                               [Page 13] 
 

 
Internet Draft             IPAC Discussion              February 2001 
 
   [1] OSGi, http://www.osgi.org 
   [2] HAVi, http://www.havi.org 
   [3] ÊVHN Home Network,∆ EIA 851, Version 1, to be released 4Q00, See 
   http://www.vesa.org for further information. 
   [4] UPnP, http://www.upnp.org 
   [5] Jini, http://www.jini.org 
   [6] X.10, http://www.x10.org 
   [7] Bluetooth, http://www.bluetooth.com 
   [8] Salutation, http://www.salutation.org 
    
    
9. Acronyms 
 
     802.11        Wireless LAN networking technology. 
     Bluetooth     Wireless technology for networked devices. 
     Domain        An administrative IP domain. 
     HAVi          Home Audio Video Interoperability:  A consortium of 
                   audio-visual electronics manufacturers who have 
                   developed a common, openly-licensable specification 
                   for networking digital home entertainment products. 
                    
     HE            Home Environment 
     IPA           Internet Personal Appliance (see NA) 
     Jini          Java based device connectivity and discovery 
                   framework. 
     NA            Networked Appliance:  A dedicated function consumer 
                   devices containing at least one networked processor. 
     NAS           Network Attached Storage. 
     NAT           Network Address Translator. 
     OSGi          Open Services Gateway initiative:  An industry group 
                   working to define and promote an open standard for 
                   connecting smart consumer and small business 
                   appliances with commercial internet services. 
     PDA           Personal Digital Assistant 
     RGW           Residential Gateway:  Point of networking and 
                   control access to/from a home environment.  The RGW 
                   may contain additional functions, such as firewalls 
                   and NATs. 
     Salutation    An open service discovery and session management 
                   protocol developed by the Salutation Consortium. 
     UPnP          Universal Plug and Play:  An open architecture for 
                   connectivity of PCs of all form factors, intelligent 
                   appliances, and wireless devices. 
     VHN           Video Electronics Standards Association (VESA) Home 
                   Networking:  Networking and control for video 
                   appliances developed by the VESA consortium. 
     X.10          Early power line based home networking technology. 
    
    
10.  Author's Contacts 
    
   Simon Tsang 
 
S. Tsang et al                                               [Page 14] 
 

 
Internet Draft             IPAC Discussion              February 2001 
 
   Telcordia Technologies 
   445 South Street 
   MCC 1A 264R 
   Morristown, NJ 07960, USA. 
   e-mail:  stsang@research.telcordia.com 
    
   Stan Moyer 
   Telcordia Technologies 
   445 South Street 
   MCC 1A-238R 
   Morristown, NJ 07960, USA. 
   e-mail: stanm@research.telcordia.com 
    
   Dave Marples 
   Telcordia Technologies 
   445 South Street 
   MCC 1J-226B 
   Morristown, NJ 07960, USA. 
   e-mail: dmarples@research.telcordia.com 
    
   Henning Schulzrinne 
   Department of Computer Science 
   Columbia University 
   M/S 0401 
   1214 Amsterdam Avenue 
   New York, NY 10027-7003, USA. 
   e-mail: hgs@cs.columbia.edu 
    
   Arjun Roychowdhury 
   Hughes Software Systems 
   Prestige Opal 
   146 Infantry Road 
   Bangalore 560001, India. 
   e-mail: archow@hss.hns.com 
     
    
















 
S. Tsang et al                                               [Page 15] 
 
