Internet-Draft                                               Intel Corp.
draft-ietf-run-spew-01.txt                                  Albert Lunde
Expires September, 1997                          Northwestern University


                               DON'T SPEW
                A Set of Guidelines for Mass Unsolicited
                     Mailings and Postings (Spam*)


Abstract

   This document provides explains why mass unsolicited electronic mail
   messages are not useful in the Internetworking community.  It gives a
   set of guidelines for dealing with unsolicited mail for users, for
   system administrators, news administrators, and mailing list
   managers.  It also makes suggestions Internet Service Providers might
   follow.


Status of This Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts. Comments on this draft should
   be sent to ietf-run@mailbag.intel.com.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
   Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
   munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or
   ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).


1. Introduction

   The Internet's origins in the Research and Education communities
   played an important role in the foundation and formation of Internet
   culture.  This culture defined rules for network etiquette
   (netiquette) and communication based on the Internet's being
   relatively off-limits to commercial enterprise.



Hambridge, Lunde            Expires: 15Jan98                    [Page 1]

Internet Draft                 Don't Spew                      July 1997


   As we know, this all changed when US Government was no longer the
   primary funding body for the US Internet, when the Internet truly
   went global, and when all commercial enterprises were allowed to
   obtain Fully Qualified Domain Names.  Internet culture had become
   deeply embedded in the protocols the network used.  Although the
   social context has changed, the technical limits of the Internet
   protocols still require a person to enforce certain limits on
   resource usage for the 'Net to function effectively.  Strong
   authentication was not built into the News and Mail protocols.  There
   was no end-to-end cost accounting and/or cost recovery.  Bandwidth is
   shared among all traffic without resource reservation (although this
   is changing).

   Unfortunately for all of us, the culture so carefully nurtured
   through the early years of the Internet was not fully transferred to
   all those new entities hooking into the bandwidth.  Many of those
   entities believe they have found a paradise of thousands of potential
   customers each of whom is desparate to learn about stunning new
   business opportunities.  Alternatively, some of the new netizens
   believe all people should at least hear about the one true religion
   or political party or process.

   While there may be thousands of folks desparate for any potential
   message, mass mailings or Netnews postings are not at all appropriate
   on the 'Net.  This document explains why mass unsolicited email and
   Netnews posting (aka spam*) is bad, what to do if you get it, what
   webmasters, postmasters, and news admins can do about it, and how an
   Internet Service Provider might respond to it.


2. What Is Spam?

   The term "spam," as it is used to denote mass unsolicited mailings or
   netnews postings, derives from a Monty Python sketch set in a
   movie/TV studio cafeteria.  During that sketch, the word "spam" takes
   over each item offered on the menu until the entire dialogue consists
   of nothing but "spam spam spam spam spam spam and spam".  This so
   closely resembles what happens when mass unsolicited mail and posts
   take over mailing lists and netnews groups that the term has been
   pushed into common usage in the Internet community.

   When unsolicited mail is sent to a mailing list and/or news group it
   frequently generates more hate mail to the list or group by people
   who do not realize the source of the mail.  If the mailing contains
   suggestions for removing your name from a mailing list, 10s to 100s
   of people will respond to the list with "remove" messages meant for
   the originator. So, the original message (spam) creates more unwanted
   mail (spam spam spam spam), which generates more unwanted mail (spam



Hambridge, Lunde            Expires: 15Jan98                    [Page 2]

Internet Draft                 Don't Spew                      July 1997


   spam spam spam spam spam and spam.)  Similar occurances are
   perpetuated in newsgroups, but this is held somewhat in check by
   "cancelbots" (programs which cancel postings) triggered by mass
   posting.


3. Why Mass Mailing Is Bad

   In the world of paper mail we're all used to receiving unsolicited
   circulars, advertisements, and catalogs.  Generally we don't object
   to this - we look at what we find of interest, and we discard/recycle
   the rest.  Why should receiving unsolicited email be any different?

   The answer is that the cost model is different.  In the paper world,
   the cost of mailing is borne by the sender.  The sender must pay for
   the privilege of creating the ad and the cost of mailing it to the
   recipient.  In the world of electronic communications, the recipient
   bears the majority of the cost.  Yes, the sender still has to compose
   the message and the sender also has to pay for Internet connectivity.
   However, the receipient ALSO has to pay for Internet connectivity and
   possibly also connect time charges, so for electronic mailings the
   recipient is expected to help share the cost of the mailing.

   Of course, this cost model is very popular with those looking for
   cheap methods to get their message out.  By the same token, it's very
   unpopular with people who have to pay for their messages just to find
   that their mailbox is full of junk mail.  Consider this: if you had
   to pay for receiving paper mail would you pay for junk mail?

   Frequently spammers indulge in unethical behavior such as using mail
   servers which allow mail to be relayed to send huge amounts of
   electronic solicitations.  Or they forge their headers to make it
   look as if the mail orginates from a different domain.  These kinds
   of people don't care that they're intruding into a personal or
   business mailbox nor do they care that they are using other people's
   resources without compensating them.

   But what about free speech?  Doesn't the US Constitution guarantee
   the ability to say whatever one likes?  First, the U.S. Constitution
   is law only in the U.S., and the Internet is global.  There are
   places your mail will reach where free speech is not a given.
   Second, the U.S.  Constitution does NOT guarantee one the right to
   say whatever one likes.  The example of yelling "FIRE" in a crowded
   theater comes to mind.  In general, the U.S. Constitution refers to
   political freedom of speech and not to commercial freedom of speech.
   Finally, there are laws which govern other areas of electronic
   communication, namely the "junk fax" laws.  Although these have yet
   to be applied to electronic mail they are still an example of the



Hambridge, Lunde            Expires: 15Jan98                    [Page 3]

Internet Draft                 Don't Spew                      July 1997


   "curbing" of "free speech."  Free speech does not, in general,
   require other people to spend their money and resources to deliver
   your message.

   The crux of sending large amounts of unsolicited mail and news is not
   a legal issue so much as an ethical one.  If you are tempted to send
   unsolicited "information" ask yourself these questions: "Whose
   resources is this using?"  "Did they consent in advance?"  "What
   would happen if everybody (or a very large number of people) did
   this?"  "How would I feel if 90% of the mail I received was
   advertisements for stuff I didn't want?"  "How would I feel if 95% of
   the mail I received was advertisements for stuff I didn't want?"
   "How would I feel if 99% of the mail I received was advertisements
   for stuff I didn't want?"

   Although hard numbers on the volume and rate of increase of spam are
   not easy to find, seat-of-the-pants estimates from the people on the
   spam mailing list [1] indicate that unsolicited mail/posts seems to
   be following the same path of exponential growth as the Internet as a
   whole [2].  This is NOT encouraging, as this kind of increase puts a
   strain on servers, connections, routers, and the bandwidth of the
   Internet as a whole.

   Finally, sending large volumes of unsolicited email or posting
   voluminous numbers of Netnews postings is just plain rude.  Consider
   the following analogy: suppose you discovered a large party going on
   in a house on your block.  Uninvited, you appear, then join each
   group in conversation, force your way in, SHOUT YOUR OPINION of
   whatever you happen to be thinking about at the time, drown out all
   other conversaion, then scream "discrimination" when folks tell you
   you're being rude.           To continue the party analogy, if
   instead of forcing your way into each group you stood on the
   outskirts a while and listened to the conversation.  Then you
   gradually began to add comments relevant to the discussion.  Then you
   began to tell people your opinion of the issues they were discussng,
   they would probably be less inclined to look badly on your intrusion.
   Note that you are still intruding.  And that it would still be
   considered rude to offer to sell products or services to the guests
   even if the products and services were relevant to the discussion.
   You are in the wrong venue and you need to find the right one.

   Lots of spammers believe that they can be forgiven their behavior by
   beginning their messages with an apology, or by personalizing their
   messages with the recipient's real name, or by using a number of
   ingratiating techniques.  But, much like the techniques used by Uriah
   Heap in Dicken's _David Copperfield_, these usually have an effect
   opposite to the one intended.  Poor excuses ("It's not illegal."
   "This will be the only message your receive."  "This is an ad." "It's



Hambridge, Lunde            Expires: 15Jan98                    [Page 4]

Internet Draft                 Don't Spew                      July 1997


   easy to REMOVE yourself from our list.") are still excuses.
   Moreover, they are likely to make the recipient MORE aggravated
   rather than less aggravated.


4a. ACK!  I've Been Spammed - Now What?

   It's unpleasant to receive mail which you do not want.  It's even
   more unpleasant if you're paying for connect time to download it.
   And it's really unpleasant to receive mail on topics which you find
   offensive.  Now that you're good and mad, what's an appropriate
   response?

   First, you always have the option to delete it and get on with your
   life.  This is the easiest and safest response.  It does not
   guarantee you won't get more of the same in the future, but it does
   take care of the current problem.

   Second, send the mail back to the originator objecting to your being
   on the mailing-list.  Check the headers carefully to find this
   information.  Get your local support staff to help you if you do not
   know how to do this.  Be aware, though, that many folks who develop
   these lists take "Please desist" messages and throw them away.
   Alternatively, they take these messages and create mailing-lists to
   sell to others.  Still, it is a way to register your disapproval.

   Next, be sure to carbon copy the postmaster of the offending site.
   You can do this by sending mail To: Postmaster@offending-site.domain.
   Again, many organizations which send unsolicited mail have this
   address aliased to go nowhere.  But it can't hurt.  Good sites are
   now using an "abuse" address for people to complain about spam.  Send
   complaints about unsolicited mail and posts to abuse@offending-
   site.domain.           When complaining about questionable mail
   messages or news postings, be sure to include the full headers; most
   mail and news programs don't display the full headers by default.
   For email, it is especially important to show the Received: headers;
   for Usenet news, the Path:  header, as these normally show the route
   by which the mail or news was delivered.

   Cc your own postmaster if your organization allows this.  Your
   organization may have the ability to block incoming unwanted mail, so
   it doesn't hurt to let your postmaster know you're getting unwanted
   mail.  This is especially true if the mail is offensive.

   If your personal mailer allows you to write rules, write a rule which
   sends mail from the originator of the unwanted mail to the trash.
   That way, although you still have to pay to download it, you won't
   have to read it!



Hambridge, Lunde            Expires: 15Jan98                    [Page 5]

Internet Draft                 Don't Spew                      July 1997


   Finally, DO NOT respond by sending back large volumes of unsolicited
   mail.  Two wrongs do not make a right.  Do not become your enemy.
   And take it easy on the network.

   Check the Appendix for a detailed explanation of tools and
   methodology to use when trying to chase down a spammer.


4b. There's a Spam In My Group!

   Netnews is also subject to spamming.  Here, several factors help to
   mitigate against the propagation of spam in news, although they don't
   entirely solve the problem.  Newsgroups and mailing lists may be
   moderated, which means that a moderator approve all mail/posts.  If
   this is the case, the moderator usually acts as a filter to removed
   unwanted and off-topic posts/mail.           In Netnews, there are
   programs which detect posts which have been sent to multiple groups
   or which detect multiple posts from the same source to one group.
   These programs cancel the posts.  While these work and keep
   unsolicited posts down, they are not 100% effective and spam in
   newsgroups seems to be growing at an even faster rate than spam in
   mail or on mailing lists.  After all, it's much easier to post to a
   newsgroup for which there are thousands of readers than it is to find
   individual email addresses for all those folks.  Hence the
   development of the "cancelbots" (sometimes called "cancelmoose") for
   Netnews groups.  Cancelbots are triggered when one message is sent to
   a large number of newsgroups or when many small messages are sent
   (from one sender) to the same newsgroup.  In general, these are tuned
   to the "Breidbart Index" [3] which is a somewhat fuzzy measure of the
   interactions of the number of posts and number of groups.  This is
   fuzzy purposefully, so that people will not post a number of messages
   just under the index and still "get away with it."  Still, spam gets
   through; so, what can a concerned netizen do?

   If there is a group moderator, make sure s/he knows that off-topic
   posts are slipping into the group.  If there is no moderator, you
   could take the same steps for dealing with news as are recommended
   for mail with all the same caveats.


5. Help for Beleaguered Admins

   As a system administrator, news administrator, local Postmaster, or
   mailing-list administrator, your users will come to you for help in
   dealing with unwanted mail and posts.  First, find out what your
   institution's policy is regarding unwanted/unsolicited mail.  It is
   possible that it won't do anything for you, but it is also possible
   to use it to justify blocking a domain which is sending particularly



Hambridge, Lunde            Expires: 15Jan98                    [Page 6]

Internet Draft                 Don't Spew                      July 1997


   offensive mail to your users.  If you don't have a clear policy, it
   would be really useful to create one.  If you are a mailing-list
   administrator, make sure your mailing-list charter forbids off-topic
   posts.  If your internal-only newsgroups are getting spammed from the
   outside of your institution, you probably have bigger problems than
   just spam.

   Make sure that your mail and news transports are configured so that
   you don't inadvertantly contribute to the spam problem.  Ensure your
   mail and news transports are configured to reject messages injected
   by parties outside your domain.  SMTP source routing
   <@relay.host:user@dest.host> is becoming deprecated due to its
   overwhelming abuse by spammers.  Consider configuring your mail
   transport to reject relayed messages (when neither the sender nor the
   recipient are within your domain).  Consider configuring your
   firewall to prohibit SMTP (mail) and NNTP (news) connections from
   clients within your domain to outside servers.  Ensure that messages
   generated within your domain have proper identity information in the
   headers, and users cannot forge headers.

   If you have the capability (i.e., you are running a mail transfer
   agent which allows it) consider blocking well known offending sites
   from ever getting mail into your site.  However, it is a well-known
   problem that offenders create domains more quickly than postmasters
   can block them.  Also, help your users learn enough about their
   mailers so that they can write rules to filter their own mail, or
   provide rules and kill files for them to use.

   Use well-known Internet tools, such as whois and traceroute to find
   which ISP is serving your problem site.  Notify the postmaster/abuse
   address that they have an offender.  Be sure to pass on all header
   information in your messages to help them with tracking down the
   offender.  If they have a policy against using their service to post
   unsolicited mail they will need more than just your say-so that there
   is a problem.  Also, the "originating" site may be a victim of the
   offender as well.  It's not unknown for those sending this kind of
   mail to bounce their mail through dial-up accounts, or off
   unprotected mail servers at other sites.  Use caution in your
   approach to those who look like the offender.           News spammers
   use similar techniques for sending spam to the groups.  They have
   been known to forge headers and bounce posts off "open" news machines
   and remailers to cover their tracks.  During the height of the
   infamous David Rhodes "Make Money Fast" posts, it was not unheard of
   for students to walk away from terminals which were logged in, and
   for sneaky folks to then use their accounts to forge posts, much to
   the later embarrassment of both the student and the institution.





Hambridge, Lunde            Expires: 15Jan98                    [Page 7]

Internet Draft                 Don't Spew                      July 1997


   Participate in mailing lists and news groups which discuss
   unsolicited mail/posts and the problems associated with it.
   News.admin.net-abuse.announce is probably the most well-known of
   these.


6. What's An ISP To Do

   As an ISP, you first and foremost should decide what your stance
   against unsolicited mail and posts should be.  If you decide not to
   tolerate unsolicited mail, write a clear acceptable use policy which
   states your position and deliniates consequences for abuse.  If you
   state that you will not tolerate use of your resource for unsolicited
   mail/posts, and that the consequence will be loss of service, you
   should be able to cancel offending accounts relatively quickly
   (verifying, of course, that the account really IS being mis-used).
   If you have downstreaming arrangements with other providers, you
   should make sure they are aware of any policy you set.  Likewise, you
   should be aware of your upstream providers' policies.

   Consider limiting access for dialup accounts so they cannot be used
   by those who spew.  Make sure your mail servers aren't open for mail
   to be bounced off them.  Make sure your mail transfer agents are the
   most up-to-date version (which pass security audits) of the software.

   Educate your users about how to react to spew and spewers.  Make sure
   instructions for writing rules for mailers are clear and available.
   Support their efforts to deal with unwanted mail at the local level -
   taking some of the burden from your sys admins.

   Make sure you have an address for abuse complaints.  If complainers
   can routinely send mail to "abuse@BigISP.com" and you have someone
   assigned to read that mail, workflow will be much smoother.  Don't
   require people complaining about spam* to use some unique local
   address for complaints.  Read and use 'postmaster' and 'abuse'.

   Finally, write your contracts and terms and conditions in such
   language that allows you to suspend service for offenders.  Make sure
   all your customers sign it before their accounts are activated.

   Legally, you may be able to stop spammers and spam relayers, but this
   is certainly dependent on the jurisdictions involved.  Potentially,
   the passing of spam via third party computers, especially if the
   headers are forged, could be a criminal action depending on the laws
   of the particular jurisdiction(s) involved.  If your site is being
   used as a spam relay, be sure to contact local and national criminal
   law enforcement agencies.  Site operators may also want to consider
   the bringing of civil actions against the spammer for expropriation



Hambridge, Lunde            Expires: 15Jan98                    [Page 8]

Internet Draft                 Don't Spew                      July 1997


   of property, in particular the computer time and network bandwidth.
   In addition, when a mailing list is involved, there is a potential
   intellectual property rights violation.


6. Security Considerations

   Certain actions to stop spamming may cause problems to legitimate
   users of the net.  There is a risk that filters to stop spamming will
   unintentionally stop legitimate mail too.  Overloading postmasters
   with complaints about spamming may cause trouble to the wrong person,
   someone who is not responsible for and cannot do anything to avoid
   the spamming activity, or it may cause trouble out of proportion to
   the abuse you are complaining about.

   Lower levels of network security interact with the ability to trace
   spam via logs or message headers.  Measures to stop various sorts of
   DNS and IP spoofing can make this information mroe reliable.


7. Acknowledgements

   Thanks for help from the IETF-RUN working group, and also to all the
   spew-fighters.  Specific thanks are due to J.D. Falk, whose very
   helpful Anti-spam* FAQ proved helpful.  Thanks are also due to the
   vigilence of Scott Hazen Mueller and Paul Vixie, who run
   www.spam.abuse.net/, the Anti-spam* web site.  Thanks also to Jacob
   Palme, Chip Rosenthal, Karl Auerbach for specific text: Jacob for the
   Security Considerations section, Chip for the configuration
   suggestions in section 5, Karl for the legal considerations.


8. References

   [1] As reported in messages on the spam@zorch.sf.bay.org (private)
       mailing list in May, 1997.

   [2] Holbrook, J.P.; Reynolds, J.K. "Site Security Handbook; RFC
       1244," July 1991.  Available via anonymous ftp at
       ftp://ds.internic.et/rfc/rfc1244.txt

   [3] _Current Spam thresholds and guidelines_. Lewis, Chris and Tim
       Skirvan.  http:www.uiuc.edu/ph/www/tskirvan/spam.html.

   * Spam (R) is a registered trademark of a meat product made by
   Hormel.





Hambridge, Lunde            Expires: 15Jan98                    [Page 9]

Internet Draft                 Don't Spew                      July 1997


9. Appendix - How To Track Down Spammers

   In a large proportion of spams today, complaining to the postmaster
   of the site that is the apparent sender of a message will have little
   effect because, either the headers are forged to disguise the source
   of the message, or the sender of the message runs their own
   system/domain, or both.

   As a result, it may be necessary to look carefully at the headers of
   a message to see what parts are most reliable, and/or to complain to
   the second or third-level Internet providers who provide Internet
   service to a problem domain.

   In many cases, getting reports with full headers from various
   recipients of a spam can help locate the source. In extreme cases of
   header forgery, only examination of logs on multiple systems can
   trace the source or a message.

   With only one message in hand, one has to make an educated guess as
   to the source. The following are only rough guidelines.

   In the case of mail messages, "Received:" headers added by systems
   under control of the destination organization are most likely to be
   reliable. You can't trust what the source domain calls itself, but
   you can usually use the source IP address since that is determined by
   the destination domain's server.

   In naive mail forgeries, the "Message-ID:" header may show the first
   SMTP server to handle the message and/or the "Received:" headers may
   all be accurate, but neither can be relied on.

   In the case of news messages, some part of the Path: header may be a
   forgery; only reports from multiple sites can make this clear.  In
   naive news forgeries, the "NNTP-Posting-Host:" header shows the
   actual source, but this can be forged too.

   If a spam message advertises an Internet server like a WWW site, that
   server must be connected to the network to be usable.  Therefore that
   address can be traced. It is appropriate to complain to the ISP
   hosting a web site advertised in a SPAM.  Even if the origin of the
   spam seems to be elsewhere.

   Doing a traceroute on an IP address or DNS address will show what
   domains provide IP connectivity from you to that address.

   Using whois and nslookup, one can try to determine who is
   administratively responsible for a domain.




Hambridge, Lunde            Expires: 15Jan98                   [Page 10]

Internet Draft                 Don't Spew                      July 1997


   In simple cases, a user of a responsible site may be exploiting an
   account or a weakness in dial-up security; in those cases a complaint
   to a single site may be sufficient. However, it may be appropriate to
   complaint to more than one domain, especially when it looks like the
   spammer runs their own system.

   If you look at the traceroute to an address, you will normally see a
   series of domains between you and that address, with one or more
   wide-area/national Internet Service Providers in the middle and
   "smaller" networks/domains on either end. It may be appropriate to
   complain to the domains nearer the source, up to and including the
   closest wide-area ISP.  However, this is a judgement call.

   If an intermediate site appears to be a known, responsible domain,
   stopping your complaints at this point makes sense.




































Hambridge, Lunde            Expires: 15Jan98                   [Page 11]

Internet Draft                 Don't Spew                      July 1997


   Authors' Addresses

   Sally Hambridge
   Intel Corp, SC11-321
   2200 Mission College blvd
   Santa Clara, CA 95052
   sallyh@ludwig.sc.intel.com

   Albert Lunde
   Northwestern University
   2129 Campus Drive North
   Evanston, IL 60208
   Albert-Lunde@nwu.edu






































Hambridge, Lunde            Expires: 15Jan98                   [Page 12]
