
Network Working Group                            Madan Ganesh Velayudham
SIEVE: Remove attachment(s)                      Hewlett-Packard Company
Expires: June 2, 2004                                   December 2, 2003
    
                        SIEVE: Remove attachment(s)
		draft-madanganeshv-sieve-remove-attach-00.txt
                           
Status of this Memo
    
    This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
    all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.
    
    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
    other groups may also distribute working documents as
    Internet-Drafts.
    
    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
    at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as
    reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."
    
    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
    <http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt>
    
    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
    <http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html>.
    
Copyright Notice
    
    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.
                
Abstract
        
   This draft introduces an action command "fileinto-except" to [SIEVE]
   in order to move a message to a folder without certain attachments
   of the received message.

1. Introduction

   SIEVE does not have a mechanism by which attachment(s) of a mail
   can be removed automatically. Some users might want to implement 
   rules like a message can still be accepted without certain attachments.
		
2. Conventions Used in this Document
    
   The key words "REQUIRED", "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD
   NOT", and "MAY" in this document are to be interpreted as described
   in "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels"
   [KEYWORDS].
    
3. Requirement

   The requirement is to allow an user to accept a message without certain 
   attachments of a message.



Expires June 2, 2004            Madan                       [Page 1]


Internet-Draft      SIEVE : Remove attachment(s)     December 2, 2003

4. Action fileinto-except

   Syntax:

   "fileinto-except" <folder: string> 
         [COMPARATOR] [MATCH-TYPE] <field-name: string>

   If only folder string is specified, the behavior of fileinto-except 
   will be same as the behavior of fileinto action of [SIEVE].

   fileinto-except action has effects on MIME message only. That is, 
   the fileinto-except action does void, if the message does not 
   contain any attachments.

   The field-name is always matched as a case-insensitive us-ascii 
   string.  The field-name MUST be a valid 7-bit header field name as
   described by the RFC 2822 "field-name" nonterminal.

   When the attachment header(s) of the message matches the search 
   string, [SIEVE] implementations removes the attachment(s). If 
   implementation can not complete the operation successfully, it 
   MUST deliver the message to INBOX. 

   Example :

      fileinto-except sumy :contains "filename" ".exe"

      would remove attachment(s) containing .exe in their filename and 
      moves message to the folder "sumy".

5. Security Considerations
 
   It is believed that this draft does not introduce any security 
   issues. When defining wildcard matches to remove attachments, 
   Care SHOULD be taken in order to avoid removal of valid attachments. 
	

6. IANA Considerations

   The following templates specify the IANA registration of the Sieve
   extensions specified in this document:

   To: iana@iana.org
   Subject: Registration of new Sieve extension

   Capability name: fileinto-except
   Capability keyword: fileinto-except
   Capability arguments: "fileinto-except" <folder: string> 
                   [COMPARATOR] [MATCH-TYPE] <field-name: string>
   Standards Track/IESG-approved experimental RFC number: this RFC
           
   Person and email address to contact for further information:
           Madan Ganesh Velayudham
           madan-ganesh.v@hp.com



Expires June 2, 2004            Madan                       [Page 2]


Internet-Draft      SIEVE : Remove attachment(s)     December 2, 2003

    This information should be added to the list of sieve extensions
    given on http://www.iana.org/assignments/sieve-extensions.


Appendices

A. References

   The following documents contain definitions or specifications that
   are necessary to understand this document properly:
   
   [ABNF]      Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax 
               Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, November 1997.

   [KEYWORDS]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
               Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.


   [SIEVE]     Showalter, T.; "Sieve: A Mail Filtering Language"; 
               RFC 3028; Mirapoint, Inc.; January 2001

Author's Address

   Madan Ganesh Velayudham
   Hewlett-Packard,
   29, Cunningham road,
   Bangalore,
   India 560052
   madan-ganesh.v@hp.com
   +91-80-205-3108


Intellectual Property Statement
    
    The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
    intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
    pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
    this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
    might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
    has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
    IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
    standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
    claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances
    of licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made
    to obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
    proprietary rights by implementers or users of this specification
    can be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.
    
    The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
    copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
    rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
    this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
    Director.




Expires June 2, 2004            Madan                       [Page 3]


Internet-Draft      SIEVE : Remove attachment(s)     December 2, 2003

Full Copyright Statement
    
    Copyright (C) The Internet Society 2003.  All Rights Reserved.
    
    This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
    others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
    or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
    and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
    kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
    are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
    document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
    the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
    Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
    developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
    copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
    followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
    English.
    
    The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
    revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.
    
    This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
    "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
    TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
    BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
    HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
    MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.































Expires June 2, 2004            Madan                       [Page 4]

