



Network Working Group                                      T. Morin, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                              S. Litkowski
Intended status: Standards Track                                  Orange
Expires: August 14, 2015                                        K. Patel
                                                           Cisco Systems
                                                                J. Zhang
                                                               R. Kebler
                                                                 J. Haas
                                                        Juniper Networks
                                                       February 10, 2015


                      Multicast VPN state damping
                  draft-ietf-bess-multicast-damping-00

Abstract

   This document describes procedures to damp multicast VPN routing
   state changes and control the effect of the churn due to the
   multicast dynamicity in customer site.  The procedures described in
   this document are applicable to BGP-based multicast VPN and help
   avoid uncontrolled control plane load increase in the core routing
   infrastructure.  New procedures are proposed inspired from BGP
   unicast route damping principles, but adapted to multicast.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 14, 2015.




Morin, et al.            Expires August 14, 2015                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Multicast VPN damping            February 2015


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Existing mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     4.1.  Rate-limiting of multicast control traffic  . . . . . . .   4
     4.2.  Existing PIM, IGMP and MLD timers . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     4.3.  BGP Route Damping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Procedures for multicast state damping  . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     5.1.  PIM procedures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     5.2.  Procedures for multicast VPN state dampening  . . . . . .   9
   6.  Procedures for P-tunnel state damping . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     6.1.  Damping mVPN P-tunnel change events . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     6.2.  Procedures for Ethernet VPNs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   7.  Operational considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     7.1.  Enabling and configuring multicast damping  . . . . . . .  11
     7.2.  Troubleshooting and monitoring  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     7.3.  Default and maximum values  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   8.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   9.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   10. Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   11. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     11.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     11.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14

1.  Introduction

   In a multicast VPN [RFC6513] deployed with BGP-based procedures
   [RFC6514], when receivers in VPN sites join and leave a said
   multicast group or channel through multicast membership control
   protocols (IGMP, MLD), multicast routing protocols accordingly adjust



Morin, et al.            Expires August 14, 2015                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Multicast VPN damping            February 2015


   multicast routing states and P-multicast tree states, to forward or
   prune multicast traffic to these receivers.

   In VPN contexts, providing isolation between customers of a shared
   infrastructure is a core requirement resulting in stringent
   expectations with regards to risks of denial of service attacks.
   Hence, mechanisms need to be put in place to ensure that the load put
   on the BGP control plane, and on the P-tunnel setup control plane,
   remains under control regardless of the frequency at which multicast
   memberships changes are made by end hosts.  By nature multicast
   memberships change based on the behavior of multicast applications
   running on end hosts, hence the frequency of membership changes can
   legitimately be much higher than the typical churn of unicast routing
   states.  Section 16 of [RFC6514] specifically spells out the need for
   damping the activity of C-multicast and Leaf Auto-discovery routes.

   This document describes procedures, remotely inspired from existing
   BGP route damping, aimed at protecting these control planes while at
   the same time avoiding negative effects on the service provided,
   although at the expense of a minimal increase in average of bandwidth
   use in the network.

   The base principle is described in Section 3.  Existing mechanisms
   that could be relied upon are discussed in Section 4.  Section 5
   details the procedures introduced by these specifications.

   Section 6 provide specific details related to the damping of
   multicast VPNs P-tunnel state.

   Finally, Section 7 discusses operational considerations related to
   the proposed mechanism.

2.  Terminology

   TBC

3.  Overview

   The procedures described in this document allows the network operator
   to configure multicast VPN PEs so that they can delay the propagation
   of multicast state prune messages, when faced with a rate of
   multicast state dynamicity exceeding a certain configurable
   threshold.  Assuming that the number of multicast states that can be
   created by a receiver is bounded, delaying the propagation of
   multicast state pruning results in setting up an upper bound to the
   average frequency at which the router will send state updates to an
   upstream router.




Morin, et al.            Expires August 14, 2015                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Multicast VPN damping            February 2015


   From the point of view of a downstream router, such as a CE, this
   approach has no impact: the multicast routing states changes that it
   solicits to its PE will be honored without any additional delay.
   Indeed the propagation of joins is not impacted by the proposed
   defined procedures, and having the upstream router delay state prune
   propagation to its own upstream does not affect what traffic is sent
   to the downstream router.  In particular, the amount of bandwidth
   used on the PE-CE link downstream to a PE applying this damping
   technique is not increased.

   This approach increases the average bandwidth utilization on a link
   upstream to a PE applying this technique, such as a PE-PE link:
   indeed, a said multicast flow will be forwarded for a longer time
   than if no damping was applied.  That said, it is expected that this
   technique will allow to meet the goals of protecting the multicast
   routing infrastructure control plane without a significant average
   increase of bandwidth; for instance, damping events happening at a
   frequency higher than one event per X second, can be done without
   increasing by more than X second the time during which a multicast
   flow is present on a link.

   To be practical, such a mechanism requires configurability, in
   particular, needs to offer means to control when damping is
   triggered, and to allow delaying a multicast state Prune for a time
   increasing with the churn of this multicast state.

4.  Existing mechanisms

   This section describes mechanisms that could be considered to address
   the issue, but that end up appearing as not suitable or not efficient
   enough.

4.1.  Rate-limiting of multicast control traffic

   [RFC4609] examines multicast security threats and among other things
   the risk described in Section 1.  A mechanism relying on rate-
   limiting PIM messages is proposed in section 5.3.3 [RFC4609], but has
   the identified drawbacks of impacting the service delivered and
   having side-effects on legitimate users.

4.2.  Existing PIM, IGMP and MLD timers

   In the context of PIM multicast routing protocols [RFC4601], a
   mechanism exists that in some context may offer a form of de facto
   damping mechanism for multicast states.  Indeed, when active, the
   prune override mechanism consists in having a PIM upstream router
   introduce a delay ("prune override interval") before taking into
   account a PIM Prune message sent by a downstream neighbor.



Morin, et al.            Expires August 14, 2015                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Multicast VPN damping            February 2015


   This mechanism has not been designed specifically for the purpose of
   damping multicast state, but as a means to allow PIM to operate on
   multi-access networks.  See [RFC4601] section 4.3.3.  However, when
   active, this mechanism will prevent a downstream router to produce
   multicast routing protocol messages that would cause, for a said
   multicast state, the upstream router to send to its own
   upstreamrouter, multicast routing protocol messages at a rate higher
   than 1/[prune override interval], thus providing de-facto a form of
   damping.

   Similarly, the IGMP and MLD multicast membership control protocols
   can provide a similar behavior, under the right conditions.

   These mechanisms are not considered suitable to meet the goals
   spelled out in Section 1, the main reasons being that:

   o  when enabled these mechanisms require additional bandwidth on the
      local link on which the effect of a Prune is delayed (in our case
      the PE-CE link)

   o  when enabled these mechanisms require disabling explicit tracking,
      even though enabling this feature may otherwise be desired

   o  on certain implementations, these mechanisms are incompatible with
      behavior that cannot be turned off

   o  they do not provide a suitable level of configurability

   o  they do not provide a way to discriminate between multicast flows
      based on estimation of their dynamicity

4.3.  BGP Route Damping

   The procedures defined in [RFC2439] and [RFC7196] for BGP route flap
   damping are useful for operators who want to control the impact of
   unicast route churn on the routing infrastructure, and offer a
   standardized set of parameters to control damping.

   These procedures are not directly relevant in a multicast context,
   for the following reasons:

   o  they are not specified for multicast routing protocol in general

   o  even in contexts where BGP routes are used to carry multicast
      routing states (e.g.  [RFC6514]), these procedures do not allow to
      implement the principle described in this document, the main
      reason being that a damped route becomes suppressed, while the




Morin, et al.            Expires August 14, 2015                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            Multicast VPN damping            February 2015


      target behavior would be to keep advertising when damping is
      triggered on a multicast route

   However, the set of parameters standardized to control the thresholds
   of the exponential decay mechanism can be relevantly reused.  This is
   the approach proposed for the procedures described in this document
   (Section 5).  Motivations for doing so is to help the network
   operator deploy this feature based on consistent configuration
   parameter, and obtain predictable results, without the drawbacks of
   exposed in Section 4.1 and Section 4.2.

5.  Procedures for multicast state damping

5.1.  PIM procedures

   This section describes procedures for multicast state damping
   satisfying the goals spelled out in Section 1.  This section spells
   out procedures for (S,G) states in the PIM-SM protocol ([RFC4601] ;
   they apply unchanged for such states created based on multicast group
   management protocols (IGMP [RFC3376], MLD [RFC3810]) on downstream
   interfaces.  The same procedures are applied to (*,G) states in the
   context of PIM-SM ASM groups (damping is not applied to (S,G,Rpt)
   Prune state).

   The following notions introduced in [RFC2439] are reused in these
   procedures:

   figure-of-merit:  a number reflecting the current estimation of past
      recent activity of an (S,G) multicast routing state, which evolves
      based on routing events related to this state and based an
      exponential decay algorithm ; the activation or inactivation of
      damping on the state is based on this number ; this number is
      associated to the upstream state machine for (S,G)

   cutoff-threshold:  value of the *figure-of-merit* over which damping
      is applied (configurable parameter)

   reuse-threshold:  value of the *figure-of-merit* under which damping
      stops being applied (configurable parameter)

   decay-half-life:  period of time used to control how fast is the
      exponential decay of the *figure-of-merit* (configurable
      parameter)

   Additionally to these values, a configurable "*increment-factor*"
   parameter is introduced, that controls by how much the *figure-of-
   merit* is incremented on multicast state update events.




Morin, et al.            Expires August 14, 2015                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            Multicast VPN damping            February 2015


   Section Section 7.3 proposes default and maximum values for the
   configurable parameters.

   On reception of updated multicast membership or routing information
   on a downstream interface I for a said (S,G) state, that results in a
   change of the state of the PIM downstream state machine (see section
   4.5.3 of [RFC4601]), a router implementing these procedures MUST:

   o  apply unchanged procedures for everything relating to what
      multicast traffic ends up being sent on downstream interfaces,
      including interface I

   o  increasing the *figure-of-merit* for the (S,G) by the *increment-
      factor* (updating the *figure-of-merit* based on the decay
      algorithm must be done prior to this increment)

   o  update the damping state for the (S,G) state: damping becomes
      active on the state if the recomputed *figure-of-merit* is above
      the configured *cutoff-threshold*

   o  if damping is inactive on (S,G) state, update the upstream state
      machine as usual (as per section 4.5.7 of [RFC4601])

   o  if damping becomes active for the (S,G) state:

      *  if the received message has caused the upstream state machine
         to transition to Joined state, update the upstream state
         machine for (S,G) (applying usual PIM procedures in section
         4.5.7 of [RFC4601], including sending a PIM Join to the
         upstream neighbor)

      *  if the received message has caused the upstream state machine
         to transition to NotJoined state, do not update the upstream
         state machine for (S,G)

      *  then freeze the upstream state machine in Joined state, and and
         setup a trigger to update it once damping later becomes
         inactive again.  The effect is that in the meantime, PIM Join
         messages will be sent as refreshes to the upstream neighbor,
         but no PIM Prune message will be sent.

   o  if damping was already active: do not update the upstream state
      machine for (S,G) (the upstream state machine was frozen after
      processing the previous message)

   Once the *figure-of-merit* for (S,G) damping state decays to a value
   below the configured *reuse-threshold*, the upstream state machine
   for (S,G) is recomputed based on states of downstream state machines,



Morin, et al.            Expires August 14, 2015                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            Multicast VPN damping            February 2015


   eventually leading to a PIM Join or Prune message to be sent to the
   upstream neighbor.

   Same techniques as the ones described in [RFC2439] can be applied to
   determine when the figure-of-merit value is recomputed based on the
   exponential decay algorithm and the configured *decay-half-life*.

   Given the specificity of multicast applications, it is REQUIRED for
   the implementation to let the operator configure the *decay-half-
   life* in seconds, rather than in minutes.  When the recomputation is
   done periodically, the period should be low enough to not
   significantly delay the inactivation of damping on a multicast state
   beyond what the operator wanted to configure (i.e. for a half-life of
   10s, recomputing the *figure-of-merit* each minute would result in a
   multicast state to remained damped for a much longer time than what
   the parameters are supposed to command).

   PIM implementations typically follow [RFC4601] suggestion that
   "implementations will only maintain state when it is relevant to
   forwarding operations - for example, the 'NoInfo' state might be
   assumed from the lack of other state information, rather than being
   held explicitly" (Section 4.1 of [RFC4601]).  To properly implement
   implement damping procedures, an implementation MUST keep an explicit
   (S,G) state as long as damping is active on an (S,G).  Once an (S,G)
   state expires, and damping becomes inactive on this state, its
   associated *figure-of-merit* and damping state are removed as well.

   Note that these procedures:

   o  do not impact PIM procedures related to refreshes or expiration of
      multicast routing states: PIM Prune messages triggered by the
      expiration of the (S,G) keep-alive timer, are not suppressed or
      delayed, and the reception of Join messages not causing transition
      of state on the downstream interface does not lead to incrementing
      the *figure-of-merit*;

   o  do not impact the PIM assert mechanism, in particular PIM Prune
      messages triggered by a change of the PIM assert winner on the
      upstream interface, are not suppressed or delayed;

   o  do not impact PIM Prune messages that are sent when the RPF
      neighbor is updated for a said multicast flow;

   o  do not impact PIM Prune messages that are sent in the context of
      switching between a Rendez-vous Point Tree and a Shortest Path
      Tree.





Morin, et al.            Expires August 14, 2015                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            Multicast VPN damping            February 2015


   Note also that no action is triggered based on the reception of PIM
   Prune messages (or corresponding IGMP/MLD messages) that relate to
   non-existing (S,G) state, in particular, no *figure-of-merit* or
   damping state is created in this case.

5.2.  Procedures for multicast VPN state dampening

   The procedures described in Section 5.1 can be applied in the VRF
   PIM-SM implementation (in the "C-PIM instance"), with the
   corresponding action to suppressing the emission of a Prune(S,G)
   message being to not withdraw the C-multicast Source Tree Join
   (C-S,C-G) BGP route.  Implementation of [RFC6513] relying on the use
   of PIM to carry C-multicast routing information MUST support this
   technique.

   In the context of [RFC6514] where BGP is used to distribute
   C-multicast routing information, the following procedure is proposed
   as an alternative and consists in applying damping in the BGP
   implementation, based on existing BGP damping mechanism, applied to
   C-multicast Source Tree Join routes and Shared Tree Join routes (and
   as well to Leaf A-D routes - see Section 6), and modified to
   implement the behavior described in Section 3 along the following
   guidelines:

   o  not withdrawing (instead of not advertising) damped routes

   o  providing means to configure the half-life in seconds if that
      option is not already available

   o  using parameters for the exponential decay that are specific to
      multicast, based on default values and multicast specific
      configuration

   While these procedures would typically be implemented on PE routers,
   in a context where BGP Route Reflectors are used it can be considered
   useful to also be able to apply damping on RRs as well.
   Additionally, for mVPN Inter-AS deployments, it can be needed to
   protect one AS from the dynamicity of multicast VPN routing events
   from other ASes.  In that perspective, it is RECOMMENDED for
   implementations to support damping mVPN C-multicast routes directly
   into BGP, without relying on the PIM-SM state machine.

   When not all routers in a deployment have the capability to drop
   traffic coming from the wrong PE (as spelled out in section 9.1.1 of
   [RFC6513]), then the withdrawal of a C-multicast route resulting from
   a change in the UMH SHOULD NOT be damped.  An implementation of these
   specs MUST whether, not damp these withdrawals by default, or
   alternatively provide a tuning knob to disable then damping of these



Morin, et al.            Expires August 14, 2015                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            Multicast VPN damping            February 2015


   withdrawals.  Additionally, in such a context, it is RECOMMENDED to
   *not* enable any multicast VPN route damping on RRs and ASBRs, since
   these equipments cannot distinguish these events.

   The choice to implement damping based on BGP routes or the procedures
   described in Section 5, is up to the implementor, but at least one of
   the two MUST be implemented; keeping in mind that in contexts where
   damping on RRs and ASBRs the BGP approach is RECOMMENDED.

   Note well that damping SHOULD NOT be applied to BGP routes of the
   following sub-types: "Intra-AS I-PMSI A-D Route", "Inter-AS I-PMSI
   A-D Route", "S-PMSI A-D Route", and "Source Active A-D Route".

6.  Procedures for P-tunnel state damping

6.1.  Damping mVPN P-tunnel change events

   When selective P-tunnels are used (see section 7 of [RFC6513]), the
   effect of updating the upstream state machine for a said (C-S,C-G)
   state on a PE connected to multicast receivers, is not only to
   generate activity to propagate C-multicast routing information to the
   source connected PE, but also to possibly trigger changes related to
   the P-tunnels carrying (C-S,C-G) traffic.  Protecting the provider
   network from an excessive amount of change in the state of P-tunnels
   is required, and this section details how this can be done.

   A PE implementing these procedures for mVPN MUST damp Leaf A-D
   routes, in the same manner as it would for C-multicast routes (see
   Section 5.2).

   A PE implementing these procedures for mVPN MUST damp the activity
   related to removing itself from a P-tunnel.  Possible ways to do so
   depend on the type of P-tunnel, and local implementation details are
   left up to the implementor.

   The following is proposed as example of how the above can be
   achieved.

   o  For P-tunnels implemented with the PIM protocol, this consists in
      applying multicast state damping techniques described in
      Section 5.1 to the P-PIM instance, at least for (S,G) states
      corresponding to P-tunnels.

   o  For P-tunnels implemented with the mLDP protocol, this consists in
      applying damping techniques completely similar as the one
      described in Section 5, but generalized to apply to mLDP states





Morin, et al.            Expires August 14, 2015               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            Multicast VPN damping            February 2015


   o  For root-initiated P-tunnels (P-tunnels implemented with the P2MP
      RSVP-TE, or relying on ingress replication), no particular action
      needs to be implemented to damp P-tunnels membership, if the
      activity of Leaf A-D route themselves is damped

   o  Another possibility is to base the decision to join or not join
      the P-tunnel to which a said (C-S,C-G) is bound, and to advertise
      or not advertise a Leaf A-D route related to (C-S,C-G), based on
      whether or not a C-multicast Source Tree Join route is being
      advertised for (C-S,C-G), rather than by relying on the state of
      the C-PIM Upstream state machine for (C-S,C-G)

6.2.  Procedures for Ethernet VPNs

   Specifications exists to support or optimize multicast and broadcast
   in the context of Ethernet VPNs [RFC7117], relying on the use of
   S-PMSI and P-tunnels.  For the same reasons as for IP multicast VPNs,
   an implementation of these procedures MUST follow the procedures
   described in this section.Section 6.1.

7.  Operational considerations

7.1.  Enabling and configuring multicast damping

   In the context of multicast VPNs, these procedures would be enabled
   on PE routers.  Additionally in the case of C-multicast routing based
   on BGP extensions ([RFC6514]) these procedures can be enabled on
   ASBRs, and possibly Route Reflectors as well.

7.2.  Troubleshooting and monitoring

   Implementing the damping mechanisms described in this document should
   be complemented by appropriate tools to observe and troubleshoot
   damping activity.

   More specifically it is RECOMMENDED to complement the existing
   interface providing information on multicast states with information
   on eventual damping of corresponding states (e.g.  MRIB states):
   C-multicast routing states and P-tunnel states.

7.3.  Default and maximum values

   The following values are RECOMMENDED to adopt as default conservative
   values:

   o  increment-factor: 1000

   o  cutoff-threshold: 3000



Morin, et al.            Expires August 14, 2015               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            Multicast VPN damping            February 2015


   o  decay-half-life: 10s

   o  reuse-threshold: 1500

   For unicast damping, it is common to set an upper bound to the time
   during which a route is suppressed.  In the case of multicast state
   damping, which relies on not withdrawing a damped route, it may be
   desirable to avoid a situation were a multicast flow would keep
   flowing in a portion of the network for a very large time in the
   absence of receivers.

   The proposed default maximum value for the figure-of-merit is
   20x<increment-factor>, i.e. 20000 with the proposed default
   increment-factor of 1000.

   The following values are proposed as maximums:

   o  decay half-life: 60s

   o  cutoff-threshold: 50000

8.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.

9.  Security Considerations

   The procedures defined in this document do not introduce additional
   security issues not already present in the contexts addressed, and
   actually aim at addressing some of the identified risks without
   introducing as much denial of service risk as some of the mechanisms
   already defined.

   The protection provided relates to the control plane of the multicast
   routing protocols, including the components implementing the routing
   protocols and the components responsible for updating the multicast
   forwarding plane.

   The procedures describe are meant to provide some level of protection
   for the router on which they are enabled by reducing the amount of
   routing state updates that it needs to send to its upstream neighbor
   or peers, but do not provide any reduction of the control plane load
   related to processing routing information from downstream neighbors.
   Protecting routers from an increase in control plane load due to
   activity on downstream interfaces toward core routers (or in the



Morin, et al.            Expires August 14, 2015               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft            Multicast VPN damping            February 2015


   context of BGP-based mVPN C-multicast routing, BGP peers) shall rely
   upon the activation of damping on corresponding downstream neighbors
   (or BGP peers) and/or at the edge of the network.  Protecting routers
   from an increase in control plane load due to activity on customer-
   facing downstream interfaces or downstream interfaces to routers in
   another administrative domain, is out of the scope of this document
   and should rely upon already defined mechanisms (see [RFC4609]).

   To be effective the procedures described here must be complemented by
   configuration limiting the number of multicast states that can be
   created on a multicast router through protocol interactions with
   multicast receivers, neighbor routers in adjacent ASes, or in
   multicast VPN contexts with multicast CEs.  Note well that the two
   mechanism may interact: state for which Prune has been requested may
   still remain taken into account for some time if damping has been
   triggered and hence result in otherwise acceptable new state from
   being successfully created.

   Additionally, it is worth noting that these procedures are not meant
   to protect against peaks of control plane load, but only address
   averaged load.  For instance, assuming a set of multicast states
   submitted to the same Join/Prune events, damping can prevent more
   than a certain number of Join/Prune messages to be sent upstream in
   the period of time that elapses between the reception of Join/Prune
   messages triggering the activation of damping on these states and
   when damping becomes inactive after decay.

10.  Acknowledgements

   We would like to thank Bruno Decraene and Lenny Giuliano for
   discussions that helped shape this proposal.  We would also like to
   thank Yakov Rekhter and Eric Rosen for their reviews and helpful
   comments.  Thanks to Wim Henderickx for his comments and support of
   this proposal.

11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2439]  Villamizar, C., Chandra, R., and R. Govindan, "BGP Route
              Flap Damping", RFC 2439, November 1998.

   [RFC3376]  Cain, B., Deering, S., Kouvelas, I., Fenner, B., and A.
              Thyagarajan, "Internet Group Management Protocol, Version
              3", RFC 3376, October 2002.



Morin, et al.            Expires August 14, 2015               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft            Multicast VPN damping            February 2015


   [RFC3810]  Vida, R. and L. Costa, "Multicast Listener Discovery
              Version 2 (MLDv2) for IPv6", RFC 3810, June 2004.

   [RFC4601]  Fenner, B., Handley, M., Holbrook, H., and I. Kouvelas,
              "Protocol Independent Multicast - Sparse Mode (PIM-SM):
              Protocol Specification (Revised)", RFC 4601, August 2006.

   [RFC6513]  Rosen, E. and R. Aggarwal, "Multicast in MPLS/BGP IP
              VPNs", RFC 6513, February 2012.

   [RFC6514]  Aggarwal, R., Rosen, E., Morin, T., and Y. Rekhter, "BGP
              Encodings and Procedures for Multicast in MPLS/BGP IP
              VPNs", RFC 6514, February 2012.

   [RFC7117]  Aggarwal, R., Kamite, Y., Fang, L., Rekhter, Y., and C.
              Kodeboniya, "Multicast in Virtual Private LAN Service
              (VPLS)", RFC 7117, February 2014.

   [RFC7196]  Pelsser, C., Bush, R., Patel, K., Mohapatra, P., and O.
              Maennel, "Making Route Flap Damping Usable", RFC 7196, May
              2014.

11.2.  Informative References

   [RFC4609]  Savola, P., Lehtonen, R., and D. Meyer, "Protocol
              Independent Multicast - Sparse Mode (PIM-SM) Multicast
              Routing Security Issues and Enhancements", RFC 4609,
              October 2006.

Authors' Addresses

   Thomas Morin (editor)
   Orange
   2, avenue Pierre Marzin
   Lannion  22307
   France

   Email: thomas.morin@orange.com


   Stephane Litkowski
   Orange
   France

   Email: stephane.litkowski@orange.com






Morin, et al.            Expires August 14, 2015               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft            Multicast VPN damping            February 2015


   Keyur Patel
   Cisco Systems
   170 W. Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Email: keyupate@cisco.com


   Jeffrey (Zhaohui) Zhang
   Juniper Networks Inc.
   10 Technology Park Drive
   Westford, MA  01886
   USA

   Email: zzhang@juniper.net


   Robert Kebler
   Juniper Networks Inc.
   10 Technology Park Drive
   Westford, MA  01886
   USA

   Email: rkebler@juniper.net


   Jeff Haas
   Juniper Networks

   Email: jhaas@juniper.net




















Morin, et al.            Expires August 14, 2015               [Page 15]
