Internet Engineering Task Force                              Janet P. Gunn
Internet Draft                                               CSC
Expiration: Dec 21st, 2003                                   
File: draft-gunn-ieprep-ip-telephony-bcp-00.txt                  






                        Best Current Practices for 
                      Internet Emergency Preparedness 
                            Use of IP Telephony 

                               June 21st, 2003 





     
Status of this Memo 
     
This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all 
provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1]. 
    
Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task 
Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other groups 
may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
    
Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months and 
may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any time. It 
is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite 
them other than as "work in progress." 
    
The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed 
at http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 



Abstract 

This document proposes best current practices for Internet Emergency 
Preparedness in the context of IP telephony in private IP networks designed, 
engineered and managed with telephony as the dominant application.  It takes a 
top-down approach, and is intended to stimulate discussion and further revision 
and enhancement.





Gunn                                                                Page 1

Internet Draft              BCP IEPREP IP Tel              June 21st, 2003


Table of Contents 
     
Abstract   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Table of Contents    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
1.0   Introduction   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
2.0   Objectives   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
2.1   High Probability of Call Completion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
2.2   No Loss of Signaling Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
2.3   Distinction of  Data Traffic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
2.4   Non Pre-emptive  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
2.5   Functional in a Non-ubiquitous Environment . . . . . . . . . . .  6
2.6   Authenticated Service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
2.7   Alternate Path Routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
2.8   End to End Fault Tolerance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
3.0   Key Scenarios  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7 
3.1   Single IP Administrative Domain  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
3.1.1 Solutions for Providing Signaling of EP Calls  . . . . . . . . .  7
3.1.2 Solutions for Providing Priority for the Data Stream . . . . . .  9
3.2   Multiple (but Predefined) Administrative Domains . . . . . . . . 10
3.2.1 Solutions for Providing Signaling of EP Calls  . . . . . . . . . 11
3.2.2 Solutions for Providing Priority for the Data Stream . . . . . . 14
4.0   Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.1   Signaling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.2   Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
5.0   Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
6.0   IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
7.0   Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
8.0   References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
9.0   Author Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16


1.0 Introduction

The Charter for the Internet Emergency Preparedness (IEPREP) working group [2] 
calls for the development of a Best Current Practices document.

The scope of the IEPREP working group is quite broad.  It covers support for 
both emergency personnel use of IP telephony, and of other applications.  It 
covers emergency personnel use of isolated private networks that happen to run 
the IP protocol suite, public Internet Service Providers (ISPs), and the "Big I" 
Internet interconnection of networks.  From the telephony perspective, it 
includes dedicated telephony networks, and general purpose networks which 
include telephony with many other applications.  It includes "IP Bridging", "IP 
at the Start", "IP at the End", "End-to-End IP".  These topologies are described 
in RFC 3523 [3].

The "best practices" will vary significantly in each of these environments.  Any 
attempt to address them all in a single Best Practices document would probably 
be futile.  Therefore we take the approach of drastically limiting the scope of 
this initial document.  In the future, as best practices are documented for 
other environments, it may make sense to consolidate them into a single 
document, or it may make sense to keep them distinct.

Gunn                                                                Page 2

Internet Draft              BCP IEPREP IP Tel              June 21st, 2003

This document addresses best practices from a high level.  It is hoped that this 
will generate discussion which will lead to a "top-down" development of more 
detailed best practices.  We do not attempt to identify "Best Practices" for 
Voice over IP (VoIP) in general, only incremental "Best Practices" for Emergency 
Preparedness.

The scope of this document is thus limited to
-      Voice Telephony
-      Private (isolated from the "Big I" Internet) IP networks that are 
       designed, engineered, and managed with Telephony as the dominant 
       application.

This means that the issues associated with Quality of Service (QoS) for basic 
telephony service (e.g. assuring that you do not have 10 simultaneous "calls" 
across a single 128K link) have already been addressed, in either a standards-
based, or a proprietary manner.  We can then focus on any needed enhancements to 
support Emergency Preparedness.

The scope includes all four topologies described in RFC 3523 [3]:
"IP Bridging", 
"IP at the Start",
"IP at the End",  
"End-to-End IP".

The "class 4" IP networks being deployed by several of the (historically CSN 
based) telephony carriers are examples of networks encompassed by this scope.

[Note: a universally acceptable term for the incremental services needed to 
support Emergency Personnel has not yet been established.  Emergency 
Preparedness (EP), Emergency Telecommunications Service (ETS), and International 
Emergency Preference Scheme (IEPS) have all been used, but each has connotations 
or legal implications which make them inappropriate in some contexts.  In this 
document we use "EP" or "emergency preparedness", recognizing that this will be 
replaced when a more universally acceptable term is selected.]

2.0  Objectives

"Framework for Supporting ETS in IP Telephony"[4] describes six "objectives":
-    High Probability of Call Completion
-    No Loss of Signaling Information
-    Distinction of Signaling and Data
-    Non Pre-emptive Action
-    Functional in a Non-ubiquitous Environment
-    Authenticated Service 
And 2 "value added objectives":
-    Alternate Path Routing
-    End to End Fault Tolerance

These objectives are based on the "General Requirements for Emergency 
Telecommunications Service" [5], and "IP Telephony Requirements for Emergency 
Telecommunications Service" [6].


Gunn                                                                Page 3

Internet Draft              BCP IEPREP IP Tel              June 21st, 2003

This document will attempt to address best practices for meeting these 
objectives in the limited scope of private, telephony focused, IP networks.

2.1  High Probability of Call Completion

In the context of an IP network that is already configured to provide "carrier 
grade voice over IP", then the "high probability of call completion" objective 
is focused on the call admission process at each point in the path.  The need 
for high probability of delivery for the data packets is largely taken care of 
by the network's QoS mechanism. 

EP personnel do need a "higher than others" probability of call admission during 
congestion.  But, if normal calls have an acceptable QoS, they do not 
necessarily need a "higher than others" QoS for established calls.

In some circumstances, emergency preparedness personnel may actually find it 
acceptable to accept a "lower than others" QoS (as long as it is still above a 
basic intelligibility threshold) as a tradeoff for a higher probability of call 
admission.

Within the context of a private IP network that is designed, engineered, and 
managed with Telephony as the dominant application, we can assume that there is 
already a call admission policy of some sort in place.  This policy determines 
what to do when the system cannot provide the "standard" QoS.  It may be 
desirable for the policy to distinguish between "normal" calls and EP-related 
calls.

Examples of the kinds of actions associated with the policy are:
-    Reject the call
-    Establish a queue for some or all calls that cannot be established
-    Retry the attempt to establish the call after a (fixed or 
     variable) time interval
-    Attempt to establish the call with a different (for instance less
     stringent) QoS level
-    Establish the call anyway, recognizing that this may result in
     violations of the QoS expectations/commitments for this and/or
     other, calls.

All except the first are actions which will increase the probability of 
completion for the calls they are applied to.

2.2  No Loss of Signaling Information

This objective addresses the need for the IP network to transmit Circuit 
Switched Network (CSN) related signaling information (e.g., Signaling System No. 
7 (SS7) information) about Emergency Preparedness status to the CSN network, so 
that the CSN can provide priority treatment on the CSN.  This signaling 
information is currently contained in two particular parameters that are part of 
the SS7 ISDN User Part (ISUP) Initial Address Message (IAM) [7] which is used to 
set up the call path: the Calling Party Category Parameter and the Precedence 
Parameter.


Gunn                                                                Page 4

Internet Draft              BCP IEPREP IP Tel              June 21st, 2003

The first parameter used to signal Emergency Preparedness status is the NS/EP 
Calling Party Category (CPC) code point, often referred to as the "High 
Probability of Completion" (HPC) code point [8].  The HPC code point is used in 
public portions of the USA telephony CSN.

The second parameter used to signal Emergency Preparedness status is the 
Precedence parameter. The most common use of this parameter is to signal the 
priority level in MLPP (Multi Level Precedence and Priority) systems[9].  MLPP 
systems allow higher priority calls to pre-empt lower priority calls, when the 
higher priority call would otherwise be blocked.  Such MLPP systems exist only 
in isolated, privately controlled CSN, such as those controlled by the military.

The Precedence parameter can also be used to signal the priority level for 
enhanced Multi Level Precedence and Priority (eMLPP) systems [10], [11], [12].  
eMLPP systems are specified for Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM) 
telephone systems, but currently exist only in private mobile networks, such as 
those run by railway companies.  Depending on how related parameters are set in 
the GSM switches, a higher priority call may preempt a lower priority call when 
it would otherwise be blocked, or otherwise blocked calls may queue (in priority 
order) until the call can be completed.

A third use of the Precedence parameter is to signal the priority for the 
Wireless Priority Service (WPS).  The WPS operates in selected carriers in the 
public mobile network in the US.

It is expected that the Emergency Preparedness information (which will be 
translated into either the CPC or Precedence Parameter in the CSN) will be 
carried in IP networks in a label such as the proposed SIP Resource Priority 
Header [13} and [14]. Therefore translation will be needed (both ways) between 
the IP label and the CPC (HPC) and/or Precedence parameters.

2.3 Distinction of  Data Traffic

This objective addresses the need to distinguish data packets associated with 
Emergency Preparedness from other types of Voice over IP data packets.  This is 
typically discussed in terms of providing different treatment (such as lower 
drop rate, lower delay) for the distinguished packets.

2.4  Non Pre-emptive

This objective indicates that the means used to provide priority treatment for 
Emergency Preparedness calls shall not result in the pre-emption (disconnection) 
of an existing call (whether Emergency Preparedness related or not) in either 
the CSN or IP network.  However, the priority treatment for Emergency 
Preparedness calls may result in future non-EP calls being blocked.  It may also 
result in a limited level (specified by Service Level Agreement (SLA)) of 
degradation of QoS, for both EP and non-EP calls.





Gunn                                                                Page 5

Internet Draft              BCP IEPREP IP Tel              June 21st, 2003


2.5  Functional in a Non-ubiquitous Environment

The objective of functioning in a non-ubiquitous environment is less important 
within the constraints/scope of Private IP networks that are designed, 
engineered, and managed with Telephony as the dominant application, than in a 
"general purpose" or "public" IP network.  None the less, even private, 
telephony focused networks may have a variety of equipment and interfaces.  An 
approach will not be rejected just because it does not work well for every piece 
of equipment in the network, or because it cannot be supported end0to-end for 
all calls.

2.6  Authenticated Service

Authentication/authorization is likely to be somewhat different, depending on 
whether the call originates in the CSN (IP in the middle, or IP at the end), or 
in the IP network (IP end to end or IP at the start.

If the call originates in the CSN, the authentication/authorization will 
probably also take place in the CSN.  It is then important that the IP network 
can trust the authentication/authorization passed to it by the CSN.

If the call originates in the IP network, a different method for 
authentication/authorization will need to be adopted, and, in the case of IP at 
the start, the CSN must trust the authentication/authorization passed to it by 
the IP network. It is anticipated that this will be based on 
authentication/authorization approaches implemented for SIP and non-EP IP 
telephony [15], [16].

2.7  Alternate Path Routing

There are two quite different levels at which alternate path routing can apply.  

-     When the end destination is not in the IP network (IP bridging or IP at
      the start) there may be a choice of exit gateways to reach the final 
      destination.  If the call can not be established through the first choice 
      of an exit gateway, the source can attempt to establish a connection via 
      the second choice exit gateway.

-     When the end destination is in the IP network (or the exit gateway is 
      fixed), it may be possible to establish an alternate path through the IP 
      network.  How feasible this is depends on what mechanism is already being 
      used to provide QoS for VoIP traffic.

2.8  End to End Fault Tolerance

Any VoIP system needs to have a mechanism to compensate for lossy networks 
providing best effort services.  The issue here is whether the system can 
provide a different level of fault tolerance for calls that have been defined as 
EP related.  As noted above, there are circumstances in which EP related calls 
can accept a lower QoS connection than normal voice over IP calls.  There may be 
other circumstances in which they require a higher QoS connection.


Gunn                                                                Page 6

Internet Draft              BCP IEPREP IP Tel              June 21st, 2003


3.0  Key Scenarios

There are two key scenarios within the scope of this document (there are many 
more scenarios within the larger scope of general purpose IP networks).  The 
first, and simplest scenario, is a single administrative domain. The second 
scenario is multiple administrative domains which have already resolved the 
relevant technical and business issues associated with supporting normal VoIP.

3.1  Single IP Administrative Domain

A single administrative domain (especially in the current context of private IP 
networks that are designed, engineered, and managed with Telephony as the 
dominant application) is the simplest scenario for supporting the Emergency 
Preparedness objectives.

-     QoS issues to support IP telephony in general are easiest to address in a 
      single administrative domain, and additional QoS consideration for 
      Emergency Preparedness are also simplest- protocols like MPLS and 
      DiffServe are applicable in the single administrative domain.

-     Authorization/authentication are simplified in a single domain.  There is 
      no need to establish trust in transferring the EP label (whatever it is) 
      between domains.

There are a number of policies that can be implemented at various points in the 
path based on the identification of the call as EP-related.
-     Queue
-     Retry
-     Attempt with different QoS
-     Establish in spite of lack of capacity. 

3.1.1  Solutions for Providing Signaling of EP Calls

In this scenario we address each of the topologies discussed in RFC 3523 [3]:
 "IP Bridging"
 "IP at the Start".
 "IP at the End"
 "End-to-End IP"
identifying possible solutions for each scenario

"IP bridging"- 

-     Do nothing new (now)
     - Pros û Easy to implement, no security holes
     - Cons û Not only no new benefit, but will lose existing CSN functionality 
              in the terminating CSN network when an IP "island" is inserted in 
              the CSN.




Gunn                                                                Page 7

Internet Draft              BCP IEPREP IP Tel              June 21st, 2003

-    Encapsulation (now) -  
     - Pros - It works (or is close to working) now, not dependant on 
              implementation of new services by the IP carrier
     - Cons û It has no visibility in the IP part, and may fail if the start and 
              end are using different "flavors" of ISUP

-    Translation (e.g., from ISUP to SIP to ISUP)(future) 
     - Pros û It will provide visibility within the IP part, and can address 
              translation to different "flavors" of ISUP
     - Cons - Not there yet, and will require implementation by the IP carrier

"IP at the start"

-     Do nothing new (now)
      - Pros û Easy to implement, no security holes
      - Cons û No benefit in either the CSN or IP network

-     Apply CSN methods independent of IP telephony (e.g. recognize a dialed 
      2prefix, or a special dialed number combined with a pin)
     - Pros - Easy to implement, only requires IP carrier to recognize and 
              appropriately route the dialed number or prefix
     - Cons - Very inefficient. Authorization/authentication scheme which is 
              adequate for the CSN may not be sufficiently secure for IP 
              networks. 

-     Translation (e.g., from SIP to ISUP) and IP based authorization 
      /authentication(future)
     - Pros - Visibility within IP network, More efficient (don't need to send 
              PIN signaling back and forth). More flexible (easier to apply to 
              multiple CSN systems), less dependant on CSN model for 
              authentication/authorization, better security model, potentially 
              expandable to IP end-to-end
     - Cons û Not there yet.  Will require implementation by IP carrier.  Will 
              require development /implementation of IP based 
              authentication/authorization scheme.

"IP at the End"

-     Do nothing (still use the CSN based method to signal EP in the "start" 
      CSN) (now)
     - Pros û Easy to implement, no security holes
     - Cons û No benefit in the IP network (still have benefit in the "start" 
              CSN)

-     Translation (e.g., from ISUP to SIP) (future)
     - Pros - Visibility within IP network. Flexible (easy to apply to various 
              different CSN variants), better security model possible, 
              potentially expandable to IP end-to-end
     - Cons û Not there yet.  Will require implementation by IP carrier. Will 
              require additional agreement between CSN and IP network providers,   
              and requires the IP carrier to trust the CSN authentication.


Gunn                                                                Page 8

Internet Draft              BCP IEPREP IP Tel              June 21st, 2003


"End-to-End IP"

-    Do nothing (now)
     - Pros û Easy to implement, no security holes
     - Cons û no benefit in the IP network

-    "EP" signaling within SIP
     - Pros û visibility within the IP network (only valuable if something is 
              also implemented for the data side)
     - Cons - not there yet.  Will require implementation by IP carrier.  Will 
              require development /implementation of IP based  
              authentication/authorization scheme.  Not much benefit if there is 
              no congestion within the IP network.

3.1.2 Solutions for Providing Priority for the Data Stream

In this context, we assume that the network already has provisions to assure 
basic "QoS" for voice traffic.  We consider alternatives to for providing a 
different treatment for EP-Voice related data packets, in comparison to non-EP-
Voice related data packets.

The particular alternatives would depend on the techniques already in place to 
support VoIP (e.g., RSVP, DiffServe, MPLS).  Therefore we only list generic 
alternatives here. 

In some cases, the basic VoIP service may rely on over provisioning, with no 
active policing of call admission to prevent congestion related problems.  In 
these cases, it may be difficult to provide priority for the EP-Voice related 
data stream without major enhancement. 

In general, we are referring to the data stream containing the "voice packets".  
But some of these approaches might also be relevant for the data stream 
containing the signaling packets.  In general, we expect a more stringent QoS 
for EP-Voice related data packets, but under some circumstances, a less 
stringent QoS for EP-Voice related data packets may be desirable, as the 
"tradeoff" for establishing the call at all.

The alternatives, and the basic "pros and cons" are the same for all four 
topologies.  The major difference is whether or not the access links are likely 
to be congestion points.  For instance, the access links are less likely to be a 
congestion point in "IP bridging" (where the access link may have been traffic 
engineered to correspond to the capacity of the CSN at that point) than in "End-
to-End IP" (where the access links may connect to single enterprise locations, 
and may have been engineered with a greater emphasis on reducing link costs). 

-    Do nothing new
     - Pros û Easy, Cheap
     - Cons - no benefit- but may not need a benefit if the entire network has 
              excess capacity



Gunn                                                                Page 9

Internet Draft              BCP IEPREP IP Tel              June 21st, 2003


-    Provide different QoS only on the ingress access link
     - Pros û can be based on signaling information at the ingress gateway, does 
              not require transmitting packet level information across the IP 
              network, provides benefit on the ingress access link
     - Cons û provides no benefit at the egress access link, which may be a 
              congestion point  

-    Provide different QoS on the ingress and egress access links
     - Pros û provides benefits at the two most likely congestion points
     - Cons û requires signaling to the egress gateway, and/or packet level 
              labeling, transmitted across the IP network, with possible impact 
              on processing speed. 

-    Provide different QoS only on the egress access links
     - Pros û provides benefit on the egress access link
     - Cons û requires signaling to the egress gateway, and/or packet level 
              labeling, transmitted across the IP network, with possible impact 
              on processing speed.  Provides no benefit in ingress access link, 
              which may be a congestion point. 

-    Provide different QoS on all links 
     - Pros û provides maximum benefit
     - Cons - but also maximum potential for Denial of Service (DoS), maximum 
             impact on processing a at all intermediate nodes etc.

3.2  Multiple (but Predefined) Administrative Domains

In this section we consider multiple Private (isolated from the "Big I" 
Internet) IP networks that are designed, engineered, and managed with Telephony 
as the dominant application.  We will discuss it in the context of just two 
independent domains, but most of the considerations can be extrapolated to 
multiple domains.  We assume that all technical issues, and all relevant SLAs, 
contractual, and authorization issues related to carrying normal IP Telephony 
traffic across the multiple domains have already been addressed.

In this section we focus on the connection between the domains.  The four 
different topologies are not particularly important in this context.

Rather, there are several other high level considerations that affect the best 
practices (this is not a complete list of considerations):

-    No service-Neither domain recognizes any special services for Emergency 
     Preparedness traffic
-    Service in One Domain-One domain provides special services for Emergency 
     Preparedness traffic and the other does not.
-    Untrusted Domains-Each domain provides special services for Emergency 
     Preparedness traffic, but they do not trust each other, nor share the same 
     set of authorized users (e.g. a US based domain and a North Korea based 
     domain)



Gunn                                                               Page 10

Internet Draft              BCP IEPREP IP Tel              June 21st, 2003

  
-    Trusted, Different Services-Each domain provides special services for 
     Emergency Preparedness traffic, they do trust each other, they share the 
     same set (or at least a subset) of authorized users, but the nature of the 
     special services they provide are different (e.g., a private military 
     domain and a private civilian domain).
-    Trusted, Same Services-Each domain provides special services for Emergency 
     Preparedness traffic, they do trust each other, they share the same set of
     authorized users, and the nature of the special services they provide are 
     essentially the same (e.g., two private civilian domains).

The two private domains may be directly connected, or they may be connected by 
another network.  In the latter case we assume that provisions (such as 
tunneling) have already been implemented to serve normal IP telephony traffic 
between the two domains.

We do not make specific assumptions about the interfaces between the domains 
(firewalls, media gateways, proxy servers, NATs, etc.)beyond the fact that they 
are supporting normal IP Telephony traffic.

There are a number of policies that can be implemented at the interfaces and 
connections between the domains, based on the identification of the call as EP-
related.
-     Queue
-     Retry
-     Attempt with different QoS
-     Establish in spite of lack of capacity.

3.2.1 Solutions for Providing Signaling of EP Calls

The potential signaling solutions for the first three cases (No Service, Service 
in One Domain, and Untrusted Domains) are essentially the same:

-    Strip any EP related information out of the signaling messages 
     - Pros û avoids any potential DoS attack, or unauthorized use
     - Cons û lose any possibility to pass the signaling information, which 
              might be acted on by subsequent domains (IP based or CSN) if 
              appropriate.

-    Ignore any EP related information in the signaling messages, but do not 
     remove it. 
     - Pros - Any EP indication in the signaling messages(e.g., resource 
              priority header, calling party category, encapsulated ISUP 
              parameters) may be passed transparently, to be acted on by 
              subsequent domains (IP based or CSN) if appropriate.
     - Cons û Provides an additional burden on any subsequent domain which might 
              act on the signaling information, in terms of 
              authorization/authentication, and detecting and preventing DoS 
              attempts.  Provides potential unauthorized use and DoS attacks.




Gunn                                                               Page 11

Internet Draft              BCP IEPREP IP Tel              June 21st, 2003


Trusted, Different Services-

-    Strip any EP related information out of the signaling messages 
     - Pros û avoids any potential DoS attack, or unauthorized use
     - Cons û Lose any benefit

-    Ignore any EP related information in the signaling messages, but do not 
     remove it. 
     - Pros - Any EP indication in the signaling messages(e.g., resource 
              priority header, calling party category, encapsulated ISUP 
              parameters) may be passed transparently, to be acted on by 
              subsequent domains (IP based or CSN) if appropriate.  Because 
              there is already a trust relationship between the domains, there 
              is less chance of DoS or unauthorized use.
     - Cons û Does not provide the possible benefit in the second domain. 
              Provides small potential for unauthorized use and DoS attacks in 
              subsequent domains.

-    Translate signaling information appropriate for the first domain into 
     signaling information appropriate for the second domain (e.g., between CPC 
     and Precedence parameters in encapsulated ISUP message, or change the value 
     of the resource priority header in SIP message) (for users authorized in 
     both domains)
     - Pros - Provides potential for benefit in both domains 
     - Cons - More workload/processing on interfaces both in determining which   
              users are authorized in both domains (and thus which signaling 
              messages should be translated) and I doing the translations

Trusted, Same Services

-    Strip any EP related information out of the signaling messages 
     - Pros û avoids any potential DoS attack, or unauthorized use
     - Cons û Lose any benefit here, or in subsequent domains.

-    Ignore any EP related information in the signaling messages, but do not 
     remove it. 
     - Pros - Provides potential benefit in subsequent domains
     - Cons û Does not provide the possible benefit in the second domain. Can 
              provide potential for DoS in subsequent domains.

-    Act on the signaling information, and pass it on.
     - Pros - Provides potential for benefit in both domains (and subsequent 
              domains) 
     - Cons - Dependant on the trust relationship (and the strength of the 
              authorization/authentication process in the first domain).







Gunn                                                               Page 12

Internet Draft              BCP IEPREP IP Tel              June 21st, 2003

 
3.2.2 Solutions for Providing Priority for the Data Stream

In this context we refer to providing priority in the interfaces and connections 
between the two domains, not within the domains themselves.  Where EP related 
signaling information is stripped or ignored, there is only one option.

-    Do nothing new
     - Pros û Easy, Cheap
     - Cons- no benefit- but may not need a benefit if the connections and 
interfaces between domains have excess capacity

Where EP related signaling information is translated, or acted on directly, 
there are two options.

-    Do nothing new
     - Pros û Easy, Cheap
     - Cons- no benefit- but may not need a benefit if the connections and 
interfaces between domains have excess capacity

-    Provide different QoS on the interfaces and connections between the domains 
     - Pros û provides maximum benefit
     - Cons - but also maximum potential for DoS, maximum impact on processing 
              at interfaces, etc. May not be viable if the interfaces and/or 
              connections are under the control of a third domain.


4.0  Recommendations

There are a number of criteria to use in choosing among the various possible 
alternatives.

Meeting the stated objectives is certainly one criterion, but there are a number 
of others:
-     Impact on other users ("fairness") (both other VoIP users and other IP 
users in general)
     - Use of communications capacity
     - Potential for abuse (e.g. DoS and DDoS)
     - Delay
     - Robustness
     - Cost to users

-    Impact on service provider (ISP)
     - Ease of development/implementation
     - Ease of maintenance/management (including SLAs)
     - Network availability, MTBF, MTTR
     - Cost vs. revenue opportunities

-    Impact on equipment vendors
     - Ease of development
     - Market possibilities
     - Cost vs. Revenue possibilities


Gunn                                                               Page 13

Internet Draft              BCP IEPREP IP Tel              June 21st, 2003



-    Impact on application level functionality

-    Transparency 

-    Security

-    "Unintended side effects"

4.1 Signaling

The recommended solution is to use SIP signaling (e.g., the proposed resource 
priority header), and translation between this and CSN signaling(e.g., ISUP) 
when available. When and where SIP signaling is not available, the recommended 
solution is to encapsulate the CSN signaling (e.g., ISUP).

4.2 Data

The recommended solution is to provide special treatment for the EP Voice 
related data stream only where there is not a large level of excess capacity. 
This depends on the engineered capacity vs traffic level of the individual 
networks and domains.

5.0  Security Considerations

Security considerations are addressed throughout the document.  There are two 
primary concerns:

-    Authorization/authentication of traffic which is entitled to EP- Voice 
     special treatment.  The approaches currently used within the CSN (PIN 
     based authorization and/or dialing prefix-caller device based 
     authorization) do not always translate well to IP Domains.  This document 
     recognizes the issue, but does not propose specific solutions

-    Potential for unauthorized use of EP-Voice special treatment, and of DoS or 
     DDoS attacks.  This potential is addressed in the pros and cons of each 
     alternative considered.

6.0 IANA Considerations

There are no IANA considerations addressed in this document

7.0 Acknowledgements

The author would like to acknowledge the helpful comments, opinions, and 
clarifications of Pat McGregor, Dennis Berg, and Richard Kaczmarek, as well as
those comments received from the IEPS and IEPREP mailing lists.




Gunn                                                               Page 14

Internet Draft              BCP IEPREP IP Tel              June 21st, 2003


8.0 References

[1]   Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

[2]   Internet Emergency Preparedness (IEPREP) Working Group Charter

[3]   Polk, J., "Internet Emergency Preparedness (IEPREP) 
      Telephony Topology Terminology", RFC 3523, April 2003.

[4]   Carlberg, K., Brown I., Beard, C. "Framework for Supporting ETS
      in IP Telephony", draft-ietf-ieprep-framework-04.txt, Internet Draft, 
      March, 2003

[5]   Carlberg, K., Atkinson, R., "General Requirements for Emergency
      Telecommunications Service", draft-ietf-ieprep-ets-general-03.txt, 
      Internet Draft, January, 2003

[6]   Carlberg, K., Atkinson, R., "IP Telephony Requirements for
      Emergency Telecommunications Service", 
      draft-ietf-ieprep-ets-telephony-05.txt,Internet Draft, January, 2003

[7]   ANSI, "Signaling System No. 7, ISDN User Part", ANSI 
      T1.113-2000, 2000

[8]   ANSI, "Signalling System No. 7 (SS7) û High Probability 
      of Completion (HPC) Network Capability." ANSI T1.631-1993,
      1993

[9]   ITU-T Recommendation I.255.3 (1990), "Multilevel Precedence 
      and Preemption Service (MLPP)", 1990

[10]  3GPP TS 22.067 version 3.0.1 (1999-10), "3rd Generation 
      Partnership Project; Technical Specification Group Services 
      and System Aspects; enhanced Multi-Level Precedence and 
      Pre-emption (eMLPP) û Stage 1 (Release 1999)"

[11]  3GPP TS 23.067 version 3.3.0 (2001-06), "3rd Generation 
      Partnership Project; Technical Specification Group Core 
      Network; enhanced Multi-Level Precedence and Pre-emption 
      (eMLPP) û Stage 2 (Release 1999)"

[12]  3GPP TS 24.067 version 3.2.0 (2001-06), "3rd Generation
      Partnership Project; Technical Specification Group Core 
      Network; enhanced Multi-Level Precedence and Pre-emption 
      (eMLPP) û Stage 3 (Release 1999)"

[13]  Schulzrinne, H., "Requirements for Resource Priority Mechanisms
      for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 3487, February,
      2003.


Gunn                                                               Page 15

Internet Draft              BCP IEPREP IP Tel              June 21st, 2003

[14]  Schulzrinne, H., Polk, J., "SIP Communications Resource 
      Priority Header", draft-polk-sip-resource-02.txt, Internet Draft,
      March 2003

[15]  Loughney, J., Camarillo, G.,  "Authentication, Authorization and 
      Accounting Requirements for the Session Initiation Protocol",
      draft-ietf-sipping-aaa-req-03.txt, Internet Draft, May 2003

[16]  Peterson, J., "Enhancements for Authenticated Identity 
      Management in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)",
      draft-ietf-sip-identity-01.txt, Internet Draft, February 2003


9.0 Author Information

Janet P Gunn
CSC
15000 Conference Center Dr.
Chantilly, VA, 20151-3808 USA 
Email: janet.gunn@dyncorp.com
Phone: 703 818 4725










"Copyright (C) The Internet Society (May 21st, 2003). 
All Rights Reserved.

This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or 
assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and 
distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, 
provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are included 
on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this document itself 
may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright notice 
or references to the Internet Society or other Internet organizations, 
except as needed for the purpose of developing Internet standards in 
which case the procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet 
Standards process must be followed, or as required to translate it into 
languages other than English.

The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

This document and the information contained herein is provided on an "AS 


Gunn                                                               Page 16

Internet Draft              BCP IEPREP IP Tel              June 21st, 2003

IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK 
FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT 
LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT 
INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR 
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."




The Expiration date for this Internet Draft is:

December 21st, 2003









































Gunn                                                               Page 17
