


Network Working Group                                        A. Rezafard
Internet-Draft                                            Afilias Canada
Intended status: Informational                          January 15, 2008
Expires: July 18, 2008


      Extensible Supply-chain Discovery Service Problem Statement
                draft-rezafard-esds-problem-statement-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 18, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).














Rezafard                  Expires July 18, 2008                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           ESDS Problem Statement             January 2008


Abstract

   This document discusses the requirements of an application layer
   protocol which can meet the needs of today's complex and dynamic
   supply chains.  Currently, supply chain communication traffic travels
   over the Internet using existing Internet protocols.  This is a
   temporary solution for a growing niche.  This document elaborates on
   issues that would arise if this trend continues.  Also, this document
   outlines a set of design concerns that an application layer protocol
   needs to address in order to be deployable in a real-world supply
   chain.

   Comments are solicited and should be addressed to the mailing list at
   esds@ietf.org and/or the author(s).





































Rezafard                  Expires July 18, 2008                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           ESDS Problem Statement             January 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1.  Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     1.3.  Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     1.4.  Description  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.  Internet Concerns  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.1.  Public Networks and Tree-Walking Concerns  . . . . . . . .  7
     2.2.  Bootstrapping Concerns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.  Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.1.  Resource Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.2.  Client Query . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.3.  Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.4.  Access Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.5.  Independence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     3.6.  Identifier Agnostic  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     3.7.  Extensible . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     3.8.  Retention Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     3.9.  Stale Links  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   4.  Technical Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     4.1.  Auditability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     4.2.  Responsiveness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     4.3.  Availability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   5.  Research Bodies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   6.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   7.  Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     10.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     10.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 21

















Rezafard                  Expires July 18, 2008                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           ESDS Problem Statement             January 2008


1.  Introduction

   Supply chain Tracking System utilization is rising at an
   unprecedented rate.  These systems enable tracking and tracing of
   physical objects as they move through a supply chain.  Deployment of
   these systems has grown to a point that they can no longer operate
   effectively in isolation from other systems.  There is a need to
   share data among these disparate systems, which are owned and
   operated by separate organizations.

1.1.  Background

   Traditionally supply chain communication has been routed over private
   network infrastructures.  However in recent years this practice is
   abandoned in favour of communication over public networks.  The
   communication and data exchange has taken the form of flat file data
   exchange, XML, and other proprietary forms across existing
   mechanisms, such as SFTP and SMTP.  This method of exchange requires
   bilateral agreements and networking arrangements amongst all partners
   of a given supply chain.  In this model, information sharing begins
   with the supply chain partner who provides lists of the objects
   (shipping manifest) that the other partners can expect to exchange
   within the supply chain.  While this one way method is effective in
   very static supply chain relationships, its main drawback lies in
   inability to support dynamic routing of physical objects and,
   therefore, exception handling.  For example, if an object arrived at
   supply chain partner C without prior notification from supply chain
   partner B or A, the product remains unidentified and not routable.

   The advent of RFID tags has been a catalyst for the desire to
   reverse-lookup object information.  Products are being tagged with
   RFID tags, traditional barcodes, and other types of proprietary
   object identifiers.  The exchange of information now begins with the
   object and leads back to the supply chain partner.  As the object is
   scanned at various key gates in the supply chain, a referral service
   must be available to match the object's identifier either to a
   relevant supply chain partner or to a list of relevant supply chain
   partners and the data services that these partners offer to a
   requestor.  This enables supply chains to route flexibly and handle
   exceptions.











Rezafard                  Expires July 18, 2008                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           ESDS Problem Statement             January 2008


1.2.  Terminology

   There are three actors in this problem:
   Client:  refers to an actor that seeks (sources of) information about
       an individual object.
   Resource:  refers to an actor that holds information about an
       individual object and may provide it to authenticated clients who
       satisfy some authorization criteria (access control policies and
       rules).
   ESDS:  refers to an intermediary lookup service that enables a client
       to locate one or more resources.

   What emerges from combinations of these actors and their
   relationships are:
   Partner:  refers to a business entity which is comprised of Client
       and Resource actors belonging to an organization.
   Supply chain:  refers to a group of partners that have the desire to
       share information among themselves.

1.3.  Problem Statement

   Information sharing between partners is essential for all modern
   supply chain networks.  There is a strict set of business and
   technical requirements that must be observed in order to enable open
   sharing of information in a supply chain.

   There are resources and clients in each supply chain.  Each resource
   wants to advertise its knowledge (data) to interested and authorized
   clients.  Only deploying private networks to connect whole supply
   chains is no longer feasible, as the more efficient and economical
   means of connecting resources and clients is to use public network
   infrastructure.  Currently, many supply chain track-and-trace
   initiatives are deployed on public networks and the information is
   routed through Internet.  Because of this trend, it is highly
   desirable that a standardized protocol should be developed.  An IETF
   standards process would ensure that the adopted protocol conforms to
   Internet's operational needs.

   A key principle of information sharing in the supply chain is that
   data ownership must be respected.  This means that each partner can
   collect information within their organization and is not required to
   route that information to any other partner.  However, they can
   choose to share selected information with other trusted partners.
   This in turn means that the complete lifecycle information about any
   individual object may be held by multiple resources throughout the
   supply chain or the product lifecycle.  Therefore a mechanism is
   needed in order to facilitate the gathering of this information.




Rezafard                  Expires July 18, 2008                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           ESDS Problem Statement             January 2008


   A key requirement is that information accessibility is fully
   controllable.  The confidential information must be secure and hidden
   from unauthorized-clients and only visible to the intended-clients in
   a supply chain.  Unauthorized clients need to be barred from viewing,
   eavesdropping, or deducing information, in order to establish trust
   and reputation with the participating resources.

   There must be a common set of data that all resources will offer.
   This set must be defined and agreed upon in the final protocol.  This
   set may include data such as object identifier, lifecycle step,
   bootstrap location, links to back-end systems.  An essential feature
   is for the protocol to be extensible beyond the common data set to
   facilitate the needs of supply chains that discover additional uses.

   Defining a bootstrapping procedure is a necessity when designing a
   global and autonomous network of systems.  Currently there are
   deployed supply chain systems that bootstrap via Internet's DNS
   roots.  One example of this is the EPCglobal Object Name Service
   (ONS).  While ONS enables an economical means of bootstrapping,
   improper implementations may increase the traffic on DNS roots
   exponentially.  Since data will be routed through the Internet, the
   bootstrapping procedure needs to be formulated under the IETF
   standards process.

1.4.  Description

   An Extensible Supply-chain Discovery Service (ESDS) provides a
   mechanism to locate one or more sources of information about an
   individual physical object.  This may include the original
   manufacturer or supplier of the object, as well as other
   organizations who have handled the object at some point during its
   lifecycle (including repair and maintenance organizations) and even
   organizations (such as customs agencies) who might hold information
   records related to the object, even though they may have never had
   physical custody of the object.

   This document defines the Problem Statement, Objectives and Technical
   Challenges related to the application layer protocol currently
   proposed as Extensible Supply-chain Discovery Services (ESDS).  ESDS
   captures and queries historical events related to specific objects
   with attached object identifiers.  The interface enables disparate
   applications to track-and-trace shared lifecycle views of object
   identifiers across a supply chain.  Additionally, ESDS provides
   referral services in a loosely coupled mechanism with granular
   security that enables selective visibility.






Rezafard                  Expires July 18, 2008                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           ESDS Problem Statement             January 2008


2.  Internet Concerns

2.1.  Public Networks and Tree-Walking Concerns

   Currently, another standards body, EPCglobal, has issued a related
   standard referred to as ONS (Object Naming Service, 1.0).  ONS is
   effectively an extended version of DNS that does not benefit from the
   IETF review process and, by design, necessitates increased tree-
   walking.  ONS specifies a reverse mapping of the EPCglobal "SGTIN"
   (one type of supply chain object identifier) as a domain and allows
   for a reference (i.e.  URL) to a manufacturer's relevant back-end
   system (using a NAPTR record).  The SGTIN identifier is comprised of
   a EPC Manager Number, an Object Class, and a Serial Number.  The ONS
   lookup excludes the Serial Number portion of the SGTIN.  However, the
   ONS specification has already been extended in industry pilot
   projects to include the Serial Number, as this enables item level
   lookups for tagged objects in the supply chain.  Using serial level
   lookups, ONS could be used to indicate point to point referrals
   through the passage of a relevant identifier throughout the supply
   chain.  This would require successive updates to the hierarchal ONS
   to indicate incremental supply chain partner referrals, reducing the
   effectiveness of caching.  Alternatively the ONS could provide a
   single, static point of referral to the first or initiating supply
   chain partner.  However, even a relatively static entry, which only
   refers to the point of origin within the supply chain, would drive
   the number of public zone entries to extremely large numbers if an
   individual record were created for each serial number.  One common
   suggestion to manage this problem is that multiple alternate ONS
   roots can be managed for separate and unrelated supply chains and/or
   regions.  However, since there is nothing to prevent ONS from
   operating in the existing Internet root hierarchy, even alternate ONS
   providers can opt to drive traffic to the existing Internet root
   servers, rather than operate their own ONS roots.  There has already
   been a pilot ONS implementation under the .aero zone
   (sgtin.id.ons.autoid.aero) where this phenomenon may already be
   observed.  ESDS must aim to prevent this problem by keeping most of
   the network traffic off the Internet root hierarchy.

2.2.  Bootstrapping Concerns

   Currently there are discussions on how to best facilitate a
   bootstrapping processes for objects in the supply chain.  The
   bootstrapping process involves locating an object's Discovery Service
   server by an interested and authorized client.  The bootstrapping
   process needs to be enabled with only the information provided by the
   object identifier.  Unlike DNS, where there is a known set of root
   servers, ESDS will have numerous roots for various supply chains
   operating globally.  This, in turn, complicates the bootstrapping



Rezafard                  Expires July 18, 2008                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           ESDS Problem Statement             January 2008


   process.

   A common bootstrapping scenario is exception handling.  For example,
   if an object is mis-delivered, a recipient who has no pre-existing
   relationship to the supply chain, needs to obtain object ownership
   information and its corresponding Discovery Service server.  ESDS
   design must aim to accommodate this scenario while respecting privacy
   and security considerations.

   It has been suggested to use the ONS for the bootstrapping process.
   However, ONS's hierarchical identifiers have raised privacy and
   security concerns by multiple participants in the supply chain.
   While ONS can technically support multiple identifier schemes, with
   multiple issuing authorities, its hierarchical operation does depend
   on structured identifiers (for example,
   ManagerNumber.ObjectType.SerialNumber).  These identifiers leak
   information about products such as type and manufacturer and as a
   result could compromise the privacy of an individual transporting
   them.  Additionally, ONS has no authentication or access control.
   ESDS must be designed for serial level lookups and must support
   unstructured opaque identifiers to use as lookup keys within an ESDS
   service.  It should fully support authentication and object level
   access controls to address privacy concerns.

   To facilitate bootstrapping and exception handling scenarios ESDS
   design could consider a peer-to-peer lookup protocol such as XMPP.
   This would keep the ESDS traffic flat and avoid walking up the
   Internet root hierarchy.  A major concern is that the bootstrapping
   design must not implicitly establish monopolies in the long run.  The
   IETF process will ensure that the resulting protocol design addresses
   the concerns of all participants in the global supply chain.




















Rezafard                  Expires July 18, 2008                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           ESDS Problem Statement             January 2008


3.  Objectives

   This section outlines the objectives of the ESDS protocol.  In
   efforts to convey the goal of each objective, example solutions are
   provided.  These solutions are provided to trigger discussion on the
   subject matter, and are not intended to be the suggested solution to
   fulfil the objective.

3.1.  Resource Discovery

   An ESDS must provide a mechanism whereby a resource can dynamically
   establish a link for an individual object (or range or class of
   objects) that points from the ESDS to the resource.  The link can be
   expressed as a string or URI and it is helpful if this is accompanied
   by an indication of the type of service which can be accessed via the
   link (in order to distinguish between web pages, web services, EPC
   Information Services (EPCIS) and other communication mechanisms which
   might even include phone or fax numbers)

3.2.  Client Query

   An ESDS should provide a mechanism whereby a client can query the
   ESDS in order to retrieve a list of links to one or more resources.
   Queries may be one-time queries or standing queries, and an ESDS may
   support either type of query, or both.

   The query interface needs to define the criteria fields as well as
   acceptable criteria values, such as regular expressions or wildcards.

3.3.  Security

   Since ESDS needs to be deployable over public network infrastructure,
   issues of security and privacy are of heightened importance.  Clients
   must be authenticated to prevent theft of information and resources
   must be authenticated to ensure integrity of information.  The
   information routed over the Internet must be encrypted.  It is
   suggested that the security model be based on open standards, trusted
   by the supply chain industry.

   The ESDS protocol should be decoupled from the security layer and not
   have embedded components specific to certain security protocol
   implementations.  This will enable ESDS implementations to respond
   quickly to changes in the ever advancing security layer protocols.

3.4.  Access Control

   An ESDS should provide a resource with the ability to protect its
   link information in order to retain control over which clients are



Rezafard                  Expires July 18, 2008                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           ESDS Problem Statement             January 2008


   allowed to read this information.  Such rules may be expressed in the
   form of access control policies which are evaluated against the
   client's authentication credentials and its role in relation to the
   provider of the resource, as well as other criteria such as the time
   elapsed since the link was created.

   The situation may arise where a client and the provider of a resource
   have no existing trust relationship with each other.  An ESDS should
   allow a resource to specify multiple levels of 'visibility' to such a
   client, so that the resource either remains completely 'silent' or
   'invisible', or so that an opaque handle is visible.  The opaque
   handle should not reveal the identity of the resource in any way, but
   may be used to facilitate the initial negotiation between a client
   and a resource, if an ESDS or associated service provides such a
   mechanism, such as forwarding a number of messages from the client to
   the provider of the resource, provided that the client specifies the
   handle in their message.  To protect the resource provider and ESDS
   from additional burden, such a facility may be limited in the number
   of messages which are forwarded and the time window following the
   client's query during which forwarding of messages is offered.

3.5.  Independence

   In today's morphing supply chains there will always be resources that
   cannot or will not participate in track-and-trace efforts.  If a
   resource in a supply chain chooses not to participate, the protocol
   architecture needs to be tolerant of this missing link in the supply
   chain.  The only acceptable consequence of a non-participating
   resource would be to miss the information that would have been
   supplied had it participated.

3.6.  Identifier Agnostic

   To enable grouping of information belonging to the same object, each
   object needs to be uniquely identifiable as it moves through the
   supply chain and its lifecycle steps.  The protocol cannot safely
   rely on unique object identifiers alone, because an identifier may
   enter the supply chain multiple times.  One use case for this is
   returnable bins, where the same bin will go through the supply chain
   many times.  Another use case is airline baggage, where the same
   baggage identifier could appear the following year, because the
   identifier is only required to include a Julian date (the day of the
   year) but is not required to include the year.

   As an object moves through the supply chain, it produces events of
   interest.  The same event on the same object may take on a different
   meaning depending on the lifecycle step of the object.  These events
   would be more useful to the interested partners if they conveyed some



Rezafard                  Expires July 18, 2008                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           ESDS Problem Statement             January 2008


   information on the lifecycle step of the object being tracked.  The
   lifecycle defined by a supply chain should enable intelligent
   exception handling by a partner's Business Application.  Also a
   lifecycle definition should facilitate re-using of the same object
   identifier in a supply chain.  A possible solution could include the
   combination of a non-unique identifier with an unique lifecycle
   identifier.  This would require consideration as to how the
   downstream partners might know the lifecycle identifier in order to
   add additional events of interest.

3.7.  Extensible

   The event data needs to accommodate various supply chains and their
   business requirements.  Therefore it must be an extensible protocol
   which enables the partners to communicate messages specific to their
   group and supply chain.

   An ESDS protocol should enable sharing of information and refrain
   from involving the business rules of supply chains.  This will keep
   the interface clean and uniform across all supply chains and ESDS
   services.

3.8.  Retention Policy

   The retention time for data records in ESDS would vary based on the
   supply chain's business and regulatory requirements.
   o  For tracking of shipments, the records might only need to be
      stored while the shipment is in transit and has not yet reached
      its final customer (e.g. a few days to a few weeks)
   o  For some objects (e.g. consumer goods/retail sector), the primary
      interest may be tracking from manufacturer to point of sale (e.g.
      a few days to a few months)
   o  In some sectors (e.g. pharmaceuticals), regulatory guidelines may
      require records to be retained for several years beyond the point
      of dispensing.
   o  In other sectors (e.g. aerospace parts), the lifecycle up to the
      point of delivery is only the initial phase of the lifecycle of
      the part - and there may be significant interest in tracking the
      part (and its sequence of custodians and information providers)
      throughout its active service life, which can be up to 30 years
      for some parts.
   [bridge-discovery-services-design]

   So the protocol needs to facilitate defining and customizing these
   retention policies in the supply chains.






Rezafard                  Expires July 18, 2008                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           ESDS Problem Statement             January 2008


3.9.  Stale Links

   There are situations where the link information (such as a URL) that
   was originally specified is no longer effective (e.g. because the
   provider of the resource has not taken care to maintain redirection
   from the original link address to the new location of the resource
   when restructuring a website or moving to a different domain name).
   In such situations, it is desirable that an ESDS can provide a client
   with link information that is current and effective.  For audit
   purposes, it may also be necessary for an ESDS to be able to retain
   and reconstruct the original (or previous) link information, even if
   it is no longer effective.

   This may also imply that an ESDS should allow a resource provider to
   loosely couple the link record or event with the current link
   address, to ease migration of multiple records to a new link address,
   while providing a mechanism to recover a full audit trail of such
   changes of link addresses.

































Rezafard                  Expires July 18, 2008                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           ESDS Problem Statement             January 2008


4.  Technical Challenges

4.1.  Auditability

   Based on some supply chain business and regulatory requirements,
   auditing capabilities should be facilitated by ESDS to provide
   accountability if and when something goes wrong.  With an auditing
   mechanism, record data can be tracked and the person responsible
   identified, thus a series of data records can be reconstructed at a
   later date, allowing the supply chain to prove who was responsible
   for which data records [bridge-security-analysis].

4.2.  Responsiveness

   ESDS implementations will need to be designed to accept updates in a
   close to real time basis from multiple providers of information
   across the supply chain or lifecycle of an object (including
   organizations that handle the object beyond the point of sale or
   delivery, e.g. for repair purposes, maintenance, returns and reverse
   logistics, as well as recycling, remanufacturing and other end-of-
   life processes).  Because they store serial-level records, they will
   need to be sufficiently scalable to store large volumes of data,
   possibly up to trillions of records per year.

4.3.  Availability

   ESDS availability requirements would vary from supply chain to supply
   chain.  Research by BRIDGE shows that the uptime requirements for
   some supply chains are 99.99% year round.

   It is expected that the ESDS instances will be available over a
   shared network that exposes them to the effects of network attacks.
   Furthermore, in many cases it is expected that these components
   should be globally reachable from the Internet and not hosted on a
   secure private network.  Such components are also built using
   commonly available Operating Systems and middleware (e.g.
   Application Servers).  Thus they are also subject to any
   vulnerabilities of these supporting systems.

   A major security issue for shared services such as the ESDS or ONS is
   service availability.  In particular if you consider services that
   are vital for supply chain processes (e.g. "pharma ePedigree" or
   "product-authentication") ESDS needs to be able to guarantee minimal
   amount of service downtime due to security vulnerabilities and
   attacks [bridge-security-analysis].






Rezafard                  Expires July 18, 2008                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           ESDS Problem Statement             January 2008


5.  Research Bodies

   Currently, the standards organization EPCglobal, and EU research
   projects BRIDGE, SMART, and PROMISE are looking into the global
   supply chain track-and-traceability challenge.  As part of their
   research, each of them has identified the need for Discovery Services
   to link resources and clients in the supply chains.

   EPCglobal is beginning to gather user requirements for Discovery
   Services.  However, EPCglobal is a paid membership organization
   focused on serving their own subscriber community.  Although the
   final ratified EPCglobal standards are open and freely available to
   download, the subscription fees for joining the EPCglobal community
   may deter the greater proportion of the global supply chain community
   from directly participating in the development of their global
   standards.

   IETF would be the ideal standards body to oversee the development of
   this protocol because of its deep knowledge of Internet
   infrastructure and experience with development of application layer
   protocols.

   An IETF working group would be an inviting and open community which
   facilitates contribution and participation of all interested parties
   involved in the global supply chain.  Unlike an EPCglobal work group,
   there would be no economic barriers to participation in the
   development of the technical standard.  The output would be released
   as a freely available RFC in the public domain.























Rezafard                  Expires July 18, 2008                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           ESDS Problem Statement             January 2008


6.  Acknowledgements

   This document and the process of authoring was made possible by the
   excellent xml2rfc tool [RFC2629].  Credit must also be given to Scott
   Hollenbeck author of [RFC4930] for the organization and grouping of
   RFC sections.













































Rezafard                  Expires July 18, 2008                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft           ESDS Problem Statement             January 2008


7.  Contributors

      Dr. Mark Harrison
      Senior Research Associate, Distributed Information and Automation
      Laboratory
      Director, Auto-ID Labs at Cambridge
      Institute for Manufacturing
      University of Cambridge
      Mill Lane
      Cambridge, UK
      CB2 1RX

      Phone: +44-(0)1223-338178
      Email: mark.harrison@cantab.net



      Michael Young
      Senior Director, Technology
      Afilias Canada
      204-4141 Yonge Street
      Toronto, ON M2P 2A8
      CA

      Phone: +1-416-646-3304
      Email: myoung@ca.afilias.info

























Rezafard                  Expires July 18, 2008                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft           ESDS Problem Statement             January 2008


8.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.
















































Rezafard                  Expires July 18, 2008                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft           ESDS Problem Statement             January 2008


9.  Security Considerations

   This document is a problem statement that does not by itself
   introduce any security issues.















































Rezafard                  Expires July 18, 2008                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft           ESDS Problem Statement             January 2008


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.

   [RFC4930]  Hollenbeck, S., "Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP)",
              RFC 4930, May 2007.

10.2.  Informative References

   [TDS1.3]   EPCglobal Tag Data Standard Work Group, "EPC Tag Data
              Standard Standard", March 2006.

   [bridge-discovery-services-design]
              BRIDGE, "BRIDGE WP02 High-level design for Discovery
              Services", August 2007.

   [bridge-security-analysis]
              BRIDGE, "BRIDGE WP04 Security Analysis Report", July 2007.

   [bridge-serial-level-lookup-requirements]
              BRIDGE, "BRIDGE WP02 Serial Level Lookup Requirements",
              August 2007.

   [draft-thompson-esds-commands]
              Thompson, F., "Extensible Supply-chain Discovery Service
              Commands (work in progress)", April 2007.

   [draft-thompson-esds-schema]
              Thompson, F., "Extensible Supply-chain Discovery Service
              Schema (work in progress)", April 2007.

   [epc-information-services]
              EPCglobal Information Services Work Group, "EPCglobal
              Information Services", September 2007.











Rezafard                  Expires July 18, 2008                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft           ESDS Problem Statement             January 2008


Author's Address

   Ali Rezafard
   Afilias Canada
   204-4141 Yonge Street
   Toronto, ON  M2P 2A8
   CA

   Phone: +1-416-646-3304
   Email: arezafar@ca.afilias.info









































Rezafard                  Expires July 18, 2008                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft           ESDS Problem Statement             January 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Rezafard                  Expires July 18, 2008                [Page 21]

