

INTERNET-DRAFT                                              S.Nyckelgard
Expires: March 27, 2003                                Telia Research AB
                                                      September 27, 2002

                        
               DNS look-up for services related to a URI
                   <draft-nyckelgard-uri-lookup-00.txt>


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as 
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved.


Abstract

This memo is an extension to ENUM RFC 2916 [3]. RFC 2916 describes 
how to utilize DNS as a look-up mechanism for services related to a 
telephone number. This memo describes how to utilize the same look-
up mechanism for personal URIs (user@domain). Specifically, it 
defines how to translate personal URIs to DNS names.


1. Conventions used in this document

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [2].






S. Nyckelgard                                                  [Page 1]


Internet Draft                  enum-uri                September 2002


2. Introduction 

It is sometimes desirable to find out what services that are connected 
to a certain user identifier. ENUM RFC 2916 [3] defines how to utilize 
existing DNS services for the look-up but the range of user identifiers
is limited to telephone numbers. This memo extends the scope to also 
incude personal URIs (user@domain). 

The look-up mechanism requires that the user identifier be translated to 
a DNS name. ENUM RFC 2916 [3] describes how to translate E.164 telephone 
numbers to DNS names. This memo describes how to translate personal 
URIs to DNS names. 
 

3. The virtual "at" domain

Internet domains that wish to use DNS as a repository for information 
regarding what services that are connected to their users MAY create a 
virtual sub-domain that serves as a kind of user directory in the DNS. 
The virtual sub-domain SHOULD be given the name "at". 

The name "at" derives from the rule for how to translate a personal 
URI to a DNS name. The rule is simple and intuitive:  

    Replace the "@" sign found in personal URIs by the virtual 
    domain name "at". 

Example:

     "john.doe@foo.com"  translates to  "john.doe.at.foo.com"   

A DNS query for "john.doe.at.foo.com" will return information related 
to the URI "john.doe@foo.com". 

URI-related information that can be stored by the DNS and the record 
structure for storing such information in the DNS are exactly the 
same as defined for telephone numbers by ENUM RFC 2916 [3]. See RFC 
2916 for more information. 

Remark:
The probability that an Internet domain has a non-virtual sub-domain 
named "at" that also happens to serve as a root for other sub-domains 
is extremely small. Having choosen a name other than "at" in order to 
reduce the risk of encountering a naming collision would hence not 
have counterbalanced the advantage of an intuitive naming convention. 


4. Security Considerations

The security considerations of ENUM RFC 2916 [3] apply here too. 
See RFC 2916 for more information.



S. Nyckelgard                                                  [Page 2]


Internet Draft                  enum-uri                September 2002


5. References


[1]   Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", 
      BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

[2]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
      Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

[3]   Faltstrom, P., "E.164 number and DNS", RFC 2916, September 2000



6. Author's Address

   S÷ren Nyckelg…rd
   Telia Research AB
   Box 214
   40123 Gothenburg
   Sweden
   
   soren.m.nyckelgard@telia.com
   +46 70 5732399



Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (c) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of develop-
   ing Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights 
   defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as 
   required to translate it into languages other than English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


S. Nyckelgard                                                  [Page 3]
