



Network Working Group                                  B. Carpenter (ed)
Internet-Draft                                                       IBM
Expires: December 11, 2006                                  June 9, 2006


                  Questions about the standards track
                  draft-carpenter-newtrk-questions-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 11, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document sets out some thoughts about three possible directions
   for further work on the evolution of the IETF standards track.  Its
   purpose is to stimulate community discussion leading to a choice
   between these three directions.








Carpenter (ed)          Expires December 11, 2006               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     Questions about the standards track         June 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Focus on document relationships  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Focus on maturity levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   8.  Change log [RFC Editor: please remove this section]  . . . . .  7
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 10




































Carpenter (ed)          Expires December 11, 2006               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     Questions about the standards track         June 2006


1.  Introduction

   BCP 9 [RFC2026] is the current definition of the IETF standards
   track.  For some years there has been concern in the IETF that the
   three stages of the standards track are no longer well adapted to
   current conditions.  One version of the statement of this problem is
   in [RFC3774] which says:


   "2.4.  Three Stage Standards Hierarchy not properly Utilized

      The current hierarchy of Proposed, Draft, and Full Standard maturity
      levels for specifications is no longer being used in the way that was
      envisioned when the stratification was originally proposed.  In
      practice, the IETF currently has a one-step standards process that
      subverts the IETF's preference for demonstrating effectiveness
      through running code in multiple interoperable implementations.  This
      compresses the process that previously allowed specifications to
      mature as experience was gained with actual implementations:

      o  Relatively few specifications are now progressed beyond Proposed
         Standard (PS) to Draft Standard (DS) level, and even fewer to Full
         Standard (FS)."
     (etc.)

   It is important that the concern is not viewed only as a matter
   internal to the IETF.  The IETF's output is of no value unless it is
   useful to a much wider community: implementors, vendors, service
   providers, and directly or indirectly for the whole user community.
   Therefore, the comprehensibility and useability of IETF
   specifications for all these stakeholders is at issue.  This broad
   perspective, and not the IETF's internal workings, should be our
   first concern.  This point seems to have been missed in the drafting
   of [RFC3774], which is rather focussed on the mechanics of the IETF,
   but is implicit in the IETF Mission Statement [RFC3935].

   Some time ago, the New IETF Standards Track Discussion (newtrk) WG
   was set up to tackle this problem.  Its charter says in part:

   "The goal of this working group is to agree on a revised IETF
   Standards Track, to replace the standards track described in RFC
   2026.  The working group will also decide on a process path forward.

   "The disparity between the documented IETF standards process and what
   is used in practice can cause confusion on the part of those people
   or organizations that use IETF technologies...

   "The goal of this working group is to agree on a revised IETF



Carpenter (ed)          Expires December 11, 2006               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     Questions about the standards track         June 2006


   Standards Track, taking into consideration the above points, to
   replace the standards track described in RFC 2026.  The working group
   will also decide on a process for making forward progress...

   "As part of a revised standards track process, the group will also
   explore the creation of a new series of short IESG-approved IETF
   documents to describe and define IETF technology standards.  These
   documents should be able to be used to define the IETF understanding
   of what constituted a specific IETF standard at particular points in
   time."

   This draft will not attempt to recapitulate the history of
   discussions in newtrk.  However, they have not yet led to a set of
   proposals which have both solid WG support and seem likely to rapidly
   reach IETF consensus and IESG approval.  There are undoubtedly
   differences of opinion about how this situation arose and who is to
   blame.  This draft avoids that discussion.  Its goal is to set out
   three distinct ways forward and to stimulate constructive discussion
   in the community (not just in the WG) about which is the best choice
   for the future.

   The three possible ways forward are:
   1.  Agree that, apart from day to day efforts to improve efficiency,
       the problems with the existing standards track are not serious
       enough to justify the effort needed to make substantial changes.
       Conclude that [RFC3774] exagerrated the problem and we only need
       to make a relatively minor set of clarifications to BCP 9
       [RFC2026].
   2.  Focus on the issue of document relationships, or as the newtrk
       charter currently says "the creation of a new series of short
       IESG-approved IETF documents to describe and define IETF
       technology standards."
   3.  Focus on the three-stage standards track, or as the newtrk
       charter currently says "agree on a revised IETF Standards
       Track... to replace the standards track described in RFC 2026."

   The next two sections expand somewhat on the latter two alternatives.


2.  Focus on document relationships

   Today, users of IETF standards have no way to unambiguously identify
   the complete current set of specifications for a given standard.  In
   particular, there is no effective structured document identification
   scheme and no systematic approach to documenting the relationship
   between various parts and versions of a standard.

   This issue is best illustrated by example.  Perhaps the most



Carpenter (ed)          Expires December 11, 2006               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     Questions about the standards track         June 2006


   fundamental example is Internet Protocol version 4.  Consider a
   hypothetical programmer on a desert island, with a computer and an
   electricity supply, but no information except the indexed corpus of
   RFCs and their external normative references.  How can this
   programmer implement IPv4 interoperably?  The index will suggest
   starting with RFC 791 (a Standard), updated by RFC 1349 (a Proposed
   Standard, i.e. of lower status, so how can it have priority?).  The
   index then tells our programmer that RFC 1349 was obsoleted by RFC
   2474 (another Proposed Standard).  It then indicates that RFC 2474
   was updated by RFC 3168 (Proposed Standard) and by RFC 3260
   (Informational).  Only by reading RFC 2474 will our programmer know
   to consult RFC 2475 (Informational).  And nowhere in this process is
   she led to a much more important reference: RFC 1122 "Requirements
   for Internet Hosts - Communication Layers" (a Standard), which itself
   has been updated by RFC 1349 (again) and RFC 4379 (17 years later).
   We will stop the trail here, but it should be clear that our isolated
   programmer is unlikely to determine which RFCs she needs to follow to
   build an interoperable IPv4 stack.

   Other examples abound.  What is the set of documents needed to fully
   specify TCP or SMTP?  How does an implementor of FTP know that the
   appropriate reference for ASCII is RFC 20?  Among more modern
   protocols, where does a SIP or MPLS implementor look for the complete
   set of relevant specifications?

   All is not hopeless.  An IPv4 implementor who starts with RFC 1122
   and its updates has a better chance than one who starts with RFC 791,
   at least until having to tackle DHCP.  An IPv6 implementor can start
   with RFC 4294 (IPv6 Node Requirements).  An IPv4 router implementor
   can start with RFC 1812 (Requirements for IP Version 4 Routers).  But
   these are exceptions produced with great effort.  In the general
   case, implementors need to be experts in the baroque structure of the
   corpus of RFCs as much as in the technology itself.  This is a cost
   to the community, directly resulting from the IETF's piecemeal
   approach.

   At least two lines of attack on this problem have been pursued in the
   newtrk WG.  To avoid this document interfering in newtrk's due
   process, only a very brief overview is given here.

   The first approach is known as Internet Standards Documents (ISDs).
   Conceptually, an ISD defines what a given standard is and which RFCs
   (of any maturity level) form part of that standard.  In this model,
   an ISD equivalent of RFC 4294 would actually be *the* IPv6 standard,
   for example.

   The other, simpler, approach is an XML model for describing a set of
   associated RFCs, without otherwise affecting the concept of what a



Carpenter (ed)          Expires December 11, 2006               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     Questions about the standards track         June 2006


   standard actually is.  These documents would be known as Set of RFC
   Documents (SRDs).  In effect, they are a boost to the existing
   indexing mechanisms for RFCs.

   Obviously, the introduction of any such mechanism would create a new
   document series and, in some cases, extra work.  In other cases the
   work is already done but in other forms (e.g.  Applicability
   Statement RFCs, or external white papers).  As with any change of
   practice in the IETF, we would need all WG chairs, and the IESG, to
   sign on and to manage the necessary work.  The community needs to
   decide whether the benefits outweigh these costs.


3.  Focus on maturity levels

   The current three stage standards track is perceived to be under-used
   and to have specific problems that make some aspects of it
   unrealistic.  (It should be noted that the number of stages in the
   standards track does not affect the time taken to move a draft
   through the approval process and to publish it, so the problem under
   discussion is distinct from the issues of the time taken to obtain
   IESG approval and RFC publication.)

   This is the topic that the newtrk WG tackled initially.  Proposals
   have been made over several years for reducing the standards track
   from three to two stages or even one stage, for adding a WG Snapshot
   option, and for related clarification of the implementation report
   requirement (a.k.a. the "running code" requirement) for advancement
   in the standards track.  All of these changes are relatively simple
   to define, but no consensus has emerged in the WG as to which of them
   is preferable.

   It seems to be generally agreed that the requirement in BCP 9
   [RFC2026] for regular review of Proposed Standards and Draft
   Standards to see if they are ready for advancement is unrealistic,
   with so many such RFCs on the books.  Even the exercise in de-
   classifying unused Proposed Standards [RFC4450] proved to be a lot of
   work, needing several rounds of community review.

   The community needs to decide whether the problems in this area are
   in fact grievous enough to be tackled in priority, or whether they
   are relatively benign.


4.  Discussion

   Clearly a case can be made for all three of the approaches mentioned.
   We could shrug our shoulders and perform a maintenance update of BCP



Carpenter (ed)          Expires December 11, 2006               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     Questions about the standards track         June 2006


   9 [RFC2026].  We could make a concerted effort to choose between a
   two-stage and a one-stage replacement for the three-stage standards
   track.  We could set that question aside and make a concerted effort
   to agree on a standards-description recipe.  However, experience
   strongly suggests that we *do* need to make a choice as a community
   between these three alternatives, and (assuming effort can be found)
   charter work on only one of them with clear goals and realistic
   milestone dates.

   It seems likely that if we choose to charter work on the standards
   description effort, formal adjustments to the three-stage standards
   track could be made at a later stage if the community wanted.  It
   also seems likely that a maintenance update of BCP 9 will be needed
   anyway, but this should not be confused with the major question: do
   we embark first on the standards track update, the standards
   description effort, or neither?

   Community discussion is invited, in the first instance at
   ietf@ietf.org.


5.  Security Considerations

   This document has no security implications for the Internet.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document requires no action by the IANA.


7.  Acknowledgements

   In drafting this document, previous discussions within the IESG were
   reviewed.  Discussion with, among others, the current newtrk Chair,
   Scott Bradner, and John Klensin are gratefully acknowledged.

   This document was produced using the xml2rfc tool[RFC2629].


8.  Change log [RFC Editor: please remove this section]

   draft-carpenter-newtrk-questions-00: original version, 2006-06-09


9.  References





Carpenter (ed)          Expires December 11, 2006               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     Questions about the standards track         June 2006


9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

9.2.  Informative References

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.

   [RFC3774]  Davies, E., "IETF Problem Statement", RFC 3774, May 2004.

   [RFC3935]  Alvestrand, H., "A Mission Statement for the IETF",
              BCP 95, RFC 3935, October 2004.

   [RFC4450]  Lear, E. and H. Alvestrand, "Getting Rid of the Cruft:
              Report from an Experiment in Identifying and Reclassifying
              Obsolete Standards Documents", RFC 4450, March 2006.

































Carpenter (ed)          Expires December 11, 2006               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     Questions about the standards track         June 2006


Author's Address

   Brian Carpenter (ed)
   IBM
   8 Chemin de Blandonnet
   1214 Vernier,
   Switzerland

   Email: brc@zurich.ibm.com










































Carpenter (ed)          Expires December 11, 2006               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft     Questions about the standards track         June 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Carpenter (ed)          Expires December 11, 2006              [Page 10]


