





                                                  Danny Goderis, Alcatel
                                                   Yves T'joens, Alcatel
                                 Christian Jacquenet, France Telecom R&D
                                                   George Memenios, NTUA
                                                     George Pavlou, UniS
                                        Richard Egan, Racal Research Ltd
                                                      David Griffin, UCL
                                           Panos Georgatsos, AlgoSystems
                                 Leonidas Georgiadis, Univ. Thessaloniki
                                                    Pim Van Heuven, IMEC

INTERNET DRAFT <draft-tequila-sls-01.txt>
                                                              June, 2001
                                                   Expires December 2001

                Service Level Specification Semantics,
                Parameters and negotiation requirements.

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

   This document  identifies the basic information to be handled by
   Service Level Specifications (SLS, [RFC 2475], [DS-TERMS]) when
   considering the deployment of value-added IP service offerings over
   the Internet. Such IP service offerings can be provided together with
   a given quality of service (QoS), which is expected to be defined in
   such SLS, from a technical standpoint. Since these IP services are



TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                  [Page 1]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


   likely to be provided over the whole Internet, their corresponding
   QoS will be based upon a set of technical parameters that both
   customers and services providers will have to agree upon. From this
   perspective, this draft aims at listing (and promoting a standard
   formalism for) a set of basic parameters which will actually compose
   the elementary contents of an SLS.

   Such a specification effort tries to address the following concerns:

   - Provide a standard set of information to be negotiated between a
   customer and a service provider or amongst services providers within
   the context of processing an SLS;

   - Provide the corresponding semantics of such information, so that it
   might be appropriately modeled and processed by the above-mentioned
   parties (in an automated fashion).

Table of Contents

   1.   Introduction
   1.1  Motivation
   1.2  Objective
   2.   Basic assumptions and terminology
   3.   SLS content & template
   3.1. Scope
   3.2. Flow Identification
   3.3. Traffic Envelop and Traffic Conformance
   3.4. Excess Treatment
   3.5. Performance Guarantees
   3.6. Service Schedule
   3.7. Reliability
   4.   Service Level Specifications and Per Domain Behaviors
   4.1  DiffServ Terminology
   4.2. SLS and PDB similarities and differences.
   4.2.1. A subset of common parameters
   4.2.2. Inter-domain interfaces versus intra-domain QoS building blocks
   4.3. From PHB to value-added IP service: a layered DiffServ view
   5.   Service Level Specification examples
   5.1. Virtual Leased Line
   5.2. Bandwidth Pipe for data-services
   5.3. Real-time micro-flows
   5.4. Minimum rate guarantee with allowed excess
   5.5. Qualitative Olympic Services
   5.6. The funnel services
   5.7. Best Effort Traffic
   6.   SLS negotiation requirements
   7.   Security considerations
   8.   Acknowledgements



TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                  [Page 2]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


0. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 ([RFC-2119]).

1. Introduction

1.0 Changes w.r.t. the previous version

   This is the third version of an Internet Draft on the issue of
   Service Level Specifications (SLSs). The first version was the draft
   <draft-tequila-diffserv-sls-00.txt >, while the second version was
   <draft-tequila-diffserv-sls-00.txt >. The major change of this
   version is a new section 4 "Service Level Specifications and Per
   Domain Behaviors". This new section discusses the simillarities and
   differences between SLSs and PDBs. Also some minor editing changes
   and reference updates have been incorporated in this version.

1.1 Motivation

   This document is presented to the IETF community to gauge the
   interest for advancing the work on the specification of an SLS
   definition, its semantics and its potential negotiation protocol(s).
   The deployment of QoS-based value-added IP services over the global
   Internet is one of the most exciting challenges that the service
   providers try to currently address, especially when considering the
   deployment of such service over administrative domains. From this
   standpoint, it seems useful to consider the specification of an SLS
   template these service providers would agree upon, so as to enforce
   an inter-domain QoS policy. This is the basic motivation for
   presenting this document to the IETF community.

1.2 Objective

   This document presents an outline for the definition of the Service
   Level Specification parameters, the semantics that go behind this
   representation, and some early ideas on the requirements on
   negotiation of SLSs.

   The need to have such an agreed set of Service Level Specification
   parameters and semantics is manifold.

   First, it is necessary to be able to allow for a highly developed
   level of automation and dynamic negotiation of Service Level
   Specifications between customers and providers. Automation and
   dynamics are indeed helpful in providing customers (as well as
   providers) the technical means for the dynamic provisioning of



TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                  [Page 3]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


   quality of service. The automation in itself is e.g. necessary to
   allow roaming (dial-in) and to enable mobile users to have access and
   negotiate a transport Service Level, independent of their point of
   attachment to the network.

   Second, the design and the deployment of Bandwidth Broker
   capabilities [TWOBIT] in a multi-vendor environment requires a
   standardized set of semantics for Service Level Specifications being
   negotiated at different locations:

      - between the customer and the service provider (namely between
      the Customer Premises Equipment (CPE) and its point of attachment
      to the IP network managed by the service provider);

      - within an administrative domain (for intra-domain SLS
      negotiation purposes);

      - between administrative domains (for inter-domain negotiation
      purposes).

   While the representation and semantics behind a Service Level
   Specification need to be standardized, this document does not assume
   that the syntax, nor the SLS negotiation protocol need to be uniquely
   defined. E.g, the negotiation could make use of various other
   protocols such as http, rsvp, IPCP, DHCP, etc. The latter is ffs, and
   as such not part of this document.

   The document is structured as follows.

   Section 2 lists the basic assumptions underlying this work and some
   terminology.

   Section 3 describes the parameters of the Service Level Specification
   (template). This draft only describes the semantics of the SLS-
   parameters, omitting all implementation details as for instance the
   parameter data types (at this moment).

   Section 4 provides some examples of relevant SLS specifications, with
   the aim to show the usage of the templates. The SLS formalism defined
   in section 3 allows making a distinction between qualitative and
   quantitative SLSs:

      - SLSs depicting qualitative services should yield the
      specification of relative QoS indicators, such as a low IP
      datagram loss ratio. From this standpoint, best effort traffic is
      expected to be qualified by an SLS of that range of qualitative
      services.




TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                  [Page 4]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


      - SLSs depicting quantitative services should yield the accurate
      measurement of QoS indicators, such as e.g., transit delay.

   Sections 5 and 6 finally describe some SLS (protocol) negotiation
   requirements and security considerations respectively.

   The material presented in this draft derives from work within the
   IST-TEQUILA project [TEQUILA].

2. Basic assumptions and terminology

   The basic assumption of this draft is that IP services will be
   deployed over a public IP infrastructure, which will be (partly if
   not completely) composed of diffserv-aware network elements ([RFC-
   2475], [DS-MODEL]). These network elements are able to implement Per
   Hop Behaviors (PHBs), including the Assured Forwarding PHB ([RFC-
   2597]), and the Expedited Forwarding PHB ([RFC-2598].

   Customers of such services include Internet Service Providers (ISP),
   who may well establish QoS-based peering agreements between
   themselves, and usual customers of ISPs, like those who compose both
   the residential and the corporate market.

   The terminology used in this draft is in agreement with the DiffServ
   Working Group terminology introduced in [RFC-2475], section 1.2
   "terminology" and further specified in [DS-TERMS].

3. SLS content & template

   The following describes the attributes of the Service Level
   Specification. It should be remarked that some SLS-features are not
   yet specified in this draft. For example, the Internet2 QoS Working
   Group specifies an SLS for the EF-based Premium Service [QBONE]. One
   of the attributes, i.e. "Route", is used for inter-domain routing
   aspects. This and other SLS features are for further study.

3.1. Scope

   The scope of an SLS associated to a given service offering indicates
   where the Quality of Service (QoS) policy for that specific service
   offering is to be enforced. Therefore the scope uniquely identifies
   the geographical/topological region over which the QoS is to be
   enforced by indicating the boundaries of that region.

   An SLS is associated with uni-directional traffic flows. Note however
   that this does not exclude the provisioning by providers of
   bidirectional contracts, by combining one or more SLSs.




TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                  [Page 5]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


   The associated scope of the SLS MUST be expressed by a couple of
   ingress and egress interfaces. Ingress/egress denote respectively the
   entry/exit points of the IP packets relative to the region (network).

   Scope = (ingress, egress) with ingress/egress defined as

      - Ingress: interface identifier | set of interface identifiers |
      any

      - Egress : interface identifier | set of interface identifiers |
      any

   Remarks:

   - "|" denotes an exclusive OR.

   - "any" is logically equivalent with unspecified.

   The following combinations of (ingress, egress) interfaces are
   allowed:

      - (1,1) -  one-to-one communication

      - (1,N) - one-to-many communication (N>1)

      - (1,any) - one-to-any communication

      - (N,1) - many-to-one communication (N>1)

      - (any,1) - any-to-one communication

   The above taxonomy excludes the many-to-many communication (M,N).
   Either ingress OR egress MUST be specified to exactly ONE interface
   identifier (with a non-exclusive OR). Many-to-many communication
   (M,N) can be decomposed into M times one-to-many communication (1,N).

   This taxonomy SHOULD avoid all ambiguity about the IP flow (defined
   as a set of IP datagrams sharing at least one common characteristic,
   like e.g. the same [source address; destination address] pair), and
   its corresponding identification. (see section 3.2 and 3.3). If the
   ingress is a single interface identifier, then the traffic envelop
   and flow id concerns the incoming IP packet stream at the unique
   ingress point. If (only) the egress is a single interface, i.e.
   (N|any,1), then the traffic envelop and flow id concerns the outgoing
   (aggregate) traffic on the egress link. More details about the latter
   can be found in the example 4.5.

   In the remaining part of this document SLSs with an associated scope



TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                  [Page 6]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


   (topology) of (1,1) ; (1,N) ; (N,1) will be called respectively Pipe,
   Hose and Funnel SLSs.

   Disclaimer:

   An ingress (or egress) interface identifier should uniquely determine
   the boundary link as defined in [RFC-2475] on which packets
   arrive/depart at the border of a DS domain. This link identifier MAY
   be an IP address, but it may also be any other mutually agreed upon
   identifier which uniquely identifies a boundary link. Fore example a
   layer-two identifier in case of e.g. ethernet, or for unnumbered
   links like in e.g. PPP(Point-to-Point Protocol, [RFC-1661])-based
   access configurations. The interface identifier(s) may also
   implicitly be derived from the source or destination address
   information in the Flow Identification field (see next section 3.2)
   combined with e.g. BGP4 (Border Gateway Protocol, version 4, [RFC-
   1771]) routing information.

3.2. Flow Identification

   The flow identification (Flow Id) of an SLS associated to a given
   service offering indicates for which IP packets the QoS policy for
   that specific service offering is to be enforced.

   A Flow Id identifies a stream of IP datagrams sharing at least one
   common characteristic. An SLS contains one (and only one) Flow Id,
   which MAY formally be specified by providing one or more of the
   following attributes:

   Flow Id = (Differentiated Services information, source information,
   destination information, application information)

      - Differentiated Services information = DSCP value | set of DSCP
      values | any

      The Differentiated Services Code Point (DSCP) IP header field is
      defined in [RFC-2474].

      - Source information = source address | set of  source addresses |
      source prefixe | set of source prefixes | any

      - Destination information = destination address | set of
      destination addresses | destination prefixe | set of destination
      prefixes | any

      - Application information = protocol number | protocol number and
      source port, destination port | any




TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                  [Page 7]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


   Note: "any" is again logically equivalent with unspecified.

   Thus, the Flow Id may be expressed by information attributes related
   to the source/destination nodes, the application or the DS field in
   the IP header. The Flow Id provides the necessary information for
   classifying the packets at a DS boundary node.

   This datagram classification can either be Behaviour Aggregate (BA)
   or Multi-Field (MF)classification based.

   In case of MF-classification all attributes MAY be specified,
   including the DSCP field. MF classification may depict as well
   micro-flows as aggregate macro-flows, based on e.g. source network
   prefix [DS-MODEL]. Also the "set-of" semantics allows for the
   specification of aggregate flows. If a Flow Id is e.g. specified by a
   set of two IP source addresses, then any packet with either of the
   two concerned source addresses belongs to the IP packet stream
   identified by Flow Id.

   In case of BA-classification [RFC-2475], the DSCP attribute MUST be
   specified and the other attributes MUST NOT be specified. If a set of
   DSCP-values is specified, then any packet having a DSCP belonging to
   this set is part of the Flow Id packet stream (analogous to the
   example above with the IP source addresses). As an example consider
   an Ordered Aggregate (OA) IP packet stream of a particular Assured
   Forwarding Class AFx (AF1,AF2,AF3,AF4 - see [RFC 2597]). This stream
   could be specified within one Flow Id using three DSCP-values,
   indicating the three drop precedences levels, respectively colored in
   green, yellow and red.

   It should however be noticed that the DSCP-value(s) specified in the
   SLS has (have) as such nothing to do with the DSCP-marking of packets
   inside the DiffServ network. The latter, i.e. the "interior" DSCP is
   used for differentiating packets according to Per Hop Behaviours
   (PHBs). The former, i.e. the "ingress" DSCP value (specified in the
   SLS), is just another way of identifying a packet stream, eventually
   in combination with other IP header fields. At the ingress DiffServ
   node (incoming) packets are classified based on the "ingress" DSCP
   value (amongst others), after which they may be re-marked by the
   "interior" DSCP-value.

   Finally note also that the IP routing scheme MAY put restrictions on
   combining scope and flow identification within an SLS.

   In general, if (only) Flow ID is specified by source and destination
   IP address (IP-src, IP-dest), and the scope is unspecified, then
   there is no a-priori assumption about the actual ingress/egress
   points that this traffic will use. Indeed, it is the responsibility



TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                  [Page 8]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


   of the service provider to define the most appropriate route for this
   traffic, by enforcing the corresponding traffic engineering and
   routing policy. Thus, the (ingress, egress) information (which is NOT
   in the SLS) is then derived from the Flow Id and the routing policy
   of the service provider.

   On the other hand, if Flow Id AND scope are specfied in the SLS,
   resp. by the pairs (IP-src, IP-dest) and (IP-ingr, IP-egr) then it is
   clear that the IP packets MUST follow the route (IP-src,...,IP-
   ingr,...,IP-egr,...,IP-dest). Thus the restriction is that the scope
   (IP-ingr, IP-egr) is part of the route from IP-scr to IP-dest.

   Also remark that the exclusion of the many-to-many communication
   scope model puts similar constraints on the source/destination fields
   of the Flow Identification.

3.3 Traffic Envelop and Traffic Conformance

   The traffic envelop describes the traffic (conformance)
   characteristics of the IP packet stream identified by the Flow Id.
   The traffic envelop is a set of Traffic Conformance Parameters,
   describing how the packet stream should look like to get the
   guarantees indicated by the performance parameters (defined in
   section 3.5)

   The Traffic Conformance Parameters are the basic input for the
   Traffic Conformance Algorithm. Traffic Conformance Testing is the
   combination of the Traffic Conformance Parameters and the Traffic
   Conformance Algorithm. This will usually be done at a DS-boundary
   node.

   The algorithm and the conformance test can be binary-based or multi-
   level based.

   Binary Traffic Conformance Testing is a set of actions which uniquely
   identifies the "in-profile" and "out-of profile" (or excess) packets
   of an IP stream (identified by Flow-Id). In this case the Traffic
   Conformance Parameters describe the reference values the traffic
   (identified by the Flow ID.) will have to comply with, thus yielding
   the notions of "in" and "out" of profile traffics. The Traffic
   Conformance Algorithm is the mechanism enabling unambiguously to
   identify all "in" or "out" of profile packets based on these
   Conformance parameters.

   In case of multi-level (n) Traffic Conformance Testing a packet will
   be tagged (by the algorithm) as belonging to a particular level
   (1...n). Packets tagged as level n are called "excess" packets.




TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                  [Page 9]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


   The SLS MUST indicate the concerned level (n) of the conformance
   testing algorithm:

      - Multi-level conformance testing n (integer)

   The following gives a (non-exhaustive) list of potential conformance
   parameters.

      - Peak rate p (bits per second)

      - Token bucket rate r (bits per second)

      - bucket depth b (bytes)

      - Maximum Transport Unit (MTU) M (bytes)

      - Minimum packet size (bytes)

   Binary-based Traffic Conformance Testing examples:

      - Conformance parameters = token bucket parameters (b,r);
      conformance algorithm = token bucket algorithm.

      - Conformance parameters = token bucket parameters and peak rate
      (b,r,p) with p larger than r; conformance algorithm = the combined
      token bucket (b,r) and (b,p). This is the conformance test for
      Integrated Services Controlled Load and Guaranteed Service IP
      flows in the IntSer QoS architecture [RFC-2211, RFC-2212]. The
      scheme permits bursty traffic to be sent, limited to a burst of b
      bytes, with a (long-term) average rate of r and a peak rate of no
      more than p.

      - Conformance parameters = MTU; conformance algorithm = all
      packets allowed with size smaller than MTU; packets larger than
      MTU are fragmented or dropped.

   Three-level based Traffic Conformance Testing example

      - The Two-rate Three-colour marker [REF] is based on two token
      buckets with rates r1 and r2 (larger than r1), containing
      respectively green and yellow tokens. The simplest operational
      mode is the "colour-blank" mode. A packet is tagged "green" if
      there are green and yellow tokens available, yellow if only yellow
      tokens are available and otherwise it is tagged red.


3.4. Excess Treatment




TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                 [Page 10]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


   This section describes how the service provider will process excess
   traffic, i.e. out-of-profile traffic (in case of binary conformance
   testing) or n-level traffic (in case of n-level conformance testing).
   The process takes place after Traffic Conformance Testing, described
   previously.

   Excess traffic may be dropped, shaped and/or remarked. The SLS MUST
   specify the appropriate action by the following attribute.

      - Excess Treatment

   If Excess Treatment is not indicated, then excess traffic is dropped.
   Depending on the appropriate action, more parameters MAY be required
   The following is an indication in case of binary conformance testing.
   Multi-level conformance testing (like the definition of a
   hierarchical drop preference model) MAY also be enforced, but this
   concern has been left for further study.

      - If excess traffic is dropped, then all packets marked as "out-
      of-profile" by the Traffic Conformance Algorithm are dropped. No
      extra parameters are needed.

      - If excess traffic is shaped, then all packets marked as "out-
      of-profile" by the Traffic Conformance Algorithm are delayed until
      they are "in-profile". The shaping rate is the policing/token
      bucket rate r. The extra parameter is the buffer size of the
      shaper.

      - If excess traffic is marked or remarked, then all packets marked
      as "out-of-profile" by the the Traffic Conformance Algorithm are
      (re-) marked with a particular DSCP-value (yellow or red). The
      extra parameter is the DSCP.


3.5. Performance Guarantees

   The performance parameters describe the service guarantees the
   network offers to the customer for the packet stream described by the
   Flow Id and over the geographical/topological extent given by the
   scope.

   There are four performance parameters:

      - delay, time interval, optional quantile

      - jitter, time interval, optional quantile

      - packet loss, time interval



TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                 [Page 11]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


      - throughput, time interval

   Delay, jitter and packet loss guarantees are for the in-profile
   traffic in case of binary conformance testing. For multi-level (n)
   conformance testing, delay, jitter and loss guarantees MAY be
   specified for each conformance level-i, except the last one (n). For
   example if n = 3, one can have a delay guarantee for the "conformance
   level-1" packets and a different delay guarantee for the "conformance
   level-2" packets. No guarantees are given for excess ("conformance
   level-n") traffic.

   The throughput is an overall guarantee for the IP packet stream,
   independent of a particular level (see below).

   The following definitions always consider the (measurable)
   performance parameters related to the packet stream specified by the
   Flow Id. For simplicity the definitions below are given for binary
   conformance testing (n=2), but generalisation is straightforward.


   The delay and jitter indicate respectively the maximum packet
   transfer delay and packet transfer delay variation from ingress to
   egress, measured over (any) time period with a length equal to the
   (indicated) time interval.

   Delay and jitter may either be specified as worst case
   (deterministic) bounds or as quantiles. Indeed, the worst case
   delay/jitter bounds will be very rare events and customers may find
   measurements of e.g. 99.5th percentile a more relevant empirical
   gauge of delay/jitter.

   Suppose e.g. that the SLS specifies the triple (delay = 10ms, time
   interval = 5 minutes, quantile = 10E-3). Then the probability that
   the transfer delay of a packet (between ingress-egress) is larger
   than 10ms, is less than 10E-3; and this for any measurement period of
   5 minutes.

   The above syntax for delay/jitter can be generalised by specifying in
   the SLS an array of e.g. N (delay/jitter, quantile)-couples. The more
   couples, the better the delay probability tail distribution can be
   approximated. Such a specification together with the eventual need of
   such a generalisation is for further study.


   The packet loss probability is ratio of the lost (in-profile) packets
   between ingress and egress and the offered (in-profile) packets at
   ingress.




TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                 [Page 12]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


                 lost packets between (and including) ingress and egress
   packet loss = -------------------------------------------------------
                 offered (injected) packets at ingress

   The ratio is measured over (any) time period with a length equal to
   the (indicated) time interval.


   The throughput is the rate measured at egress counting all packets
   identified by Flow Id. Notice that all packets, independently of
   their conformance level (in/out-of-profile) contribute. Indeed, if
   the customer (only) wants a throughput guarantee, then he/she does
   not care whether in- or out-profile packets are dropped, but is only
   interested in the overall throughput of its packet stream.


   Note on the relation with the Traffic Conformance Parameters (section
   3.3) in case of a binary-based conformance testing algorithm:

      - The Traffic Conformance Algorithm (and parameters) MUST be
      specified when guaranteeing delay/jitter or packet loss, i.e. if
      one of these performance parameters is quantified in the SLS.
      Conformance testing is required because the delay/jitter and loss
      guarantees are only for the stream of in-profile packets.

      - When only guaranteeing a throughput, or if non-of the other
      performance parameters is quantified, the traffic conformance
      algorithm MAY be specified. It is not required to specify the
      Conformance Algorithm, because the (eventual) troughput guarantee
      does not require the strict distinction between in/out-of-profile
      traffic. However, the network operator will probably protect his
      network by implementing a Traffic Conditioner at Ingress and
      specifying the token policing rate (r) (almost) equal to the
      throughput guarantee R, r~R.  He may or may not tag/mark excess
      traffic, according to his own - internal - policy rules. See also
      example 4.2.

   Note on the relation between throughput R, packet loss p and excess
   treatment in case of a binary-based conformance testing algorithm:

      - First consider the case where excess traffic is dropped (or
      shaped to in-profile) based on the token bucket (b,r) traffic
      conformance algorithm. As only in-profile packets are allowed at
      ingress, the following equality holds:

         throughput R = (1-p) * token rate r

      Thus the throughput guarantee can be derived from the loss



TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                 [Page 13]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


      probability and token rate and is therefore not an independent
      parameter.

      - If excess traffic is allowed (and marked accordingly), then
      "throughput" is an independent parameter because it also takes
      into account the out-of-profile packets (measured at egress). One
      has obviously the inequality:

         throughput R >= (1-p) * token rate r


   Quantitative performance guarantees

   A performance parameter is said to be quantified if its value is
   specified to a numeric (quantitative) value.

   The service guarantee offered by the SLS is said to be quantitative
   IF at least one of the 4 performance parameters is quantified.


   Qualitative performance guarantees

   If non of the SLS performance parameters are quantified, then the
   performance parameters "delay" and "packet loss" MAY be "qualified".

   Possible qualitative values (for delay and/or loss): high, medium,
   low.

   Relative delay guarantees:

      - gold service : value = low

      - silver service : value = medium

      - bronze service : value = high or not indicated

   Relative loss guarantees

      - green service : value = low

      - yellow service : value = medium

      - red service : value = high or not indicated

   The quantification of relative difference between <high/medium/low>
   is a provider policy (e.g. high = 2 x  medium ; medium = 2 x low).

   The above taxonomy yields the following combinations of qualitative



TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                 [Page 14]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


   services.

    -------------------------------------------------------
    |\ delay |             |               |               |
    | \------| low         | medium        |high           |
    |  loss  |             |               |               |
    |------------------------------------------------------|
    | low    | gold green  | silver green  | bronze green  |
    | medium | gold yellow | silver yellow | bronze yellow |
    | high   | gold red    | silver red    | bronze red    |
    |------------------------------------------------------|
                            Combinations table

   The service guarantee offered by the SLS is said to be qualitative if
   it is NOT quantitative and either delay or loss (non-exclusive) are
   qualified to "medium" or "low", i.e. excluding bronze/red from the
   above.

   The service guarantee offered by the SLS is said to be best-effort if
   it is NOT quantified nor qualified.


3.6. Service schedule

   The service schedule indicates the start time and end time of the
   service, i.e. when is the service available.

   This might be expressed as collection of the following parameters:

      - Time of the day range

      - Day of the week range

      - Month of the year range

   Some examples are:
      - Time of the day range
        08h00-18h00

      - Day of the week range
        A single day

        A group of sequential days

      - Month of the year range
        A single month

        A group of sequential months



TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                 [Page 15]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


      - Year range
        A single year

        A group of sequential years

   Remark: service schedule "from now on" [now, infinity] can be
   captured by putting the above to their full range.

3.7. Reliability

   Reliability indicates the maximum allowed mean downtime per year
   (MDT) and the maximum allowed time to repair (TTR) in case of service
   breakdown (e.g. in case of cable cut).

   The Mean Down Time might be expressed in minutes per year and the
   Maximum Time To Repair might be expressed in seconds.

3.8 Others

   Other parameters such as route, reporting guarantees, security,
   scheduled maintenance, etc... remain for further study.

4. Service Level Specifications and Per Domain Behaviours

   Recently the IETF DiffServ working group has documented in an
   informational RFC [RFC 3086] the concept of DiffServ Per Domain
   Behaviours (PDBs). Although this [RFC 3086] clearly specifies the
   difference between PDBs and SLSs, it is worthwile to further
   elaborate communalities and differences between PDBs and SLSs.

   We first recall the DiffServ working group terminology.

4.1 DiffServ Terminology

4.1.1. About Service Level Specifications

   According to the IETF DiffServ working group, a Service Level
   Agreement (SLA) is "the documented result of a negotiation between a
   customer and a provider of an IP service that specifies the levels of
   availability, serviceability, performance, operation or other
   attributes of the transport service" [DS-TERMS].

   The SLA contains technical and non-technical terms and conditions.
   The technical specification of the IP connectivity service is given
   in Service Level Specifications (SLSs). An SLS "is a set of technical
   parameters and their values, which together define the service,
   offered to a traffic stream by a DiffServ domain". SLSs describe the
   traffic characteristics of IP flows and the QoS guarantees offered by



TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                 [Page 16]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


   the network to these flows.

4.1.2. About Per Domain Behaviors

   In [RFC 3086] a "Per Domain Behavior is the expected treatment that
   an identifiable or target group of packets will receive from "edge-
   to-edge" of a DS domain. A particular PHB (or, if applicable, list of
   PHBs) and traffic conditioning requirements are associated with each
   PDB".

   "A PDB is characterized by specific metrics that quantify the
   treatment a set of packets with a particular DSCP (or set of DSCPs)
   will receive as it crosses a DS domain"

4.1.3. About SLS and PDB relationships

   [RFC 3086] clearly states that "there is a clear distinction between
   the definition of a Per-Domain Behavior in a DS domain and a service
   that might be specified in a Service Level Agreement. The PDB
   definition is a technical building block...in configuring DS domains,
   but the PDB (or PDBs) used by a provider is not expected to be
   visible to customers any more than the specific PHBs employed in the
   provider's network would be."

   However, "the measurable parameters of a PDB should be suitable for
   use in Service Level Specifications at the network edge."

   Vice versa, SLSs are "expected to include specific values or bounds
   for PDB parametersd."

   Therefore SLSs and PDBs are different concepts but there is clearly a
   relationship between both. We now further elaborate on this
   relationship.

4.2. SLS and PDB simularities and differences.

4.2.1. A subset of common parameters

   Both an SLS and a PDB try to capture the technical "terms and
   conditions" for describing the behavior of an (aggregate) packet
   stream crossing a (DiffServ) domain. Roughly speaking, if the
   arriving packet stream behaves appropriately, then the network will
   treat the packet stream as can be expected (from the SLS or the PDB).

   Within the context of this draft, the arriving packet stream is
   identified by a "Flow Identifier", which may be mapped accordingly on
   PDB Classifiers and packet Filters. "Behaving appropriately" means
   that the packet stream should be conformant with the Traffic Envelop



TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                 [Page 17]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


   (section 3.3). As in a PDB, excess packets are subject to a Traffic
   Conditioner which may mark, drop or shape these packets.

   The resulting packet stream, called the foo traffic aggregate in [RFC
   3086] is conditioned such that it may expect reasonable treatment in
   the DS domain. In the context of this draft, the foo traffic
   aggregate is the "in-profile" stream and should get the QoS
   performance guarantees as defined in section 3.5.

   Clearly [RFC 3086] states correctly that (some) paparameters of SLSs
   should be mapped on PDB characteristics and that (some) PDB
   parameters should be suitable for SLSs. Undoubtfully the definition
   of specific PDBs and those of SLS template(s) should be correlated.

4.2.2. Inter-domain interfaces versus intra-domain QoS building blocks

   At first sight, the simularities between SLSs and PDBs might be
   dominant. However, it appears so because only intra-domain aspects
   were discussed. Although SLSs and PDBs may have a common parameter
   subset, the concepts themselves are substantially different.

   In summary, an SLS and PDB differ along the following lines:


      - An SLS is an external interface between two legal entities, i.e.
      a customer and a provider or a provider-provider. A PDB is a
      technical intra-domain QoS building block.

      - An SLS should be (QoS) technology independent while a PDB is
      clearly a DiffServ concept. For example, as correctly mentioned in
      RFC [3086], it should be possible to offer "premium IP services"
      over a Best-Effort network by simply overprovisioning. Thus
      delay-sensitive services must not necessarily be mapped on a PDB
      like a "Virtual Wire", but as in the example above, the service
      may simply use a best-effort "PDB". There is no one to one
      mapping; the mapping will be determined by the provider policy.
      (Analogously the mapping of PDB to PHB is not one-to-one neither).

      - The main use of an SLS is inter-domain, i.e. a unique
      (standardised) interface for enabling inter-domain QoS. A PDB is
      by definition single domain. Moreover a service specified by a SLS
      is not necessarly restricted to one domain. All depends on the
      established business relations. For example, a network provider
      may offer (inter-domain) services to a company (e.g. a Virtual
      Private Network - VPNs) by subcontracting other providers. The
      SLSs specified between the company and the (main) provider will
      also span the domains of sub contracters (and the company should
      even not be aware of it).



TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                 [Page 18]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


      - An SLS is itself a (service) building bilding block for
      constructing (complex) IP transport services. For example, a bi-
      directional Virtual Leased Line has two SLSs. Multi-edge VPNs may
      be very complex and require multiple SLSs. In general, an {SLS}-
      set is needed for describing the technical (QoS & traffic-related)
      characteristics of an IP transport service.

      - Finally, an SLS and a PDB also have some distinct parameters.
      For example, the scope and the service schedule of an SLS specify
      respectively where (the geographical region) and when this typical
      service is applicable. It is unlikely that a PDB, as a generic
      service independent building block, will specify such parameters.

4.3. From PHB to value-added IP services: a layered DiffServ view

      We end this PDB-SLS discussion by a high-level view on a possible
      layered ("object") model for describing and enabling value-added
      IP services over DiffServ networks.

       ---------------------------------------------|
       | IP Transport Services - SLA                |
       |       - non-technical terms & conditions   |
       |       - technical parameters {SLS}-set     |
       |--------------------------------------------|
       | Service Level Specifications - SLS         |
       |       - IP service traffic characteristics |
       |       - offered network QoS guarantees     |
       |--------------------------------------------|
       | Per Domain Behaviors - PDB                 |
       |       - network QoS capabilities           |
       |       - DiffServ edge-to-edge aggregates   |
       |--------------------------------------------|
       | Per Hop Behaviors - PHB                    |
       | Traffic Conditioning Block - TCB           |
       |       - generic router QoS capabilities    |
       |       - DiffServ edge & core routers       |
       |--------------------------------------------|
       | Schedulers (e.g. WFQ, WTP)                 |
       | Algorithmic Droppers (e.g. RED)            |
       | Markers (e.g. SRTCM, TRTCM)                |
       |       - implementation                     |
       |       - vendor & product specific          |
       |--------------------------------------------|

      A layered service-object model for DiffServ

      Each of the underlying "layers" or "objects" exposes its (QoS)
      capabilities to the upper layer. Conversely, an upper-layer object



TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                 [Page 19]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


      makes use of the lower-layer capabilities and therefore should be
      mapped onto the lower layer objects.

      According to [RFC 3086] the specification of a PDB type should
      e.g.include the (lower-layer) PHB or PHB-group on which the PDB is
      build.

      On the othe hand, the mapping of SLSs to PDBs (and therefore PHBs)
      is a rather unexplored area. For example, it is clear that an SLS
      is service and customer specific; and is part of the service
      management system of the provider. A PDB is customer agnostic and
      could be a prefered object for (longer-term) traffic engineering
      and resource management.

      Clearly the mapping from SLS to PDB involves an aggregation policy
      of the provider, i.e. mapping of customer aware objects to non-
      custome aware entities. This is a non-straightforward problem. It
      may be very much determined by the provider policy, but some
      general "service mapping" and "customer aggregation" guidelines
      should be very useful.

      This is for further study.

5. Service Level Specification examples.

      Within this section a number of example instantiations of SLSs are
      presented to illustrate the potential use of the SLS template
      defined above.

5.1. Virtual Leased Line

      The following specifies the SLS for a (uni-directional) VLL with
      quantified throughput guarantee of e.g 1 Mbps, a delay guarantee
      of 20 ms for a 10E-3 quantile and zero packet loss.

      - Scope: one-to-one communication (Ingress, Egress) specified

      - Flow identification: (source,destination) IP-addresses, DSCP=EF.

      - Traffic Conditioning: token bucket (b,r), r = 1 Mbps

      - Excess Treatment = dropping. Thus only in-profile packets are
      allowed.

      - Delay guarantee = (d = 20 ms, t = 5 minutes, q = 10E-3)

      - Loss guarantee p = 0 (imlying a throughput guarantee R = r)




TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                 [Page 20]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


      - Service Schedule: may be indicated

      - Reliability: may be indicated

      Notice that in this example, the throughput guarantee is a derived
      parameter from the packet loss p=0, the the conditioning token
      bucket parameter r=1 Mbps and the excess treatment=dropping.

5.2 Bandwidth Pipe for data-services

      The following SLS specifies a bandwidth pipe with a strict
      throughput guarantee, but with only a loose requirements for
      packet loss, i.e. "low". Thus, the SLS only mentiones the scope
      (pipe), the Flow Id and a throughput guarantee. Remark that there
      are now traffic conformance parameters (and consequently no excess
      treatment indication).

      - Scope: one-to-one communication (Ingress, Egress) specified

      - Flow identification: (source,destination) IP-addresses

      - Throughput guarantee R = 1 Mbps

      - Service Schedule: may be indicated

      - Reliability: may be indicated

      Although there is no (explicit) traffic conditioning agreement
      between the customer and the network operator (i.e. not mentioned
      in the SLS), the operator is likely to protect his network by
      implementing a traffic conditioner token bucket (b,r). If the
      operator can guarantee a zero packet loss for the bandwidth pipe,
      then the token rate equals the throughput guarantee. However, the
      SLS can also be met by the operator without such a stringent loss
      requirement, say p = 10E-5. In this case the token rate is derived
      from the throughput guarantee and the loss probability:

      token rate r = R / (1-p)

   The in-profile packet stream (according to the conditioner (b,r)) has
   a throughput guarantee of R = r * (1-p) = 1 Mbps.

   Further, it is up to the operator's policy whether or not excess
   traffic (again according to the operator's conditioner (b,r), which
   is not mentioned in the SLS agreement) is allowed or not in his
   network.

5.3. Real-time micro-flows



TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                 [Page 21]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


   - Scope: one-to-one communication (Ingress, Egress) specified

   - Flow identification: (source IP-address, destination IP-address,
   source port number, destination port number, protocol)

   - Traffic Conditioning: token bucket (b,r), peak rate p= r = 64 Kbps

   - Excess Treatment = dropping.

   - Performance Parameters: delay = 10 msec, packet loss = 10E-6,
   guaranteed throughput R ~ r.

5.4 Minimum rate guarantee with allowed excess

   The following could be for bulk FTP traffic that requires a minimum
   throughput, but would take everything it can get (TCP). Also adaptive
   applications, like video streaming, that however require a minimum
   throughput for the service.

   - Scope: one-to-one (Pipe)

   - Flow identification: e.g. DSCP-value indicating a possible AF-PBH.

   - Traffic Conformance Parameters: (b,r) MUST be indicated

   - Excess Treatment: Remarking MUST be indicated (excess is given a
   higher drop precedence)

   - Performance guarantees: guaranteed throughput R = r.


5.5. Qualitative Olympic services

   The following SLS is meant for the Olympic Service. It could be used
   for differentiating applications such as web-browsing and e-mail
   traffic.

   SLS 1 (on-line web-browsing) - Scope: one-to-one (pipe) or one-to-
   many (hose)

   - Flow identification: MAY be indicated

   - Traffic Conformance Parameters: token parameters (b,r) The token
   bucket rate r indicates an (average) maximum Committed Information
   Rate (CIR) for which "better-than-best-effort" treatment will be
   applied.

   - Excess Treatment: remarking.



TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                 [Page 22]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


   - Performance Parameter: Delay and Packet loss are indicated as
   "low": gold/green class

   SLS2 : (background e-mail traffic)

   This is identical to SLS1 but targeting the silver/green class.

5.6. The Funnel service

   The service offered by the funnel model is primarily a protection
   service: the customer wants to set a maximum on the amount of traffic
   (characterized by a DSCP) entering his network. It could e.g. be used
   for business customers to restrict the amount of web browsing traffic
   entering their network.

                  /---------------\
                  |Network   _____|______ B
                  |    _____/     |
       A__________|___.___________|______ C
         /_____   |    _____      |
         \a(out)  |         \_____|_______D
                  \---------------/

                          Figure 4: Funnel model

   In [Figure 4], the customer A requires that the traffic entering his
   network from B,C and D does not exceed the rate a_out.

   - Scope: Funnel (N|all,1).

   - Flow identification: DSCP MUST be indicated. The filter (see below)
   is applied to all traffic characterized by the DSCP -value.

   - Traffic Conformance Parameters: (b, r) MUST be indicated. The token
   bucket parameters indicate the maximum allowed throughput (r = a_out)
   towards the customer network on the specified egress interface. This
   maximum or filter is applied to all packets marked with the DSCP-
   value indicated above.

   - Excess treatment: dropping (this is actually the service offered by
   the network).

   - Performance Parameter: not specified.


5.7. Best effort traffic

   - Scope : all models



TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                 [Page 23]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


   - Flow identification : none

   - Traffic Conformance Parameters: if not indicated, then the full
   link capacity is allowed

   - Excess Treatment: not specified

   - Performance Parameters: none

   - Service Schedule: may be indicated.

   - Reliability: may be indicated.

6. SLS negotiation requirements

   [This section is informational and preliminary. More detailed study
   is required.]

   A major goal of the availability of an SLS template is helping in the
   deployment of dynamical SLS negotiation procedures between customer
   and providers or between providers. This draft only discussed the SLS
   template and its basic contents. The SLS negotiation protocol is for
   further study. The following lists a number of conditions which
   should be met by a (to be defined) SLS negotiation protocol.

   The SLS negotiation protocol MUST allow for:

   - Original service requests, according the components of the
   specified SLS.

   - Service acknowledgement (ACK), indicating agreement with the
   requested service level.

   - Service rejection (NAK) but indicating the possibility of offering
   a closely related service (or indication of alternative DSCP to use
   for a particular service). The reply message may indicate the related
   offering by overwriting the proposed SLS attributes (hints).

   - Service rejection (REJECT) indicating  incapability of providing
   the service.

   - The ACK/NACK procedures require a reliable transport mode for such
   a negotiation protocol.

   - Service modification from both user and provider.

   The following are further requirements for the overall network
   architecture which SHOULD be fulfilled.



TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                 [Page 24]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


      - The protocol should be able to interact with feedback of events
   related to the service. For example performance degradation MAY
   result in re-negotiation of the SLS.

      - The  protocol should preferentially make use of / be an
   extension of existing specifications protocol design work available
   such as RSVP ([RFC-2205]) or PPP/IPCP ([RFC-1661]).


7. Security considerations

   The information which will yield the instantiation of an SLS template
   to address the specific requirements of a customer in terms of the
   quality associated to the service it has subscribed to may require
   the activation of security features so that:

   - Identification and authentication of the requesting entity needs to
   be performed;

   - Identification and authentication of the peering entities which
   will participate in the SLS negotiation process needs to be
   performed;

   - Preservation of the confidentiality of the information to be
   conveyed during the SLS negotiation and instantiation procedures
   between the peering entities is a MUST.


8. Acknowledgements

   Part of this work has been funded under the European Commission 5th
   framework IST program.

   The authors would like to acknowledge all their colleagues in the
   TEQUILA project for their input and reflection on this work.

   The authors also would like to acknowledge Werner Almesberger, Marcus
   Brunner, Stefaan De Cnodder, Stefano Salsano, Alberto Kamienski and
   Abdul Malick for their useful comments and suggestions on the mailing
   list sls@ist-tequila.org and during private conversation.

References

   [TEQUILA] IST-Tequila project http://www.ist-tequila.org/

   [RFC 1661] "The Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP)", W. Simpson,
   http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1661.txt?number=1661




TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                 [Page 25]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


   [RFC-1771]      A Border Gateway Protocol 4 (BGP-4). Y. Rekhter, T.
   Li. March 1995. http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2205.txt?number=1771

   [RFC 2205] "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP)- Version 1
   Functional Specification", R. Braden et al.
   http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2205.txt?number=2205

   [RFC-2211]      J. Wroclawski, "Specification of the Controlled-Load
   Network Element Service", RFC 2211, September 1997.

   [RFC-2212]      S. Shenker, C. Partridge, R. Guerin, "Specification
   of Guaranteed Quality of Service", RFC 2212, September 1997.

   [RFC 2474] "Definition of the Differentiated Services Field (DS
   Field) in the IPv4 and IPv6 Headers", K.Nichols, S. Blake, F. Baker,
   D. Black, www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2474.txt

   [RFC 2475] "An Architecture for Differentiated Services",  S. Blake,
   D. Black, M.Carlson,E.Davies,Z.Wang,W.Weiss,
   www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2475.txt

   [RFC 2597] "Assured Forwarding PHB Group", F. Baker, J. Heinanen, W.
   Weiss, J. Wroclawski, www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2597.txt

   [RFC 2598] "An Expedited Forwarding PHB", V.Jacobson, K.Nichols,
   K.Poduri, www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2598.txt

   [RFC 2638] "A Two-bit Differentiated Services Architecture for the
   Internet"[RFC-2638]  K. Nichols, V. Jacobson, L. Zhang, July 1999.
   www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2638.txt

   [RFC 2698] "A Two Rate Three Color Marker." J. Heinanen, R. Guerin.
   September 1999. www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2698.txt

   [RFC 3086] "Definition of Differentiated Services Per Domain
   Behaviors and Rules for their specification". K. Nichols, B.
   Carpenter April 2001 http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3086.txt

   [DS-MODEL] "A Conceptual Model for Diffserv Routers", Y. Bernet et
   al., draft-ietf-diffserv-model-06.txt, Work in Progress, February
   2001

   [DS-TERMS] "New terminology for diffserv", D. Grossman, draft-ietf-
   diffserv-new-terms-04.txt, work in progress, March 2001

   [QBONE] "Qbone Architecture (v1.0), Ben Teitelbaum (1999),
   http://www.internet2.edu/qos/wg/papers/qbArch/




TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                 [Page 26]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


Full copyright statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1999).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and
   distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
   provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.

   However, this document itself may not be modified in any way, such as
   by removing the copyright notice or references to the Internet
   Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed for the
   purpose of developing Internet standards in which case the procedures
   for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Authors Addresses

   Danny Goderis
   Alcatel Corporate Research Center
   Fr. Wellesplein 1, 2018 Antwerpen, Belgium.
   Phone : 32-3-240-7853
   Fax   : 32-3-240-9932
   E-mail: Danny.Goderis@Alcatel.be

   Yves T'Joens
   Alcatel Corporate Research Center
   Fr. Wellesplein 1, 2018 Antwerpen, Belgium.
   Phone : 32-3-240-7890
   Fax   : 32-3-240-9932
   E-mail: Yves.TJoens@Alcatel.be







TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                 [Page 27]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


   Christian Jacquenet
   France Telecom Research and Development
   FT R&D /DMI
   42, rue des Coutures
   BP6243
   14066 CAEN CEDEX 04
   France
   Tel : +33 2 31 75 94 28
   Fax : +33 2 31 73 56 26
   e-mail : christian.jacquenet@francetelecom.fr

   George Memenios
   Research Associate, Telecommunications Laboratory NTUA
   Heroon Polytechniou 9
   157 73 Zografou, Athens, Greece
   Phone : +30 1 772 1494
   Fax   : +30 1 772 2534
   E-mail: gmemen@telecom.ntua.gr

   George Pavlou
   Centre for Communication Systems Research (CCSR)
   Univ. of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey GU2 7XH, UK
   Phone : +44 (0)1483 259480
   Fax   : +44 (0)1483 876011
   E-mail: G.Pavlou@eim.surrey.ac.uk

   Richard Egan
   Racal Research Ltd
   Worton Drive
   Worton Grange Industrial Estate
   Reading, Berkshire RG2 OSB
   tel: +44 118 986 8601
   fax: +44 118 923 8399
   e-mail : richard.egan@rrl.co.uk

   David Griffin
   Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering
   University College London
   Torrington Place, London WC1E 7JE, UK
   Phone: +44 (0)20 7679 3557
   Fax: +44 (0)20 7388 9325
   Email: D.Griffin@ee.ucl.ac.uk









TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                 [Page 28]

Internet Draft          draft-tequila-sls-01.txt              June, 2001


   Panos Georgatsos
   Algosystems S.A.
   4, Sardeon str., 172 34 Athens, Greece
   Phone:    30-1-93-10-281
   Fax:        30-1-93-52-873
   E-mail:    pgeorgat@algo.com.gr

   Leonidas Georgiadis
   Aristotel Univ. of Thessaloniki, Faculty of Engineering
   School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Telecommunications Dept.
   PO Box 435, Thessaloniki, 54006, Greece
   Phone:    30-31-996385
   Fax:        30-31-996312
   E-mail:    leonid@eng.auth.gr





































TEQUILA consortium       Expires December 2001                 [Page 29]

