

Mobile IP                                                               
Internet Draft                                                P. McCann 
Document: draft-mccann-mobileip-80211fh-01.txt      Lucent Technologies 
Expires: April 2003                                        October 2002 
    
    
              Mobile IPv6 Fast Handovers for 802.11 Networks 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
    
Abstract 
    
   This document describes how a Mobile IPv6 Fast Handover [2] could be 
   implemented on a link layers conforming to the 802.11 suite of 
   specifications [3]. 
    
 
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [4]. 
    
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. Terminology....................................................3 
   3. Deployment Architectures for Mobile IPv6 on 802.11.............4 
   4. 802.11 Handovers in Detail.....................................5 
 
 
McCann                   Expires - April 2003                 [Page 1] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover             October 2002 
 
 
   5. Anticipated Handover...........................................7 
   6. Tunnel-based Handover..........................................8 
   7. Security Considerations........................................9 
   8. Conclusions...................................................10 
   References.......................................................12 
   Acknowledgments..................................................13 
   Author's Address.................................................13 
    
 
1. Introduction 
    
   The Mobile IPv6 Fast Handover protocol [2] has been proposed as a way 
   to minimize the interruption in service experienced by a Mobile IPv6 
   node as it changes its point of attachment to the Internet.  Without 
   such a mechanism, a mobile node cannot send or receive packets from 
   the time that it disconnects from one point of attachment in one 
   subnet to the time it registers a new care-of address from the new 
   point of attachment in a new subnet.  Such an interruption would be 
   unacceptable for real-time services such as Voice-over-IP. 
    
   Note that there may be other sources of service interruption that may 
   be "built-in" to the link-layer handoff.  For example, a recent study 
   has concluded that the 802.11 beacon scanning function may take 
   several hundred milliseconds to complete [5] during which time 
   sending and receiving IP packets is not possible.  This sort of 
   interruption may present an obstacle to real-time service deployment 
   that needs further optimization; however, such optimization is 
   outside the scope of this document. 
    
   The basic idea behind a Mobile IPv6 fast handover is to leverage 
   information from the link-layer technology to either predict or 
   rapidly respond to a handover event.  This allows IP connectivity to 
   be restored at the new point of attachment sooner than would 
   otherwise be possible.  By tunneling data between the old and new 
   access routers, it is possible to provide IP connectivity in advance 
   of actual Mobile IP registration with the home agent or correspondent 
   node.  This removes such Mobile IP registration, which may require 
   time-consuming Internet round-trips, from the critical path before 
   real-time service is re-established. 
    
   The particular link-layer information available, as well as the 
   timing of its availability (before, during, or after a handover has 
   occurred), differs according to the particular link-layer technology 
   in use.  This document gives a set of deployment examples for Mobile 
   IPv6 Fast Handovers on 802.11 networks.  We begin with a brief 
   overview of relevant aspects of basic 802.11 [3].  We examine how and 
   when handover information might become available to the IP layers 
   that implement Fast Handover, both in the network infrastructure and 
   on the mobile node.  Finally, we give details on how the proposed 
 
 
McCann                   Expires - April 2003                 [Page 2] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover             October 2002 
 
 
   Mobile IPv6 Fast Handover protocol would work in this environment and 
   evaluate the feasibility of the different IP-layer fast handover 
   mechanisms available. 
     
    
2. Terminology 
    
   This document borrows all of the terminology from Mobile IPv6 Fast 
   Handovers [2], with the following additional terms from the 802.11 
   specification [3] (some definitions slightly modified for clarity): 
    
   Access Point (AP): Any entity that has station functionality and 
                  provides access to the distribution services, via the 
                  wireless medium (WM) for associated stations. 
    
   Association:   The service used to establish access point/station 
                  (AP/STA) mapping and enable STA access to the 
                  Distribution System. 
    
   Basic Service Set (BSS): A set of stations controlled by a single 
                  coordination function, where the coordination 
                  function may be centralized (e.g., in a single AP) or 
                  distributed (e.g., for an ad-hoc network).  The BSS 
                  can be thought of as the coverage area of a single 
                  AP. 
    
   Distribution System (DS): A system used to interconnect a set of 
                  basic service sets (BSSs) and integrated local area 
                  networks (LANs) to create an extended service set 
                  (ESS). 
    
   Extended Service Set (ESS): A set of one or more interconnected 
                  basic service sets (BSSs) and integrated local area 
                  networks (LANs) that appears as a single BSS to the 
                  logical link control layer at any station associated 
                  with one of those BSSs.  The ESS can be thought of as 
                  the coverage area provided by a collection of APs all 
                  interconnected by the Distribution System.  It may 
                  consist of one or more IP subnets. 
    
   Inter-Access Point Protocol (IAPP): A protocol defined for use 
                  between access points [6] at handover time that 
                  allows for the old association with the old AP to be 
                  deleted, and for context to be transferred to the new 
                  AP. 
    
   Station (STA): Any device that contains an IEEE 802.11 conformant 
                  medium access control (MAC) and physical layer (PHY) 
                  interface to the wireless medium (WM). 
 
 
McCann                   Expires - April 2003                 [Page 3] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover             October 2002 
 
 
 
    
3. Deployment Architectures for Mobile IPv6 on 802.11 
    
   In this section we describe the two most likely relationships between 
   Access Points (APs), Access Routers (ARs), and IP subnets that are 
   possible in an 802.11 network deployment.  Here we consider only the 
   infrastructure mode [3] of 802.11.  A given STA may be associated 
   with one and only one AP at any given point in time; when a STA moves 
   out of the coverage area of a given AP it must handover (re-
   associate) with a new AP.  It is important to understand that 802.11 
   offers great flexibility, and that handover from one AP to another 
   does not necessarily mean a change of AR or subnet.   
    
    
                  AR                              AR 
            AR     |    AR                   AR    |     AR 
              \    |   /                       \   |    / 
               Subnet 1                         Subnet 2 
             /  /  |  \  \                    /  /  |  \  \ 
            /  /   |   \  \                  /  /   |   \  \ 
           /   |   |   |   \                /   |   |   |   \ 
        AP1  AP2  AP3  AP4  AP5          AP6  AP7  AP8  AP9  AP10   
    
             Figure 1: An 802.11 deployment with relay APs. 
    
   Figure 1 depicts a typical 802.11 deployment with two IP subnets, 
   each with three Access Routers and five Access Points.  Note that the 
   APs in this figure are acting as link-layer relays, which means that 
   they transport Ethernet-layer frames between the wireless medium and 
   the subnet.  Each subnet is implemented as a single LAN or VLAN.  
   Note that a handover from AP1 to AP2 does not require a change of AR 
   because all three ARs are link-layer reachable from a STA connected 
   to any AP1-5.  Therefore, such handoffs are outside the scope of IP-
   layer handover mechanisms.  However, a handoff from AP5 to AP6 would 
   require a change of AR, because the STA would be attaching to a 
   different subnet.  An IP-layer handover mechanism would need to be 
   invoked in order to provide low-interruption handover between the two 
   ARs. 
    
    
                                Internet 
                               /    |   \ 
                              /     |    \ 
                             /      |     \ 
                           AR      AR      AR 
                           AP1     AP2     AP3 

 
 
McCann                   Expires - April 2003                 [Page 4] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover             October 2002 
 
 
    
        Figure 2. An 802.11 deployment with integrated APs/ARs. 
    
    
   Figure 2 depicts an alternative 802.11 deployment where each AP is 
   integrated with exactly one AR.  In this case, every change of AP 
   would result in a necessary change of AR, which would require some 
   IP-layer handover mechanism to provide for low-interruption handover 
   between the ARs.  Also, the AR shares a MAC-layer identifier with its 
   attached AP. 
    
   In the next section, we examine the steps involved in any 802.11 
   handover. Subsequent sections discuss how these steps could be 
   integrated with an IP-layer handover mechanism in each of the above 
   deployment scenarios. 
    
    
4. 802.11 Handovers in Detail 
    
   An 802.11 handover takes place when a STA changes its association 
   from one AP to another ("re-association").  This process consists of 
   the following steps: 
    
     1. The STA performs a scan to see what APs are available.  The 
        result of the scan is a list of APs together with physical layer 
        information, such as signal strength. 
     2. The STA chooses one of the APs and performs a join to 
        synchronize its physical and MAC layer timing parameters with 
        the selected AP. 
     3. The STA requests authentication with the new AP.  For an "Open 
        System", such authentication is a single round-trip message 
        exchange with null authentication. 
     4. The STA requests association or re-association with the new AP.  
        A re-association request contains the MAC-layer address of the 
        old AP, while a plain association request does not. 
     5. If operating in accordance with the IAPP [6], the new AP 
        performs a lookup based on MAC-layer address to obtain the IP 
        address of the old AP by consulting a local table or RADIUS 
        server.  It opens a UDP or TCP connection, protected by IPSec 
        encryption, to the old AP.  Via the secure connection, it 
        informs the old AP of the re-association so that information 
        about the STA is deleted from the old AP.  Note that IAPP can 
        only be invoked based on a re-association message, as the plain 
        association message does not contain the old AP's MAC-layer 
        address. 
     6. The new AP sends a Layer 2 Update frame on the local LAN segment 
        to update the learning tables of any connected Ethernet bridges. 

 
 
McCann                   Expires - April 2003                 [Page 5] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover             October 2002 
 
 
    
   Note that in most existing 802.11 implementations, steps 1-4 are 
   performed by firmware that is on-board the 802.11 PCMCIA card.  This 
   might make it impossible for the host to take any actions (including 
   sending or receiving IP packets) before the handoff is complete. 
    
   During step 5, IAPP is used to communicate with the old AP.  The 
   IPSec tunnel between the two APs is originally established with key 
   distribution via RADIUS, but can be subsequently re-used for 
   different MNs that may need to handover between the same pair of APs. 
   Note that the SA is between the pair of APs and has nothing to do 
   with any security association that might be in place between the MN 
   and either of the APs.  During IAPP operation, link-layer context may 
   be transferred from the old AP to the new AP.  The IAPP defines a 
   container for context information.  However, no such context has 
   currently been defined or standardized by IEEE. 
    
   Also note that there is no guarantee that an AP found during step 1 
   will be available during step 2 because radio conditions can change 
   dramatically from moment to moment.  The STA may then decide to 
   associate with a completely different AP.  Usually, this decision is 
   implemented in firmware and the attached host would have no control 
   over which AP is chosen. 
    
   There is no standardized trigger for step 1.  It may be performed as 
   a result of decaying radio conditions on the current AP or at other 
   times as determined by local implementation decisions.  Usually this 
   step will be performed autonomously by firmware in the NIC using 
   proprietary scanning algorithms. 
    
   The coverage area of a single AP is known as a Basic Service Set 
   (BSS).  Note that both APs in the above description are considered to 
   belong to the same Extended Service Set (ESS).  This is to trigger a 
   re-association (rather than plain association) from the STA, which 
   contains information about both the old and new AP.  All APs should 
   therefore broadcast the same ESSID.  If two APs belong to different 
   administrative domains, this may require some inter-domain 
   coordination of the ESSID.  Otherwise, there may not be sufficient 
   information to construct the link-layer triggers required by some 
   handover mechanisms. 
    
   A change of BSS within an ESS may or may not require an IP-layer 
   handover, depending on whether the APs provide STAs access to 
   different or the same IP subnets.  The next two sections detail how 
   each mechanism from the Mobile IPv6 Fast Handover specification might 
   accomplish the necessary IP-layer reconfiguration.  First we consider 
   Anticipated handover and then move on to Tunnel-based handover. 
    
    
 
 
McCann                   Expires - April 2003                 [Page 6] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover             October 2002 
 
 
5. Anticipated Handover 
    
   Because all 802.11 handovers are mobile initiated, the network-
   initiated Anticipated Handover is not applicable to 802.11. 
    
   In mobile initiated Anticipated Handover, the MN first sends a Router 
   Solicitation for Proxy (RtSolPr) to the oAR containing the link-layer 
   address of the new Access Point.  This would happen between steps 1 
   and 2 from Section 4.  Note that for this to be possible, the MLME-
   SCAN.request primitive (See Section 10.3.2.1 of the 802.11 
   specification [3]) must be available to the host, and the card 
   firmware must not make autonomous handover decisions.  The oAR maps 
   the new AP's link-layer address into the IP address of the nAR that 
   should be used by the MN on the new link.  Note that this requires a 
   mapping table to be maintained at oAR, either by manual configuration 
   or with the use of unspecified discovery protocols.  Then, the oAR 
   determines whether stateful or stateless addressing is used by nAR.  
   For stateless addresses, the oAR picks an nCoA on the new subnet 
   (using the MN's interface identifier) and proposes it to the nAR 
   using HI/HACK.  For stateful addresses, the oAR must request an 
   address from nAR with the HI/HACK exchange.  The oAR returns a Proxy 
   Router Advertisement (PrRtAdv) to the MN.  This PrRtAdv may be sent 
   in parallel with HI/HACK, in the case of stateless address 
   configuration, but must be serialized after HI/HACK in the case of 
   stateful address configuration.  The MN then sends a Fast Binding 
   Update (F-BU) to the oAR with a binding to the new care-of address 
   (nCoA). 
    
   At this point the MN should move to nAR (steps 2-6 from Section 4).  
   Note that here we assume the host can send IP layer messages such as 
   F-BU prior to step 2, which implies that the interface firmware did 
   not autonomously skip to step 2 without permission from the host.  
   Once re-associated with the new AP, the MN will hopefully receive the 
   F-BACK indicating that the oAR received its F-BU and also that the 
   nCoA is valid.  This message is sent on both the old and new links 
   because the MN is in transit between them.  Packets from the oAR will 
   be forwarded to nAR based on the F-BU. If it doesn't receive the F-
   BACK right away, the MN retransmits the F-BU and indicates its 
   presence to the nAR with a Fast Neighbor Advertisement (F-NA).  The 
   nAR should return a Router Advertisement containing a Neighbor 
   Advertisement Acknowledgement (NAACK) indicating whether the nCoA is 
   valid.  If not, the MN can continue to use oCoA as a source address 
   for packets while it obtains a valid nCoA.  Either the F-BACK or the 
   Router Advertisement informs the MN which link-layer address to use 
   as its default router on subsequent outbound packets. 
    
   Note that Anticipated Handover requires that the MN send a RtSolPr 
   and receive a PrRtAdv prior to executing the layer-two handover.  
   Otherwise, the MN will not have any information about the new subnet, 
 
 
McCann                   Expires - April 2003                 [Page 7] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover             October 2002 
 
 
   and will need to begin neighbor discovery and care-of address 
   configuration from scratch once it has completed the layer-two 
   handover.  There is no guarantee that the RtSolPr/PrRtAdv exchange 
   will complete especially in a radio environment where the connection 
   to the old AP is deteriorating rapidly.  Also, there is no guarantee 
   that the MN will actually attach to the given new AP after it has 
   sent the F-BU to the oAR, because changing radio conditions may cause 
   nAR to be suddenly unreachable.  The precise impact of these factors 
   in an Anticipated Handover can only be evaluated after 
   experimentation in a particular deployment. 
    
    
6. Tunnel-based Handover 
    
   In a Tunnel-based Handover, the oAR and nAR collaborate to establish 
   a bi-directional edge tunnel (BET) in reaction to a layer-2 handover 
   event.   In an 802.11 network, this event would be step 4 from 
   Section 4 (target trigger) or perhaps step 5 at the old AP (source 
   trigger).  If the network looks like Figure 2, where the APs are 
   integrated with the ARs, then the L2-TT (or L2-ST) is available at 
   nAR (or oAR) through some internal interface.  However, if the 
   network is deployed like Figure 1, then some network message will 
   need to be sent from the new AP (or old AP) to nAR (or oAR).  This 
   message might be the object of future standardization efforts.  Note 
   also that there may be several ARs present on the new subnet, and the 
   new AP must choose one to which to deliver the trigger, which becomes 
   nAR.  The Layer 2 Update frame sent by the new AP might be of some 
   assistance in constructing L2-TT; however, this message is broadcast 
   to all ARs on the new subnet and does not indicate which one is to be 
   chosen as the endpoint of the tunnel.  Also, it does not contain the 
   MAC address of the old AP that would enable discovery of oAR. 
    
   The AR that received the trigger sends a HI message to the other AR, 
   who in turn responds with a HACK.  Note that this requires a mapping 
   table to be maintained, similar to the one for Anticipated handover, 
   which yields the IP address of an AR given the link-layer address of 
   an AP.  This table must be maintained manually or with the aid of 
   some unspecified discovery protocol.  The re-association provides L2-
   LD and L2-LU triggers to oAR and nAR, respectively.  At this point 
   the BET is established and traffic is tunneled between the two ARs so 
   that the MN continues to receive service, using oCoA, without the 
   need to exchange any messages immediately before, during, or 
   immediately after the handoff.  At some future time, the MN may 
   obtain an nCoA and register from the new network, perhaps using 
   completely standard Mobile IPv6 mechanisms to do movement detection 
   and registration. 
    
   Note that the MN must somehow obtain the link-layer address of nAR 
   before service can resume, so that it has a link-layer destination 
 
 
McCann                   Expires - April 2003                 [Page 8] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover             October 2002 
 
 
   address for outgoing packets (default router information).  In the 
   deployment illustrated in Figure 2, this would be exactly the AP's 
   MAC layer address, which can be learned from the link-layer handoff 
   messages.  However, in the case of Figure 1, this information must be 
   learned through other means currently unspecified.  Also note that 
   even in the case of Figure 2, the MN must somehow be made aware that 
   it is in fact operating in a Figure 2 network and not a Figure 1 
   network.  One option might be the Candidate Access Router (CAR) 
   discovery protocol [7] currently being worked in the Seamoby working 
   group.  Interestingly, this information is also available from the 
   PrRtAdv message, although its use is currently prohibited in tunnel-
   based handover.  A MN could conceivably obtain advertisements from 
   all neighboring APs well in advance of the handover, even if it 
   intended to use a Tunnel-Based instead of Anticipated handover. 
    
   Note that the BET is established at the behest of layer-2 messages.  
   Because this is a redirection of the MN's traffic, care must be taken 
   to ensure that the layer-2 messages are secure.  This issue is 
   discussed in more detail in Section 7. 
    
   For now we do not discuss the Handoff to Third (HTT) mechanism of a 
   Tunnel-based handover.  Its configuration and security implications 
   are similar to the basic scheme. 
    
    
7. Security Considerations 
    
   As stated in the Mobile IPv6 fast handover specification, the 
   security considerations of Anticipated Handover are very similar to 
   those required of any Mobile IPv6 Binding Update message.  The oAR 
   and MN are assumed to have a security association for the Binding 
   Updates, which also provides authentic PrRtAdv messages to the MN.  
   However, creating such a security association for a roaming MN is 
   still an open problem.  Also, security must be established between 
   all possible (oAR, nAR) pairs so that PrRtAdv/HI/HACK messages may be 
   authenticated.  This might be achieved through manual configuration 
   or automatic discovery, using whatever means was used to set up the 
   mapping table discussed in Section 5. 
    
   Similar to Anticipated handover, Tunnel-based handover also requires 
   a secure means to establish neighbor-mapping tables, so that tunnels 
   can be established securely between oAR and nAR based on the L2 
   triggers.  In addition, the security of a Tunnel-based handover 
   depends on the link-layer security in place.  This is because a BET 
   is established and MN traffic is redirected purely in reaction to 
   link-layer handoff messages.  Note that step 3 from Section 4 could 
   potentially provide some security; however, due to the identified 
   weaknesses in WEP shared key security [8], there is currently no 

 
 
McCann                   Expires - April 2003                 [Page 9] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover             October 2002 
 
 
   authentication algorithm for step 3 that is both standardized and 
   secure. 
    
   It may be the case that many deployments are configured as "Open 
   Systems", which will rely instead on higher-layer authentication such 
   as 802.1X Port-Based Network Access Control [9], or, ultimately, the 
   future output of the PANA working group [10].  According to published 
   standards, such authentication techniques would happen only after 
   association or re-association takes place, which leaves the re-
   association messages unprotected.  This would allow malicious nodes 
   to redirect traffic to a different subnet in a Tunnel-based handover 
   environment, or to a different AP on the same subnet even in an 
   Anticipated handover environment.  Work is currently underway to 
   better integrate 802.1X with 802.11 [11] but it is not yet complete. 
    
   The 802.1X standard [9] defines a way to encapsulate EAP on 802 
   networks (EAPOL, for "EAP over LANs").  With this method, the client 
   and AP participate in an EAP exchange which itself can encapsulate 
   any of the various EAP authentication methods.  The EAPOL exchange 
   can output a master key, which can then be used to derive transient 
   keys, which in turn can be used to encipher/authenticate subsequent 
   traffic.  It is possible to use 802.1X pre-authentication [11] 
   between a STA and a target AP while the STA is associated with 
   another AP; this would enable authentication to be done in advance of 
   handover, which would both protect the re-association message and 
   allow fast resumption of service after roaming.  However, because 
   EAPOL frames carry only MAC-layer instead of IP-layer addresses, this 
   is currently only specified to work within a single subnet, where IP 
   layer handoff mechanisms are not needed anyway.  In our case (roaming 
   across subnet boundaries) the 802.1X exchange would need to be 
   performed after roaming to, but prior to re-association with, the new 
   AP.  This would introduce additional handover delay while the 802.1X 
   exchange takes place, which may also involve round-trips to RADIUS or 
   Diameter servers. 
    
   Perhaps faster cross-subnet authentication could be achieved by 
   leveraging the context transfer features of the IAPP to carry 
   security credentials [12], or with the use of pre-authentication 
   using PANA.  To our knowledge this sort of work is not currently 
   underway in the IEEE.  The security considerations of these new 
   approaches would need to be carefully studied. 
 
 
8. Conclusions 
    
   The Mobile IPv6 Fast Handoff specification presents two alternative 
   protocols for shortening the period of service interruption during a 
   change in link-layer point of attachment.  This document has 

 
 
McCann                   Expires - April 2003                [Page 10] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover             October 2002 
 
 
   attempted to show how each may be applied in the context of 802.11 
   access networks. 
    
   There are currently serious security problems in the published 
   specifications that define the 802.11 handover process that must be 
   fixed before even intra-subnet mobility can be considered secure.  
   Tunnel-based handovers would depend on these mechanisms to secure 
   cross-subnet mobility.  In-progress specifications may fix these 
   problems but may also introduce additional delay for handover across 
   different subnets.  Usually, only the APs themselves are aware that 
   good link-layer security is in place.  This information could be made 
   available to ARs with the use of a new protocol (e.g., [13]), but as 
   such mechanisms are prone to be link-layer specific, we recommend 
   that work on Tunnel-based handovers be progressed in the IEEE rather 
   than the IETF. 
    
   Anticipated handover places requirements that messages be exchanged 
   over the wireless link prior to handover, during a period that is 
   normally under the control of low-level firmware.  The performance 
   impact of this requirement, and of the failure to meet it in certain 
   radio conditions, must be critically evaluated with experimental 
   data.  Also, given a particular firmware implementation of handover, 
   it may be impossible for a host to send the required IP-layer 
   messages at the proper time. 
    
   Both schemes rely on unspecified mechanisms for mapping AP L2 
   addresses into AR IP addresses (Anticipated and Tunnel-based) or AR 
   L2 addresses (Tunnel-based).  This problem is arguably more severe 
   with Tunnel-based handovers, especially on networks like Figure 1, 
   because the MN itself does the unspecified mapping and it cannot be 
   handled by manual configuration.  In Anticipated handover, the oAR 
   must be configured with this information so that it can send the 
   proper PrRtAdv to the MN. 
    
   The relationship between the PrRtAdv and Candidate Access Router 
   discovery protocols needs further study.  Some similar functionality 
   seems to be provided by each and it may not be necessary to 
   standardize both mechanisms independently. 
    
   For these reasons, we recommend that the draft be refocused to 
   concentrate on the specification and security considerations for the 
   F-BU and F-BACK messages only.  This allows for updating the oAR with 
   the current MN location under any circumstance, whether the handover 
   is anticipated or not.  The other mechanisms outlined in the draft 
   either need more support from the link layer, and should be moved 
   into the IEEE, or require further study to determine their 
   relationship with other work in the IETF. 
 
    
 
 
McCann                   Expires - April 2003                [Page 11] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover             October 2002 
 
 
References 
    
                     
   1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   2  Dommety, G. (editor), Yegin, A., Perkins, C., Tsirtsis, G., El-
      Malki, K., and Khalil, K., "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6", 
      draft-ietf-mobileip-fast-mipv6-04.txt, March 2002.  Work In 
      Progress. 
    
   3  "Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) 
      Specifications", ANSI/IEEE Std 802.11, 1999 Edition. 
    
   4  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   5  Mitra, A., Shin, M., and Arbaugh, W., "An Empirical Analysis of 
      the IEEE 802.11 MAC Layer Handoff Process", CS-TR-4395, University 
      of Maryland Department of Computer Science, September 2002. 
    
   6  "Recommended Practice for Multi-Vendor Access Point 
      Interoperability via an Inter-Access Point Protocol Across 
      Distribution Systems Supporting IEEE 802.11 Operation", IEEE Std 
      802.11f/D4, July 2002.  Work In Progress. 
    
   7  Krishnamurthi, G. (editor), "Requirements for CAR Discovery 
      Protocols", draft-ietf-seamoby-card-requirements-01.txt, August, 
      2002.  Work In Progress. 
    
   8  Borisov, N., Goldberg, I., and Wagner, D., "Intercepting Mobile 
      Communications: The Insecurity of 802.11", Proceedings of the 
      Seventh Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and 
      Networking, July 2001, pp. 180-188. 
    
   9  "Port-Based Network Access Control", IEEE Std 802.1X-2001, 
      October, 2001. 
    
   10 Penno, R. (editor), Yegin, A., Ohba, Y., Tsirtsis, G, and Wang, 
      C., "Protocol for Carrying Authentication for Network Access 
      (PANA) Requriements and Terminology", draft-ietf-pana-
      requirements-02.txt, June 2002.  Work In Progress. 
    
   11 "Draft Supplement to IEEE 802.11: Specification for Enhanced 
      Security", IEEE Std 802.11i/D2.2, July 2002.  Work In Progress. 
    



 
 
McCann                   Expires - April 2003                [Page 12] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover             October 2002 
 
 
                                                                         
   12 Aboba, B., and Moore, T., "A Model for Context Transfer in IEEE 
      802", draft-aboba-802-context-02.txt, April, 2002.  Work In 
      Progress. 
    
   13 Yegin, A., "Link-layer Triggers Protocol", draft-yegin-l2-
      triggers-00.txt, June 2002. Work In Progress. 
    
    
Acknowledgments 
    
   Thanks to Bob O'Hara for providing explanation and insight on the 
   802.11 standards.  Thanks to James Kempf and Erik Anderlind for 
   providing comments on an earlier draft. 
    
    
Author's Address 
    
   Pete McCann 
   Lucent Technologies 
   Rm 9C-226R 
   1960 Lucent Lane 
   Naperville, IL  60563 
   Phone: +1 630 713 9359 
   Fax:   +1 630 713 1921 
   Email: mccap@lucent.com 
  
 
Intellectual Property Statement 
 
   At the time of submission the author is not aware of any intellectual 
   property rights that pertain to the implementation or use of the 
   technology described in this document.  However, this does not 
   preclude the possibility that Lucent Technologies, Inc. or other 
   entities may have such rights.  The patent licensing policy of Lucent 
   Technologies, Inc. is on file with the IETF Secretariat. 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it 
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the 
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and 
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of 
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of 
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to 
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such 

 
 
McCann                   Expires - April 2003                [Page 13] 
                         802.11 Fast Handover             October 2002 
 
 
   proprietary rights by implementers or users of this specification can 
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights, which may cover technology that may be required to practice 
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
   Director. 
    
 
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.  
       
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to    
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it    
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published    
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any    
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are    
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other    
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English.  
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
      
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  












 
 
McCann                   Expires - April 2003                [Page 14]
