



Network Working Group                                           B. Leiba
Internet-Draft                                    FutureWei Technologies
Intended status: Best Current Practice                     April 9, 2020
Expires: October 11, 2020


    Specifying the IANA Contact for Registrations in IETF Documents
                 draft-leiba-ietf-iana-registrations-00

Abstract

   IETF documents have been inconsistent in what they specify as the
   registrant (or contact, or change controller) in IANA registrations
   they make.  This document provides a consistent specification
   ("IETF") to be used, and allows for exceptions with IESG approval.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 11, 2020.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




Leiba                   Expires October 11, 2020                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     IANA Contact for IETF Registrations        April 2020


1.  Introduction

   IETF documents have been inconsistent in what they specify as the
   registrant (or contact, or change controller) in IANA registrations
   they make.  Sometimes "IETF" is used, sometimes "IESG"; sometimes a
   working group is named, and sometimes individuals (usually the
   document authors) are used.  There are even some that specify the
   IETF Chair.

   So as to provide some consistency, this document gives a preferred
   specification, while allowing exceptions when there are good reasons
   for making them.

2.  Specifying Registrant Information

   When a document coming from an IETF working group makes an IANA
   request that specifies registrant information (including such things
   as "contact", "owner", "change controller", and similar fields),
   "IETF" is to be used, as the registration is coming from the IETF as
   a whole via IETF consensus on the document.  If contact information
   is specified, the working group mailing list would normally be used.
   If there is a relevant review list or other IETF mailing list that
   covers the technology, that can be used instead.

   For example:

      Registrant contact: IETF <examplewg@ietf.org>

      Change controller: IETF <examplewg@ietf.org>

   When a document coming from an individual submitter makes an IANA
   request that specifies registrant information, "IETF" is to be used,
   as these registrations also come from the IETF as a whole via IETF
   last call consensus.  If contact information is specified and there
   are relevant mailing lists as outlined above, one of those lists
   would normally be used, with the assent of the working group chairs
   or list owners.  If there is no relevant working group, a relevant
   directorate or area-wide mailing list is the next choice, with the
   assent of the Area Directors.  In cases where neither of those
   options applies, the document authors or the IESG itself can be used
   as contact information.

   In any case, contact information will not be published in the RFC.
   IANA will record the contact information and the RFC Editor will
   remove the email addresses during final editing.  This allows IANA to
   update the recorded contact information when email addresses change
   or disappear, and avoids putting mutable email addresses into
   immutable RFCs.



Leiba                   Expires October 11, 2020                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     IANA Contact for IETF Registrations        April 2020


   As there could be good reasons to vary from these policies in some
   situations, the IESG always has the authority to approve sensible
   exceptions.  Working group chairs or document authors should discuss
   proposed exceptions with the responsible Area Director when such
   situations arise, and such exceptions should be called out in the
   document shepherd writeup.

   See BCP 26 [RFC8126] for additional information about IANA
   registratons.

3.  IANA Considerations

   IANA is asked to check compliance with this and to ask the
   responsible AD in cases where this practice is not followed.

4.  Security Considerations

   This document is purely procedural, and there are no related security
   considerations.

5.  Informative References

   [RFC8126]  Cotton, M., Leiba, B., and T. Narten, "Guidelines for
              Writing an IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26,
              RFC 8126, DOI 10.17487/RFC8126, June 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8126>.

Author's Address

   Barry Leiba
   FutureWei Technologies

   Phone: +1 914 433 2749
   Email: barryleiba@computer.org
   URI:   http://internetmessagingtechnology.org/
















Leiba                   Expires October 11, 2020                [Page 3]