


DTN Research Group                                          S. Symington
Internet-Draft                                     The MITRE Corporation
Intended status: Experimental                            October 8, 2009
Expires: April 11, 2010


             Delay-Tolerant Networking Retransmission Block
                draft-irtf-dtnrg-bundle-retrans-block-06

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 11, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.









Symington                Expires April 11, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          DTN Retransmission Block            October 2009


Abstract

   This document defines an optional extension block, called a
   Retransmission Block (RB), that may be used with the Bundle Protocol
   [refs.DTNBP] within the context of a Delay-Tolerant Network
   architecture [refs.DTNarch].  The Retransmission Block (RB) is
   designed to be used within a DTN that, as a matter of policy, deletes
   all replayed bundles from the network.  It is designed to be used in
   a network that permits duplicate bundles to be forwarded if those
   bundles have been retransmitted by a custodian, that may (if
   possible) permit duplicate bundles to be forwarded if those bundles
   are in intentional or unintentional routing loops (contingent on the
   availability of mechanisms to distinguish looping bundles from other
   bundles), but that will consider all other duplicate bundles to be
   maliciously replayed bundles and delete them as such.  The
   Retransmission Block is designed to be inserted into a bundle by a
   custodian when the custodian is retransmitting that bundle.  The
   purpose of the RB is to mark the bundle as a custody-based
   retransmission so that it can be distinguished from other types of
   duplicate bundles and thereby be spared from deletion.  This document
   defines the format and processing of this new Retransmission Block.






























Symington                Expires April 11, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          DTN Retransmission Block            October 2009


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Applicability Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.1.  Bundle Authentication Requirement  . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.2.  Deletion of All Replays, including Bundles in Routing
           Loops  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.3.  Universal Support for Replay Suppression . . . . . . . . .  8
     2.4.  Universal Support for the Retransmission Block . . . . . .  8
   3.  Retransmission Block Format  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.  Retransmission Block Processing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     4.1.  Bundle Reception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     4.2.  Detecting Duplicates and Determining which ones are
           Custodial Retransmissions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     4.3.  Keeping Track of Bundles Received  . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.4.  Purging stored bundle information  . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.5.  Bundle Forwarding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.6.  Custodial Retransmission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  Non-Uniform Support for the Retransmission Block . . . . . . . 12
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18


























Symington                Expires April 11, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          DTN Retransmission Block            October 2009


1.  Introduction

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
   [refs.RFC2119].

   The DTN bundle protocol [refs.DTNBP] defines the bundle as its
   protocol data unit.  As discussed in the DTN Security Overview
   [refs.DTNsecOver], due to the resource-scarcity that characterizes
   DTNs, unauthorized access and use of DTNs is a serious concern.  As
   described in the Bundle Security Protocol [refs.DTNBPsec], use of the
   Bundle Authentication Block (BAB) at every node in the DTN can be
   used to thwart an attacker wanting to launch a denial of service
   attack by injecting bogus or modified bundles into the network.  Use
   of the BAB enables bogus or modified bundles to be detected and
   deleted at the very first node at which they are received.  Use of
   the BAB, however, does not enable maliciously replayed bundles to be
   detected, because such replayed bundles will contain valid
   authenticators.  Replayed bundles will only be deleted from the
   network when they expire.  Given the high latency typical in some
   DTNs, bundles may be valid for days or weeks.  For those networks in
   which waiting for replayed bundles to expire is not an adequate form
   of protection against the unauthorized use of the network posed by
   replayed bundles, additional measures will be required to actively
   detect and delete maliciously replayed bundles.

   The detection and deletion of maliciously replayed bundles at any
   given node is not simply a matter of configuring the node to maintain
   a record of every bundle it receives, comparing each new bundle
   received against the list of already-received bundles, and deleting
   all duplicates.  While such an approach would result in the deletion
   of maliciously replayed bundles, it could also result in the deletion
   of other types of duplicate bundles that are not replays and that
   shouldn't be deleted.

   Indiscriminate deletion of all duplicates could result in the
   deletion of bundles that are in intentional or unintentional routing
   loops.  Such bundles may legitimately be found in DTNs and their
   deletion may not be desirable.  Unfortunately, there are currently no
   mechanisms available to enable a DTN node to distinguish bundles that
   are in loops from maliciously replayed bundles; suppression of
   replays currently requires suppression of looping bundles.  If replay
   suppression is needed in a DTN that employs routing strategies that
   result in routing loops, the routing protocols will need to provide a
   mechanism for distinguishing looping bundles from maliciously
   replayed bundles.  If such a mechanism is provided, it can be used in
   conjunction with the Retransmission Block as defined in this



Symington                Expires April 11, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          DTN Retransmission Block            October 2009


   document.

   Indiscriminate deletion of all duplicates could also result in the
   deletion of bundles that have been retransmitted by a custodian as
   part of the custody transfer process.  The Bundle Protocol includes a
   custody-based retransmission mechanism that may result in a custodian
   retransmitting a stored bundle when the bundle's retransmission timer
   expires or when the custodian receives a "failed" custody signal for
   the bundle.  Such retransmitted bundles are duplicates of previously
   forwarded bundles.  A DTN node that is configured to simply delete
   all duplicates received would delete such custodial retransmissions,
   thereby rendering custody transfer ineffective.  In order to be able
   to enable custody transfer to operate correctly while also detecting
   and deleting malicious replays, DTN nodes need a way to determine
   whether or not a duplicate bundle received is a custodial
   retransmission so that custodial retransmissions can be spared from
   deletion.

   This document defines an optional bundle block called a
   Retransmission Block (RB) that is intended to be used in DTNs that,
   as a matter of policy, delete all replayed bundles from the network.
   Such a DTN may be configured to permit duplicate bundles to be
   forwarded only if those duplicate bundles are bundles that have been
   retransmitted by a custodian.  In this case, the DTN would be one in
   which not only replayed bundles, but also bundles resulting from
   intentional or unintentional routing loops would also be deleted.
   If, on the other hand, the routing protocols being used in the DTN
   enable bundles that are in loops to be distinguished from replayed
   bundles, then the DTN could be configured such that only those
   duplicate bundles that are replayed bundles are deleted.

   In either case, the RB is designed to be inserted into a bundle by a
   custodian when the custodian is retransmitting that bundle in
   response to a custody transfer failure or retransmission timer
   expiration.  The intent of the RB is to mark a custodially
   retransmitted bundle as such, so that when the bundle is received at
   downstream nodes that detect it to be a duplicate of a previously-
   received bundle, those nodes can understand it to be a custody-based
   retransmission that should be preserved rather than another type of
   duplicate that may (according to network policy) be deleted.

   The RB is intended to enable custodially retransmitted bundles to be
   distinguished from other duplicates.  Other mechanisms would need to
   be defined in order to be able to distinguish looping bundles from
   other duplicates.  If the RB is used with duplicate suppression in
   the absence of these other mechanisms, then it will result in the
   deletion of all looping bundles in addition to all replays.




Symington                Expires April 11, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          DTN Retransmission Block            October 2009


   This document defines the format and processing of this new
   Retransmission Block.  The capabilities described in this document
   are OPTIONAL for deployment with the Bundle Protocol.  Bundle
   Protocol implementations claiming to support Retransmission Blocks
   MUST be capable of:

      -Generating a Retransmission Block and inserting it into a bundle,

      -Logging the relevant fields of all bundles received until those
      bundles expire,

      -Calculating a checksum or digest (as determined by local policy)
      of the payload block of a bundle,

      -Receiving bundles containing a Retransmission Block and using the
      information contained in this Retransmission Block (in conjunction
      with information from logged bundles and with a mechanism, if
      available, for determining whether a bundle is in a routing loop)
      to make duplicate deletion decisions, and

      -Deleting a Retransmission Block from a bundle

   as defined in this document.




























Symington                Expires April 11, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          DTN Retransmission Block            October 2009


2.  Applicability Statement

   The objective of the Retransmission Block (RB) is to make
   custodially-retransmitted bundles distinguishable from other
   duplicate bundles.  As such, the RB is designed to be used within a
   DTN that does not, as a matter of policy, permit replayed bundles to
   be forwarded and that is willing to enforce the detection and
   deletion of replayed bundles by having every node

      -Authenticate all bundles

      -Keep track of bundles that have been received to identify which
      newly-received bundles are duplicates

      -Implement and use the RB as a way to enable nodes to determine
      which duplicate bundles are custodial retransmissions

      -Spare from deletion those duplicate bundles that are custodial
      retransmissions

2.1.  Bundle Authentication Requirement

   Use of the RB to distinguish custodial retransmissions from replayed
   bundles requires that bundles be authenticated in order to ensure
   that the RB was in fact inserted by a legitimate node and that the RB
   has not been modified since its insertion.  There is no point in
   using the RB within a DTN that does not perform bundle authentication
   because DTNs that do not perform bundle authentication are
   susceptible to denial of service attacks caused by all types of
   bundles that can be modified or inserted by an adversary, not just
   replays; in such an environment, detecting and deleting replays does
   little to protect against denial of service attacks.

2.2.  Deletion of All Replays, including Bundles in Routing Loops

   Note that the RB is intended to be used only in DTNs that do not
   permit the forwarding of replayed bundles.  If a DTN does permit
   replayed bundles to be forwarded, there is no point in using the RB.
   Use of the RB makes it possible to distinguish which duplicate
   bundles are custodial retransmissions so that they can be spared from
   deletion.  The RB may be used in DTNs that are configured to delete
   all duplicates that are not custodial retransmissions.  In this case,
   duplicates that are the result of intentional or unintentional
   routing loops will also be deleted along with replayed bundles.  In
   order to be able to suppress replays in a DTN that employs routing
   strategies that result in routing loops, a mechanism for
   distinguishing a bundle that is in a routing loop from a replayed
   bundle will need to be provided for use in conjunction with the RB.



Symington                Expires April 11, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          DTN Retransmission Block            October 2009


   Currently, no such mechanisms are known to exist, so replay deletion
   will also result in the deletion of bundles that are in routing
   loops.

2.3.  Universal Support for Replay Suppression

   One component of a DTN node's security policy should be whether or
   not replays are allowed to be forwarded by that node.  A node that is
   not allowed to forward replays should delete all duplicate bundles
   that are not custodial retransmissions and that cannot be determined
   to be the result of routing loops.  In order to be applied
   consistently, correctly, and effectively, replay detection and
   deletion is something that should be enforced at all nodes in the DTN
   rather than something that is enforced on a node-by-node basis.  If
   not every node supports replay detection and deletion then some
   replays will be allowed to remain in the network.  The RB is designed
   to be used within a DTN in which every node is configured to detect
   and delete replays.

2.4.  Universal Support for the Retransmission Block

   While implementation of and support for the RB is optional, the RB is
   designed to be used within a DTN in which every node supports the RB.
   Failure to support the RB at one or more nodes in a DTN that, as a
   matter of policy, deletes replays may result in the erroneous
   deletion of custodially retransmitted bundles.  Section 5 further
   discusses the ramifications of non-uniform support of the RB.
























Symington                Expires April 11, 2010                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          DTN Retransmission Block            October 2009


3.  Retransmission Block Format

   The Retransmission Block (RB) MAY be included in a bundle.  A RB uses
   the Canonical Bundle Block Format as defined in the Bundle Protocol
   [refs.DTNBP].  That is, it is comprised of the following elements:

      -Block-type code (one byte) - defined as in all bundle protocol
      blocks except the primary bundle block.  The block type code for
      the Retransmission Block is 0x07.

      -Block processing control flags (SDNV) - defined as in all bundle
      protocol blocks except the primary bundle block.  The following
      block processing control flag MUST NOT be set:

         -Block must be replicated in every fragment

      The following block processing control flag MUST be set:

         -Block contains an EID-reference field

      - Block EID reference count and EID reference - composite field
      containing a count of EID references with a value of 1 (expressed
      as an SDNV) followed by a single EID reference (expressed as a
      pair of SDNVs).  Presence of this field is indicated by the
      setting of the "block contains an EID reference field" flag in the
      block processing control flags to 1.  The EID referenced MUST be
      that of the retransmitting custodian that inserted this block.

      -Block data length (SDNV) - defined as in all bundle protocol
      blocks except the primary bundle block.

      -Block-type-specific data field as follows:

         - Retransmission sequence number (SDNV) - An unsigned integer
         indicating the number of times this bundle has been
         retransmitted by this custodian.


   The Retransmission Block format is as follows:
   +------+--------------+------------------------------+--------------+
   |type  |flags (SDNV)  |EID ref count and list (comp) |length (SDNV) |
   +------+--------------+------------------------------+--------------+
   |   Retransmission Sequence Number (SDNV)                           |
   +-------------------------------------------------------------------+

                                 Figure 1





Symington                Expires April 11, 2010                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          DTN Retransmission Block            October 2009


4.  Retransmission Block Processing

   The following are the processing steps that a bundle node must take
   relative to generation, reception, and processing of Retransmission
   Blocks, assuming that the node is configured to detect and discard
   replays.

4.1.  Bundle Reception

   According to the Bundle Protocol, if a node receives a bundle that it
   currently has in custody as custodian, the received bundle will be
   discarded.

   Upon receipt of any other type of bundle, the node SHALL delete the
   bundle's Retransmission Block if the custodian EID referenced in the
   RB is not the same as the custodian EID referenced in the Primary
   Bundle Block.

4.2.  Detecting Duplicates and Determining which ones are Custodial
      Retransmissions

   We define a duplicate to be a bundle that has the same source
   endpoint ID, creation timestamp, fragment offset and payload length
   (if the bundle is a fragment), and checksum or digest of the payload
   block as another bundle.  (Whether to use a checksum or a digest of
   the payload block is determined by local policy.)

   If a bundle is received that is a duplicate of a previously received
   bundle, then

      -If the received bundle does not include a Retransmission Block,
      the bundle is not a custodial retransmission.

      -If the received bundle does include a Retransmission Block and
      the RB's EID reference and retransmission sequence number values
      are the same as those in the Retransmission Block (if any) of the
      previously-received, duplicate bundle, the bundle is not a
      custodial retransmission.

      -Otherwise, the received bundle is a custodial retransmission.

   The receiving node MUST delete this bundle if it is a duplicate, if
   it is not a custodial retransmission, and if it cannot be determined
   (by some mechanism that may be defined elsewhere) to be a result of a
   routing loop.






Symington                Expires April 11, 2010                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          DTN Retransmission Block            October 2009


4.3.  Keeping Track of Bundles Received

   If the bundle is not deleted as a replay, the node must store at
   least the following information from or about the bundle for
   comparison with future received bundles: source EID; creation
   timestamp; fragment offset and payload length (if the bundle is a
   fragment); checksum or digest of the payload block; custodian EID (if
   the bundle does not include a Retransmission Block) and
   Retransmission Block EID reference and retransmission sequence number
   (if the bundle does include a Retransmission Block).

4.4.  Purging stored bundle information

   The stored information for all bundles whose creation timestamp +
   lifetime is less than the current time MAY be deleted.

4.5.  Bundle Forwarding

   As part of the custody acceptance procedures, the accepting node MUST
   delete the bundle's Retransmission Block (if it has one).

4.6.  Custodial Retransmission

   Upon deciding to re-forward a bundle as a result of custody transfer
   failure, the re-forwarding custodian MUST:

      - insert a RB with a retransmission sequence number value of 0
      into the bundle if the bundle does not already include a RB, or

      - increment the retransmission sequence number value in the
      Retransmission Block if the bundle does already include a RB.

      - Store the inserted/modified retransmission block values along
      with the other information from the bundle as part of its custody
      storage procedures.

   The EID reference in the Retransmission Block MUST refer to the re-
   forwarding custodian.

   If a custodian decides to re-forward only a fragment of a bundle that
   it had previously forwarded, the re-forwarded fragment will not be a
   duplicate of any bundle that had previously been transmitted by this
   custodian.  Therefore, the re-forwarded fragment SHALL NOT include a
   Retransmission Block.







Symington                Expires April 11, 2010                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          DTN Retransmission Block            October 2009


5.  Non-Uniform Support for the Retransmission Block

   Failure to support the RB at one or more nodes in a DTN in which, as
   a matter of policy, all nodes are configured to delete replayed
   bundles may result in the erroneous deletion of custodially
   retransmitted bundles in the following cases:

      A node that does not support the RB but that is configured to
      delete replays could delete duplicate bundles even if they include
      RBs that mark them as being custodial retransmissions.

      A custodial node that does not support the RB but that retransmits
      a bundle would not include a RB to mark the bundle as a custodial
      retransmission, so that when the bundle is received at a
      downstream node that is configured to suppress replays, the bundle
      would be deleted by that downstream node (even if that downstream
      node supports the RB).

   Consequently, the RB SHOULD be supported at all nodes in a DTN that,
   as a matter of policy, deletes replayed bundles.  If not all nodes in
   the DTN support the RB, then to preserve support for custodial
   retransmission while maximizing replay suppression, the security
   policies of the nodes and the Block Processing Flags in the RB should
   be configured as follows:

      -The "Discard bundle if block can't be processed" Block Processing
      Flag SHOULD NOT be set,

      -The "Discard block if it can't be processed" Block Processing
      Flag SHOULD NOT be set,

      -Nodes that support the RB should be configured to delete
      duplicates that are not custodial retransmissions,

      -Nodes that do not support the RB should be configured to forward
      duplicates (so that they don't inadvertently delete custodial
      retransmissions), and

      -Nodes that do not support the RB should be configured not to take
      custody of bundles (to ensure that custodial retransmissions will
      always include RBs).

   The above configuration ensures that custodial retransmissions will
   not be erroneously deleted, and that all duplicate that are received
   at nodes that support the RB will be deleted.  Only duplicates that
   are received at nodes that do not support the RB will be forwarded
   and allowed to remain in the network.  If these are forwarded to a
   node that supports the RB, however, they will be deleted at that



Symington                Expires April 11, 2010                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          DTN Retransmission Block            October 2009


   node.  Therefore, a network configured in this way is vulnerable to a
   denial-of-service attack only from duplicate bundles that circulate
   exclusively among nodes that do not support the RB.
















































Symington                Expires April 11, 2010                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          DTN Retransmission Block            October 2009


6.  Security Considerations

   As mentioned in the Applicability Statement Section, it does not make
   sense to detect and suppress replayed bundles without first
   authenticating that those bundles have not been modified.  Without
   authentication that a bundle has been forwarded intact, a network is
   vulnerable to denial of service attacks launched merely by the
   injection of any spurious bundles into the network or the
   modification of any authentic bundles.  There seems little value in
   protecting against denial-of-service attacks resulting from replayed
   bundles if denial-of-service attacks resulting from such modified or
   spurious bundles will be permitted.  Therefore, in determining the
   security policy of a node, nodes that support the RB and that are
   configured to suppress replays should also be required to
   authenticate bundles.  Furthermore, all nodes in the DTN should be
   configured in the same way, to ensure that replays will be suppressed
   consistently without also resulting in the erroneous deletion of
   custodial retransmissions.

   If the integrity of the RB is not protected, an adversary could
   inject many replayed bundles into the network yet include an RB in
   each that makes these bundles appear to be legitimate
   retransmissions.  Integrity protection for the entire bundle,
   including the RB, MUST be provided by using the BAB with a
   ciphersuite, such as the BAB-HMAC ciphersuite defined in the Bundle
   Security Protocol, that uses a strict canonicalisation algorithm to
   protect the entire bundle between one hop and the next.  Because of
   the hop-by-hop nature of the protection provided by the BAB, every
   node in the network would need to require all bundles to be protected
   with the BAB in order to ensure bundle authentication across the
   network.  If, instead, integrity protection were to be provided using
   the PIB, with a ciphersuite that uses mutable canonicalization, the
   DTN would still be vulnerable to a replay attack in which an
   adversary modifies the fragment offset information of a previously-
   transmitted, valid bundle, and injects this modified bundle into the
   network.  Such a bundle would not be deleted as a replay because its
   offset information is unique, but it would authenticate using the PIB
   because ciphersuites using mutable canonicalization do not calculate
   their security results over the fragment offset information (due to
   the fact that this information may change as the bundle traverses the
   network).

   If a node or BAB key is compromised, authentication provided through
   use of the BAB does not help to protect against replays, but in this
   case the network's vulnerability to denial-of-service attacks is much
   larger than just a vulnerability to replays.  If a node is
   compromised, any bundle could be created and injected into the
   network.



Symington                Expires April 11, 2010                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft          DTN Retransmission Block            October 2009


   If a node or key is compromised, however, payload content must be
   taken into consideration in order to protect the DTN from insertion
   attacks that may be possible as a result of the RB being used.  In
   some cases it might be possible for an adversary to know or guess
   that a specific source will emit a bundle at a specific time.  In
   this case, the adversary could send out its own bundle that purports
   to be from that source and that contains correctly-guessed timestamp
   information, with the intent that this bundle be received at a
   forwarding node before the authentic bundle from the actual source.
   If the adversary that is injecting the spurious bundle is in
   possession of a compromised BAB key, this spurious bundle would
   appear to be valid when received by a forwarding node.  If the
   forwarding node were to use only bundle source, creation timestamp,
   and fragment information (and not a checksum or digest of the payload
   block, as is required) to identify duplicates, then when the
   forwarding node receives the second bundle, it would delete this
   bundle as a duplicate even though this second bundle is actually the
   authentic bundle from the actual source.  If payload block content is
   being used to identify duplicates, on the other hand, then the two
   bundles would not appear to be duplicates and the second one would
   not be deleted.  The fact that the bundle source, creation timestamp,
   and fragment information of the bundles match whereas the payloads do
   not, however, would serve as a red flag that something is amiss and
   needs to be investigated.  If an adversary launching this kind of
   insertion attack is in possession of a compromised BAB key, then
   insertion of a PIB into the bundle by the bundle's source would
   enable the forwarding node to determine which of the bundles is
   legitimate and which is not (assuming the forwarding node is in
   possession of the keying material necessary to authenticate the PIB
   security result).  If the adversary launching this attack is in
   possession of the source's PIB key, however, then determining which
   bundle is legitimate would be impossible.  Still, the presence of two
   bundles with identical bundle source, creation timestamp, and
   fragment information but different payloads would serve as a red
   flag.
















Symington                Expires April 11, 2010                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft          DTN Retransmission Block            October 2009


7.  IANA Considerations

   If the bundle protocol becomes a standards track protocol, then we
   may want to consider having IANA establish a register of block types,
   of which the Retransmission Block would be one.














































Symington                Expires April 11, 2010                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft          DTN Retransmission Block            October 2009


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [refs.RFC2119]
              Bradner, S. and J. Reynolds, "Key words for use in RFCs to
              Indicate Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, October 1997.

   [refs.DTNBP]
              Scott, K. and S. Burleigh, "Bundle Protocol
              Specification", RFC 5050, November 2007.

   [refs.DTNBPsec]
              Symington, S., Farrell, S., Weiss, H., and P. Lovell,
              "Bundle Security Protocol Specification",
              draft-irtf-dtnrg-bundle-security-08.txt, work-in-progress,
              March 2009.

8.2.  Informative References

   [refs.DTNarch]
              Cerf, V., Burleigh, S., Hooke, A., Torgerson, L., Durst,
              R., Scott, K., Fall, K., and H. Weiss, "Delay-Tolerant
              Network Architecture", RFC 4838, April 2007.

   [refs.DTNsecOver]
              Farrell, S., Symington, S., Weiss, H., and P. Lovell,
              "Delay-Tolerant Network Security Overview",
              draft-irtf-dtnrg-sec-overview-06.txt, work-in-progress,
              March 2009.





















Symington                Expires April 11, 2010                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft          DTN Retransmission Block            October 2009


Author's Address

   Susan Flynn Symington
   The MITRE Corporation
   7515 Colshire Drive
   McLean, VA  22102
   US

   Phone: +1 (703) 983-7209
   Email: susan@mitre.org
   URI:   http://mitre.org/








































Symington                Expires April 11, 2010                [Page 18]


