                                        
INTERNET-DRAFT                                    Georgios Karagiannis
                                       University of Twente / Ericsson

                                                           L. Westberg
                                                              A. Bader
                                                              Ericsson
                                                       
                                                     Hannes Tschofenig
                                                               Siemens

                                                      October 22, 2006

             Resource Unavailability (RU) Per Domain Behavior
                  draft-karagiannis-ru-pdb-03.txt


Status of this Memo  

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 22, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). 


Karagiannis, et al.                                             [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                                   RU-PDB


Abstract

   This draft specifies a Per Domain Behavior that provides the ability 
   to Diffserv nodes located outside Diffserv domain(s), e.g., receiver 
   or other Diffserv enabled router to detect when the resources 
   provided by the Diffserv domain(s) are not available. The 
   unavailability of resources in the domain is monitored and detected 
   by proportionally marking packets whenever the current link rate 
   exceeds some pre-configured SLS agreed throughput (bandwidth) 
   threshold. It is considered that the SLS agreed throughput threshold 
   is not statically but loosely defined in order to allow a more 
   efficient utilization of the Diffserv domain(s) and a simpler network
   management operation. This PDB can be applied in association with 
   either a single Diffserv domain or multiple neighboring Diffserv 
   domains, when a trust relationship exist between these multiple 
   Diffserv domains. This specification is denoted as Resource 
   Unavailability (RU) PDB and it follows the guidelines given in 
   [RFC3086].


Table of Contents

   1. Introduction. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3
   1.1 Applicability. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3
   2. Terminology . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4
   3. TCS and PHB configurations . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.1. Diffserv Source End System Configuration. . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.2 Common Diffserv node configurations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.3. Configuration of nodes outside the Diffserv domain(s) . . . . 6
   4. Attributes of this PDB . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5. Parameters . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6. Assumptions . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7
   7. Example uses . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..8
   8. Envinronmental concerns . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9. Security considerations  . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
   10 IANA considerations. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
   11.Acknowledgments . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   12.Normative References . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
   13.Informative References . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12


Karagiannis, et al.                                            [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                                   RU-PDB

1. Introduction

1.1 Applicability

   The RU PDB can be applied in the situation where Diffserv nodes 
   located outside Diffserv domain(s) must detect when 
   the resources provided by the Diffserv domain(s) are not available.
   
   This PDB is used when the negotiated SLS is associated to throughput 
   (or bandwidth) and when the SLS agreed throughput threshold is not 
   statically but loosely defined. The main purpose of loosely defining
   the SLS throughput threshold is to allow a more efficient utilization 
   of the Diffserv domain(s) and a more simple network management 
   operation. This PDB can be applied in association with either a 
   single Diffserv domain or multiple neighboring Diffserv domains, 
   when SLA agreements exist between the operator(s) of these Diffserv 
   domains. 
   
   The resource unavailability on the Diffserv nodes within the 
   Diffserv domain(s) can be detected using a DSCP remarking approach 
   where the packet remarking is proportional to the amount of 
   unavailable resources. In particular, the Diffserv nodes mark packets 
   whenever the measured link throughput rate exceeds the SLS pre-
   configured throughput threshold and the proportion of the marked 
   packets is in proportion to the excess traffic above this SLS pre-
   configured throughput threshold.
   
   The Diffserv nodes located outside the Diffserv 
   domain(s) can use the remarked DSCP packets to calculate the 
   percentage of throughput (or bandwidth) that does exceed the loosely 
   agreed SLS throughput threshold.
   
   These nodes can then, in combination with the sender of the traffic 
   and the support of the Diffserv domain(s), reduce the generated 
   throughput until the loosely agreed SLS throughput threshold is 
   satisfied. Possible applicability areas on using the remarked DSCP 
   packets/bytes are related to the support of final handling 
   decisions on the admission control and/or rate control of ongoing 
   calls/flows.
   
   In particular, the RU-PDB mechanism can be used in combination with 
   an end-to-end ECN (see, [RFC3168]) congestion control solution, to 
   support any real time application, e.g., video, that use a rate 
   adaptive coding that can adapt the bandwidth, e.g., Datagram 
   Congestion Control Protocol (DCCP) based [RFC4340], but for a 
   Feasible service quality it requires a minimum bandwidth. 
   
Karagiannis, et al.                                             [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                                   RU-PDB

   A minimum bandwidth has to be allocated because otherwise the real 
   time application service is useless. The minimum bandwidth is 
   allocated by using the DSCP based RU-PDB mechanism in combination 
   with the admission control functionality available at the nodes 
   outside the Diffserv domain(s). If the Diffserv network has more 
   capacity it can utilize that and give the end user a higher quality 
   with better end user experience. The end-to-end ECN method can be 
   used to monitor whether the network has more available capacity. Note 
   that in this case the RU-PDB has to use DSCP marking (and not ECN 
   marking) for the RU notifications. This is because an 
   interoperability problem might occur between the end-to-end ECN 
   marking used by DCCP and the RU PDB marking.
   
   It is important to mention that the RU PDB operation does not require 
   changes to the Diffserv model. The RU PDB is using typical measuring 
   and Diffserv remarking techniques. The remarking procedure remarks 
   packets from an original DSCP value to for example, an experimental 
   or a local use DSCP.


  2. Terminology
   
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   
3. Traffic Conditioning Specification (TCS) and PHB Configuration
   
   Packets using any PHB can receive the RU PDB treatment. Furthermore, 
   the RU PDB can be used in combination with any other defined PDB. 
   

3.1. Diffserv Source End System Configuration
   
   The Diffserv source end systems, which support 
   the RU PDB, ensure that the packets are being marked with the right 
   PHB. Note that the process of marking can be specified by another 
   PDB. In this text, for simplicity reasons, the PDB that is defining 
   the PHB marking is denoted as another_PDB. For each of the chosen 
   PHB, the TCS and PHB configurations associated with the RU PDB are 
   following the rules defined by another_PDB, which MAY use the 
   specifications provided in [RFC2474], [RFC2475], [RFC3246], 
   [RFC2597] and [RFC3290]. Otherwise the PHB configuration follows the 
   rules specified by the PHB specification document, e.g., [RFC3246].


3.2 Common Diffserv node configurations

   The Diffserv nodes, which are supporting the RU-PDB, must perform 
   the following functionalities:

Karagiannis, et al.                                             [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                                   RU-PDB 

   (1) Meter + (2) Marking Action: the Diffserv nodes must be configured 
   with a meter and marking function that measures and remarks bytes 
   that are out of a configured traffic profile (e.g., bandwidth 
   threshold) for a corresponding PHB traffic class, to provide and 
   indication of a potential resource limitation to a Diffserv node 
   outside the domain. The traffic profile can be set according to an 
   engineered bandwidth limitation based SLA or based on a capacity 
   limitation of specific links. By using an algorithm that calculates 
   the rate of bytes that are out of profile, say   
   rate_out_profile_bytes, a number of bytes, i.e., 
   rate_out_profile_bytes/N, are remarked to a second DSCP, denoted 
   in this example as local_DSCP, that receives the same PHB as the 
   original DSCP. "N" is a pre-configured parameter used to indicate the
   proportionality between the measured out of profile bytes and the 
   remarked bytes. If "N" is used in the algorithm, then it must have 
   the same value in all Diffserv nodes that use this mechanism. 

   (3) Packet Classification + (4) Scheduling: The Diffserv node SHOULD 
   be configured to consider that the packets marked either with the 
   original_DSCP or with the local_DSCP SHOULD receive the same per hop 
   behavior treatment. However, packets that are marked with the 
   local_DSCP, may be classified to enter a different and larger virtual 
   queue than the packets marked with original_DSCP. This can ensure 
   that the dropping probability of local_DSCP remarked packets is lower 
   than the dropping probability of original_DSCP remarked packets. This 
   classification can be accomplished by using the packet classification 
   function, while the way of how the packets are treated in the virtual 
   queues is accomplished using the scheduling function. Note that 
   the original_DSCP marked packets and their associated local_DSCP 
   packets get the same forwarding behavior. The main difference is 
   related to the fact that the local_DSCP packets get a lower dropping 
   probability compared to the original_DSCP packets. This is because 
   the marking information carried by the local_DSCP packets has a 
   higher significance for the operation of the resource unavailability 
   algorithm compared to the marking information carried by the 
   original_DSCP packets. 
   
   The two virtual queues, one for the original_DSCP and another one for 
   local_DSCP marked packets can, for example, be implemented by using 
   one Drop Tail physical queue and by maintaining queuing information 
   and also one queuing threshold for each of the virtual queues. The 
   physical queue uses the same scheduling algorithm, but the length of 
   each of the virtual queue defines the packet dropping probability of 
   a virtual queue. 

Karagiannis, et al.                                             [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                                   RU-PDB 

   The classification of packets SHOULD be based on either the DSCP or 
   on a combination of IP header fields including the DSCP.
   When a packet is received by the edge router of another domain (new 
   Diffserv domain, that might be managed by another operator), 
   remarking of the original_DSCP and local_DSCP to other DSCPs, say 
   original_new_DSCP and local_new_DSCP might be necessary. This is 
   because the neighbor DSCP operator may use different Diffserv mapping
   schemes. It is however, considered that SLA agreements exist between 
   the operator(s) of these Diffserv domains, thus also the remarking 
   rules followed in each Diffserv domain are known. Note that the 
   Diffserv nodes used in the neigbouring Diffserv domains should use 
   the same classification, meter & marking actions as described 
   above.


   3.3. Configuration of nodes outside the Diffserv domain(s)
   
   When the Diffserv nodes located outside Diffserv domain(s), e.g., 
   receiver Diffserv enabled end systems, receive the remarked packets, 
   the rate of the received marked bytes, per each flow aggregate, is 
   measured. Note that the calculated rate has to be corrected and 
   multiplied with the parameter "N", see above, in order to calculate 
   the real rate of overload, say real_rate_overload. This rate can be 
   use to provide handling decisions on the resource unavailability 
   functionality. Two types of handling decisions could be supported. 

   When only one pre-configured bandwidth threshold is maintained by 
   this Diffserv node, say Threshold1, then if the calculated rate of 
   remarked bytes is higher than Threshold1, i.e., real_rate_overload > 
   Threshold1, then the Diffserv node can use this information to 
   provide the basis of call admission decisions for new flows. Note 
   that how the admission decision process on call level operates is 
   out of the scope of this draft.

   When two pre-configured bandwidth thresholds are used, i.e., 
   Threshold1 and Threshold2, with Threshold2 > Threshold1, then the 
   Diffserv node should operate in the following way. When the 
   calculated rate, real_rate_overload > Threshold1 then the same 
   procedure as described above is used (situation that only one 
   threshold is used). When the calculated rate is higher than 
   Threshold 2, then the Diffserv node can use procedures that are out 
   the scope of this draft, to send notifications to ongoing sessions to
   enforce rate control. Note that Threshold2 is used in the case that 
   a persistent congestion situation occurs and ongoing calls have to be
   notified about it.

   Note that the flow aggregates are defined by source IP address ranges
   The size of the aggregates should be large enough to ensure that new
   calls belong to aggregates where ongoing calls provide feedback for 
   admission control decisions. 

Karagiannis, et al.                                             [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                                   RU-PDB 
   
4. Attributes of this PDB
   
   The new attributes that are related to this PDB are related to the 
   agreed SLS traffic profiles, e.g., bandwidth thresholds.   
   Different agreed SLS throughput thresholds, see Section 3, might be 
   used. Each of these throughput (bandwidth) thresholds are compared 
   to the calculated rate of remarked packets/bytes..
   

5. Parameters
   
   The used parameters are the SLS traffic profiles and bandwidth 
   thresholds.

   
6. Assumptions
   
   The negotiated SLA may include either one pre-configured loosely 
   agreed SLS throughput (bandwidth) threshold or two pre-configured 
   loosely agreed SLS throughput (bandwidth) thresholds (bound). It is 
   assumed that the network operator communicates these throughput 
   (bandwidth) thresholds from the location of where the SLS 
   parameters are maintained up to the Diffserv nodes within the 
   Diffserv domain(s).
   
   The RU PDB can be applied on more than one neighboring Diffserv 
   Domains, when SLA agreements exist between the operator(s) of these 
   Diffserv domains. Therefore, it is possible that that a marked packet
   can be received by the edge router of a new neighboring Diffserv 
   domain (and thus new domain operator). The new Diffserv domain may 
   use another type of Diffserv remarking scheme. Thus the original_DSCP
   and local_DSCP,  may be remarked to other DSCP. However, the network 
   operator MUST configure the Diffserv remarking scheme such that the 
   semantics and relations between the original_DSCP and local_DSCP 
   remain even when packets using the RU PDB are passing via multiple 
   neighboring Diffserv domains. 
   
   Furthermore, a network operator may configure Diffserv nodes located 
   outside Diffserv domain(s) to provide final handling decisions on 
   the resource unavailability and/or overload situation process, see 
   Section 3.3. 

   If the parameter "N" is used in the algorithm, then it must have the
   same value in all Diffserv nodes that use this mechanism. "N" is a 
   pre-configured parameter used to indicate the proportionality between
   the measured out of profile bytes and the remarked bytes. 
   
   A domain that does not support the remarking procedures described in 
   this document should convey DSCP information without any 
   modification.

Karagiannis, et al.                                            [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                                   RU-PDB

   A domain that applies tunneling techniques (MPLS or IP) and does not 
   support the remarking procedures described in this document, should 
   use the Diffserv marking of the inner header when the header of the 
   tunnel is removed. Furthermore, the domain should set the outer 
   header at the entry of the tunnel based on the DS field of the IP 
   packet and map the outer header to the DS field of the IP packet at 
   the end of the tunnel. In MPLS the original_DSCP or local_DSCP should
   be mapped to different EXP codepoint (Experimental field of MPLS 
   header). In IP, original_DSCP or local_DSCP should be written to the 
   DS field of outer header.

   
7. Example uses

   This section gives an example of how the RU-PDB can be used in a 
   mobile system, and in particular in the wired parts of cellular 
   systems, such as the IP Diffserv based backbone. 

   Note however, that this example can be applied in any IP based 
   Diffserv scenario that supports real-time applications, which use 
   media codecs, and that do not have the benefit of being totally free 
   in selecting/producing bit-rates. Many media codecs are only able to 
   produce certain steps in bit-rate. They are also commonly looked to 
   certain packet rates or transmission intervals to achieve good 
   performance. There is also the issue that the actual change of 
   bit-rate, and thus quality level, is noticeable and disturbing to the
   consumer of the media. Which combined results in that bit-rate 
   changes usually needs to be done as seldom as possible and may only 
   be done in steps, sometimes quite large steps. In this situation, in 
   order to achieve the best possible behavior it would be very 
   beneficial if the sending application would know with a relatively 
   high probability that the higher bit-rate would be supported before 
   even trying to utilize it. The real time application can then make 
   use of two mechanisms. 
 
   First, during admission control, the real time application claims a 
   high percentage, say 70%, of the bandwidth required to operate at a 
   minimum acceptable level from the point of view of the end user. 
   This mechanism can be accomplished by using the described in this 
   document RU-PDB.

Karagiannis, et al.                                            [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                                   RU-PDB

   Second, for the rest of the bandwidth, say 30%, required by the 
   application, the sending application could increase the bit-rate and 
   thus the quality level, when it will know with a high probability 
   that the higher bit-rate would be end to end supported. This 
   mechanism can be accomplished by using ECN response specified in 
   [RFC3168], [RFC4340] which will provide real-time media applications 
   with a basic tool for adaptation. If the receiver detects packets 
   marked with Congestion Experienced (CE), it can use that in its 
   adaptation mechanism to reduce bandwidth, by reporting the event to 
   the sender. This is accomplished in the same way as a packet loss 
   would have been notified. However with the benefit that the payload 
   carried by the packet was not lost, which improves the media quality 
   by reducing the number of lost payloads. 

   A possible way of achieving this is that the sender will increase the
   transmitted rate, step-by step. For example, during each step the 
   bandwidth could be increased by 5%. If during each step the receiver 
   detects packets marked with Congestion Experienced (CE), it can then 
   use the information in its adaptation mechanism to reduce the 
   increased bandwidth, by reporting the event to the sender.  

   In the remaining part of this section, more details are given on how 
   the RU-PDB can perform the first mechanism described above, which 
   can be used in a mobile system, and in particular in the IP Diffserv 
   based backbone of cellular systems. It is considered however, that 
   also the second mechanism, which uses the ECN response is also 
   applied, but it will not be explained in this example.

   Usually in such a system, a Media Gateway is used between a sender 
   and a receiver of a real time media application, see Figure 1. Note 
   that such an entity can usually perform media transcoding functions.
  
           (SLA)                        (SLA)     Media
             |                            |      Gateway
Source Edge  V  Edge   Interior     Edge  V  Edge  (CAC)  Receiver
|       |        |        |        |        |        |        |
|       C        |  data  | data   |        |        |        |
| data  C#marked |        |        |        |        |        |
|------>C------->|------->|--------|------->|------->|        |
|       #unmarked|        |        |        |        |        |
|       |------->|------->|------->|------->|------->|------->|
   Figure: 1  Admission control (CAC) using RU-PDB 

   It is considered in this example that the assumptions described in 
   Section 6 are valid. In particular, it is assumed that the 
   negotiated SLA includes one pre-configured loosely agreed SLS 
   throughput (bandwidth) threshold required by the real time 
   application to operate at a minimum acceptable level from the 
   point of view of the end user.

Karagiannis, et al.                                            [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                                   RU-PDB

   In order to provide admission control, a Call Admission Control (CAC)
   function has to be supported by a node outside the Diffserv domain, 
   that in this example is the Media Gateway, see Figure 1. Note that 
   the way of how the CAC function is applied to admit or reject a flow 
   is out of the scope of this example. 

   The example will be described in steps:

   (1) An IP packet is sent from the source towards the receiver. Note 
   that all packets will pass through the Media Gateway. The packets 
   are Diffserv marked to receive a relatively high level of QoS, e.g., 
   with Expedited Forwarding (EF). The packet is received by the first 
   edge router. The edge router monitors to see if this packet is 
   out-of-profile. If the edge, see Figure 1, realizes that a packet 
   is out-of-profile, then the packet is marked to a second (local) 
   DSCP, say local_EF DSCP. Note that the traffic profile of the 
   meter & marking function available in each node should be lower than 
   the bandwidth agreed in the SLA or the bandwidth available for EF 
   traffic on links. The bandwidth between profiles provides an 
   interval where feedback on the resource availability is already 
   sent but the actual resource limitation is not reached, which allows 
   the Media Gateway CAC function to interpret the resource 
   unavailability notification and block new calls before reaching 
   congestion. Furthermore, note that the Diffserv scheduling in 
   routers is configured to use the same physical queue for packets 
   marked with the original DSCP (EF) and with the local DSCP (local_EF 
   DSCP). Note however, that different virtual queues might be used, see 
   Section 3. The packet is then forwarded further.

   (2) The packet is received by the ingress edge router of the next 
   domain. This domain may be new Diffserv domain, which is 
   administrated by a new backbone operator. The new Diffserv domain 
   may use a different Diffserv mapping scheme, so remarking local_EF 
   DSCP packets to another DSCP may be necessary. However, due to the 
   SLA agreements that exist between the two backbone operators, the 
   semantics of interpreting the new value of the local_EF DSCP will 
   remain. Furthermore, the same meter & marking function that was 
   explained in step 1 will also be applied. The packet is then 
   forwarded further.

   (3) The packet is processed by the interior node(s) in the domain 
   in a similar way as described in step (1). 

   (4) The packet is received by the egress of the same domain. It is 
   processed as described in step (1).

   (5) The packet is received by an ingress. It is processed as 
   described in step (2).

Karagiannis, et al.                                            [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                                   RU-PDB

   (6) Marked and remarked packets are received by the CAC function of 
   the Media Gateway. The amount of remarked packets (local_EF DSCP) 
   is counted in this node to provide the basis of call admission 
   decisions for new flows, see Section 3.3. Note that the amount of 
   remarked packets is counted separately for flow aggregates, which 
   are defined by source IP address ranges, see Section 3.3. 

   (7) The packet is marked back to the original DSCP (EF) and 
   forwarded towards its destination. 

8. Environmental concerns
   
   There are no environmental concerns specific to this PDB. However, 
   depending on the the area wherein the RU PDB is applied (one 
   Diffserv domain or multiple neigboring domains), different 
   requirements have to be fulfilled by the network operators, see 
   Section 6.

   
9. Security considerations for RU PDB
   
   There are no specific security exposures for this PDB.  See the
   general security considerations in [RFC2474] and [RFC2475]. Note 
   that when multiple Diffserv domains are using the RU-PDB, SLA 
   agreements should exist between the operator(s) of these multiple 
   neighboring Diffserv domains and therefore, it is considered that a 
   trust relationship exist between these domains. 


10. IANA Considerations
 
   [Editor's Note: A future version of this document will provide 
   instructions to IANA.]
   

11. Acknowledgements
   
   We thank Kathie Nichols for reviewing this draft and providing 
   Useful comments.

12. Normative References
   
   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC2119, March 1997.
   
   [RFC2474]  Nichols, K., Blake, S., Baker, F. and D. Black,
              "Definition of the Differentiated Services Field (DS
              Field) in the IPv4 and IPv6 Headers", RFC 2474, 
              December 1998.

Karagiannis, et al.                                          [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                                   RU-PDB

   [RFC2475]  Blake, S., Black, D., Carlson, M., Davies, E., Wang, 
              and W. Weiss, "An Architecture for Differentiated
              Services", RFC 2475, December 1998.
   
   [RFC3086]  Nichols, K. and B. Carpenter, "Definition of
              Differentiated Services Per Domain Behaviors and Rules 
              For their Specification", RFC 3086, April 2001.
   
   
13 Informative References
   
   
   [RFC2597]  Heinanen, J., Baker, F., Weiss, W. and J. Wroclawski,
              "Assured Forwarding PHB Group", RFC 2597, June 1999.

   [RFC3168]  Ramakrishnan, K., Floyd, S., Black, D., 
              "The Addition of Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) to 
              IP", RFC 3168, September 2001.
   
   [RFC3290]  Bernet, Y., Blake, S., Grossman, D., Smith, A., "An 
              Informal Management Model for Diffserv Routers", RFC 3290,
              May 2002.
   
   [RFC3246]  B. Davie, et al., "An Expedited Forwarding PHB (Per-
              Hop Behavior) ", RFC 3246, March 2002.
   
   [RFC4340] Kohler, E., Handley, M., Floyd, S., "Datagram Congestion 
             Control Protocol (DCCP)", RFC 4340, March 2006.

Karagiannis, et al.                                            [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                                   RU-PDB

   Authors' Addresses
   
   Georgios Karagiannis
   University of Twente
   P.O.  BOX 217
   7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands
   EMail: g.karagiannis@ewi.utwente.nl

   Lars Westberg
   Ericsson Research
   Kistagangen 26
   SE-164 80 Stockholm
   Sweden
   EMail: Lars.Westberg@ericsson.com
   
   Attila Bader
   Ericsson Research
   Ericsson Hungary Ltd.
   Laborc 1, Budapest, H-1037 
   Hungary
   EMail: Attila.Bader@ericsson.com

   Hannes Tschofenig
   Siemens
   Otto-Hahn-Ring 6
   Munich, Bavaria  81739
   Germany
   EMail: Hannes.Tschofenig@siemens.com


  Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology
   described in this document or the extent to which any license
   under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it
   represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any
   such rights.  Information on the procedures with respect to rights
   in RFC documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

Karagiannis, et al.                                           [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                                   RU-PDB

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention 
   any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other 
   proprietary rights that may cover technology that may be required 
   to implement this standard.  Please address the information to the 
   IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES,
   EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT
   THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR
   ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
   PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.


