
Internet Engineering Task Force                         Dimitry Haskin
Internet Draft                                             Ross Callon
Expires May 1995                                    Bay Networks, Inc.
                                                         November 1994



              Routing Aspects Of IPv6 Transition
           (draft-haskin-ipv6-routing-aspects-00.txt)


Status of this memo

    This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are
    working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force
    (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
    groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
    Drafts.

    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
    six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by 
    other documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use 
    Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite them other 
    than as ``work in progress.''

    To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please
    check the ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the 
    Internet-Drafts Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa),
    nic.nordu.net (Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim),
    ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West
    Coast).


Abstract

    This paper discusses routing aspects associated with the 
    transition from IPv4 to IPv6. The approach outlined here
    is designed to be compatible with the Simple Internet 
    Transition (SIT) mechanism.

    The proposals contained in this document are the opinions
    of the authors, and have not yet been discussed in detail
    by the working group. This document is intended as input
    to the IPNG, Tacit, and Ngtrans working groups. 








Expires May 1995                                              [Page 1]

Internet Draft     Routing Aspects Of IPv6 Transition    November 1994



1  TERMINOLOGY

  This paper uses the following terminology:

    Node
      A protocol module that implements IPv6.

    Router
      A node that forwards packets not explicitly addressed to itself.

    Host
      Any node that is not a router.

    Link
      A communication facility or medium over which nodes can   
      communicate at the link layer, i.e., the layer immediately below
      network layer.

    Interface
      A node's attachment to a link.

    Address
      An network layer identifier for an interface or a group of 
      interfaces.

    Neighbors
      Nodes attached to the same link.

    Routing Domain
      A collection of routers which coordinate the routing knowledge 
      using  a single routing protocol.

    Routing Region (or just "Region")
      A collection of routers interconnected by a single internet  
      protocol (e.g. IPv6) and coordinating their routing knowledge 
      using routing protocols from a single internet protocol stack.
      A routing region can be a subset or a superset of a routing 
      domain.

    Border Router
      A router that forwards packets across routing region boundaries.

    Tunneling
      Encapsulation of protocol A within protocol B, such that A 
      treats B as though it were a datalink layer.

    Reachability Information
      Information describing the set of reachable destinations that 
      can be used for packet forwarding decisions.



Expires May 1995                                              [Page 2]

Internet Draft     Routing Aspects Of IPv6 Transition    November 1994



    Routing Information
      Same as reachability information.

    Address Prefix
      The high-order bits in an address.

    Routing Prefix
      Address prefix that expresses destinations which have addresses 
      with the matching address prefixes. It is used by routers to 
      locate a link for delivery a datagram.

    Route Leaking
      Advertisement of network layer reachability information across 
      routing region boundaries.

    Translating Router
      A dual (IPv4/IPv6) protocol router that is capable translate 
      IPv4 packet headers into IPv6 headers and vise versa.



2  ISSUES AND OUTLINE


   This internet draft gives an initial overview of the routing 
   aspects of IPv4 to IPv6 transition. The approach outlined here is 
   designed to be compatible with the Simple IPv6 Transition (SIT)  
   [4][5]. 

   During an extended IPv4-to-IPv6 migration period, IPv6-based 
   systems must coexist with the installed base of IPv4 systems. In 
   such a dual internetworking protocol environment, both IPv4 and 
   IPv6 routing infrastructure will be present. Initially, deployed 
   IPv6-capable domains might not be globally interconnected via 
   an IPv6-capable internet infrastructure and therefore may need to 
   communicate across IPv4-only routing regions. 

   In order to achieve dynamic routing in such a mixed environment, 
   there need to be mechanisms to globally distribute IPv6 network 
   layer reachability information between dispersed IPv6 routing 
   regions. The same techniques can be used in later stages of 
   IPv4-to-IPv6 transition to route IPv4 packets between isolated 
   IPv4-only routing region over an IPv6 infrastructure.

   Similarly, at some stages of transition, translation between IPv4 
   and IPv6 packet formats may be necessary in order to allow IPv6- 
   only systems to talk with IPv4-only systems. 





Expires May 1995                                              [Page 3]

Internet Draft     Routing Aspects Of IPv6 Transition    November 1994



   The SIT transition provides a dual-stack transition, augmented by 
   use of encapsulation and translation where necessary and 
   appropriate. Routing issues related to this transition include:

    (1)	Routing for IPv4 packets;

    (2)	Routing for IPv6 packet;

      (2a) IPv6 packets with IPv4-incompatible addresses;

      (2b) IPv6 packets with IPv4-compatible addresses;

    (3)	Operation of manually configured static tunnels;

    (4)	Operation of automatic encapsulation and translation;

      (4a) Locating encapsulators and translators;

      (4b) Ensuring that routing is consist with encapsulation and 
           translation.

   Basic mechanisms required to accomplish these goals include:
   (i) Dual Stack Route Computation; (ii) Manual configuration of 
   tunnels; and (iii) Route Leaking to support translation and 
   automatic encapsulation. 

   The basic mechanism for routing of IPv4 and IPv6 involves 
   dual-stack routing. This implies that routes are separately 
   calculated for IPv4 addresses and for IPv6 addresses. This may be 
   done either by running a separate routing protocol for each, or for
   running one "integrated" routing protocol which calculates routes 
   for both IPv4 and IPv6. For example, one instance of OSPF might be 
   used, with a single topology (a single area structure, a single 
   router ID for each router, a single DR per LAN, etc.) to calculate 
   routes for both IPv4 and IPv6. 

   Tunnels (either IPv4 over IPv6, or IPv6 over IPv4) may be manually 
   configured. For example, in the early stages of transition this may
   be used to allow two IPv6 regions to interact over an IPv4 
   infrastructure. Manually configured static tunnels are treated as 
   if they were a normal data link. This is discussed in more detail 
   in section 3.1.

   Use of automatic encapsulation and translation requires consistency
   of routes between IPv4 routes and IPv6 routes for destinations 
   using IPv4-compatible addresses. For example, consider a packet 
   which starts off as an IPv6 packet, but then is translated into an 
   IPv4 packet in the middle of its path from source to destination. 
   This packet must locate a translator at the correct part of its 



Expires May 1995                                              [Page 4]

Internet Draft     Routing Aspects Of IPv6 Transition    November 1994



   path. Also, this packet has to follow a consistent route for the 
   entire path from source to destination. This is discussed in more 
   detail in sections 3.2 and 4.



3  ROUTE DISSEMINATION TECHNIQUES


 3.1	Manually Configured Static Tunnels


   Tunneling techniques are already widely deployed for bridging 
   non-IP network layer protocols (e.g. AppleTalk, CLNP, IPX) over 
   IPv4 routed infrastructure. IP tunneling is an encapsulation of 
   rbitrary packets inside IP datagrams that are forwarded over IP 
   infrastructure between tunnel endpoints. For a tunneled protocol,
   a tunnel appears as a single-hop link (i.e. routers that establish
   a tunnel over a network layer infrastructure can inter-operate over
   the tunnel as if it were a one-hop, point-to-point link). Once a 
   tunnel is established, routers at the tunnel endpoints can 
   establish routing adjacencies and exchange routing information. 
   Describing the protocols for performing encapsulation is outside 
   the scope of this paper.

   In order for a IPv6 router to be able to encapsulate IPv6 packets 
   into IPv4 datagrams and to forward encapsulated packet over a IPv4 
   tunnel, such a router must also be able to speak IPv4 (i.e. be 
   a dual protocol router). The route tunnelling techniques call for 
   dual protocol routers to be deployed at demarcation points between 
   adjacent IPv6 and IPv4-only routing regions:


     ~~~~~ IPv6 region ~~~~~               ~~~~~ IPv6 region ~~~~~
                          |                  |
                      dual router        dual router
                          |       tunnel     |
                          | <==============> |
                         ~~~~~ IPv4 region ~~~~~
                   

   Forwarding of IPv6 packets between IPv6 routing regions is 
   straightforward -- when a packet reaches a border router, the 
   border router examines it's routing database to find an interface 
   to the next-hop router. If the forwarding interface is connected to
   a tunneled link, the packet must be encapsulated into an IPv4 
   datagram according to the adopted encapsulation scheme, and the 
   resulting datagram is forwarded over the tunnel. Intermediary IPv4 
   routers between the tunnel endpoints forward the datagram as they 



Expires May 1995                                              [Page 5]

Internet Draft     Routing Aspects Of IPv6 Transition    November 1994



   would any other IPv4 datagram, using information in the 
   encapsulating header.   The recipient border router, in an adjacent
   IPv6 region, strips off the encapsulating header and forwards the 
   original IPv6 packets toward its ultimate destination. Note that 
   the destination and source addresses in the encapsulating header 
   are the IPv4 addresses of the tunnel endpoints, not derivatives of 
   the destination and source addresses of the encapsulated IPv6 
   packet.

   In the route tunneling scheme described here, there is a complete 
   separation of the IPv6 network reachability information from the 
   IPv4 routing information; i.e. this is a dual stack approach. 
   Nevertheless, an IPv4 routing region and an IPv6 routing region can
   overlap. Each such region can share routers which support both IPv4
   and IPv6 routing. 

   The downside of the dual stack approach is that it does not support
   a dynamic end-to-end routing of data sent between an IPv4-only node
   and an IPv6-only node with an IPv4-compatible address. [It is 
   already accepted that IPv4-only nodes will not be able to 
   interoperate with IPv6-only nodes with IPv4-incompatible 
   addresses.] When sending packets between IPv4-only and IPv6-only 
   nodes, due to the routing information separation,  the route to the
   destination node is not available to the routing protocol at the 
   source node. Therefore, packets first have to be sent to a default 
   translating dual protocol router which then can dynamically route 
   converted packets to their ultimate destinations.

   There are the following advantages to employ encapsulation for 
   exchanging routing information:

   -	The underline infrastructure which furnishes a tunnel link is 
	transparent to protocols that are bridged with the tunnel 
	(i.e. there is no changes to bridged protocols).

   -	All types of IPv6 route prefixes without exception can be 
	advertised with routing protocols.  Therefore, no restriction 
	need to be imposed on formats of the addresses in IPv6 packets
	that can be routed with this scheme.

   -	If a connectivity between IPv6 nodes is all that needed, only 
	border routers at boundaries with IPv4-only routing regions 
	need to be dual protocol routers.

   -	Since IPv6 packets are encapsulated only when they travel over
	network segments that don't support IPv6, and are forwarded 
	according to their native headers anywhere else, all kind of 
	policy routing can be employed over the entire IPv6 portion of
	data path.



Expires May 1995                                              [Page 6]

Internet Draft     Routing Aspects Of IPv6 Transition    November 1994




   -	Routers from major vendors already support the multiprotocol  
	operation that is needed at tunnel endpoints.

   The disadvantages of tunneling are that:

   -	They need to be manually configured.

   -	They may circumvent security firewalls of the encapsulating
	infrastructure -- only addresses of the tunnel endpoints are 
	normally visible to such firewalls, not actual attributes of 
	encapsulated packets. Note that the same stands true for 
	automatic tunneling which is used in the route leaking scheme.

   -	Since a tunnel may appear as a one-hop link, some routing 
	protocols may prefer a tunnel over a real multi-hop link. 
	Therefore, IPv6 packets may be routed across an IPv4 routing 
	region even when an alternative homogeneous IPv6 path is 
	available.   Note that this disadvantage may be eliminated by 
	using a routing protocol such as OSPF which allows
	a considerable dynamic range of metric values to be assigned
	to links. 

   Though this section describes tunneling of IPv6 routing information
   and IPv6 packets over an IPv4 infrastructure, when a need arises 
   for IPv4 routing regions to communicate via an IPv6 routing 
   infrastructure, the similar tunneling technique can be used -- 
   except IPv4 packets will be encapsulated within IPv6 datagrams.


 3.2	Route Leaking


   "Route leaking" is used to describe advertisement of network layer 
   reachability information across routing domain boundaries. 
   Normally, routing domains exchanging network layer reachability 
   information run the same network layer protocol (i.e. use the same 
   addressing scheme). However, we are particularly interested here in
   route leaking between IPv4-only and IPv6-only regions, between dual
   regions and IPv4-only regions, and between dual regions and 
   IPv6-only regions.

   Since the IPv6 addressing architecture is quite different from the 
   IPv4 addressing architecture, it isn't plausible that route leaking
   can be used to leak all types of IPv6 address into an IPv4 routing 
   region. Nevertheless, there is an important class of IPv6 addresses
   -- IPv6 addresses with embedded IPv4 addresses [3] -- that can be 
   successfully injected into an IPv4 region. IPv6 addresses with 
   embedded IPv4 addresses are designed to facilitate the transition 



Expires May 1995                                              [Page 7]

Internet Draft     Routing Aspects Of IPv6 Transition    November 1994



   of the Internet from IPv4 to IPv6. There are two forms of such 
   addresses: an IPv4-compatible address that can be assigned to 
   an IPv6 node and an IPv4-mapped address that is the IPv6 
   representation of an IPv4 address. Both address forms embed an IPv4
   address in the low-order 32 bits.

   When a dual protocol border router leaks an IPv6 routing prefix 
   with an embedded IPv4 routing prefix into an adjacent IPv4 routing 
   region, it strips off the high-order 96 bits and advertises the 
   IPv4 routing prefix with a IPv4 routing protocol. The recipient 
   border router in an adjacent IPv4 region treats IPv4 prefixes that 
   are received from neighboring IPv6 regions as regular IPv4 routing 
   prefixes and is free to disseminate them through its own routing 
   region as well as propagate them to other adjacent IPv6 routing 
   regions.

   When an IPv4 routing prefix reaches a dual protocol border router 
   in an IPv6 region, there is no efficient way to determine whether 
   this prefix represents IPv6 or IPv4 destinations. Therefore, such
   a prefix needs to be installed in the IPv4 routing information base
   (RIB), and the IPv4-compatible IPv6 equivalent is to be installed 
   into the IPv6 RIB. [It would appear that, for completeness, the 
   matching IPv4-mapped address would need to be installed along with 
   the IPv4-compatible IPv6 prefix into the IPv6 RIB, but, if the 
   router is made capable of forwarding IPv6 packets with IP4-mapped 
   IPv6 destination addresses as if they were IPv4-compatible IPv6 
   addresses (e.g. by substituting the address prefix 0:0:0:0:0:0 with
   the 0:0:0:0:0:FFFF prefix during forwarding table lookup), such 
   a duplication doesn't seem to be necessary.]

   It is important to observe that in order for this scheme to work, 
   each participating IPv6 node must be a dual protocol (IPv4/IPv6) 
   node with an IPv4-compatible IPv6 address as well as the matching 
   IPv4 address assigned to it. This is the clear downside of the 
   route leaking method since it limits types of IPv6 addresses that 
   can be disseminated with this scheme.

   When forwarding IPv6 packets, if a dual protocol router determines 
   that the next hop for an IPv6 packet is an IPv4 router, the router 
   sends the packet using "automatic" IPv6-over-IPv4 tunneling (i.e. 
   encapsulates the packet with an IPv4 header with the destination 
   address taken from the IPv4 address embedded in the destination 
   address of the original IPv6 packet) if the packet's destination 
   address is an IPv6-compatible address of an IPv6 node, or the 
   router needs to perform IPv6-to-IPv4 packet translation if the 
   packet's destination address is an IPv6-mapped address of
   an IPv4-only node. When the encapsulated packet enters an IPv6 
   region, it has to be decapsulated by a decapsulating router before 
   it can proceed to the destination node. If the encapsulated packet 



Expires May 1995                                              [Page 8]

Internet Draft     Routing Aspects Of IPv6 Transition    November 1994



   manages to reach the destination IPv4/IPv6 host without being 
   decapsulated by an intermediary router, the destination host must 
   be able decapsulate the packet. Note that, in contrast to the 
   decapsulating function at a tunnel endpoint, the decapsulating 
   router must be able of decapsulation of packets that are not 
   explicitly addressed to itself.

   Another disadvantage of the scheme is that it may suffer from the 
   pitfalls which can be encountered when reachability information 
   from one routing protocol is injected into a different routing 
   protocol -- one needs to be careful that a possible loss of 
   information during the route leaking as well as a lack of the 
   inter-protocol coordination, wouldn't result in the formation of 
   routing loops.



4  TRANSLATION AND AUTOMATIC ENCAPSULATION


   The use of automatic tunneling and of translation introduces two 
   issues: (i) How to ensure that packets which need to be translated 
   (or encapsulated using automatic capabilities) arrive at a 
   translator; (ii) How to ensure that the routing used before 
   translation/encapsulation is compatible with the route used after 
   translation/encapsulation.

   In principle there are a wide variety of complex ways to locate 
   translators and encapsulators. Where translators are located needs 
   to be closely tied into routing, in the sense that in some cases 
   the route that a packet takes has to traverse translators at the 
   proper locations within the network. In order to keep things 
   manageable, it is highly desirable to keep this simple. We 
   therefore recommend that one or both of two approaches be used:

   - All boundary routers between dissimilar routing regions must 
     be dual, and be capable of translation and encapsulation. 

   - For stub (non-transit) dual-capable routing regions (supporting
     both IPv4 and IPv6) which are interconnected with only one
     backbone, where the backbone is a single-protocol backbone,
     an alternate solution is acceptable: Here the border routers
     between the stub and the backbone may support only the one
     protocol used in the backbone, and translators may be located
     internally within the region. The translators may attract 
     traffic from inside the stub destined outside of the stub by 
     advertising a default route. 

   So long as the routers at boundaries between dissimilar routing 



Expires May 1995                                              [Page 9]

Internet Draft     Routing Aspects Of IPv6 Transition    November 1994



   regions are capable of translating between IPv4 and IPv6 formats, 
   routing of IPv6 packets with IPv4-compatible or IPv4-mapped 
   addresses is essentially equivalent, from the perspective of 
   calculated routes, to routing of IPv4 packets. 

   There are several options regarding how routes for IPv6 with 
   IPv4-compatible or IPv4-mapped addresses may be calculated. This 
   may be done by simply running routing for IPv4 separate from IPv6 
   (even in pure IPv6 regions), and using the IPv4 routes for those 
   IPv6 packets which use UPv6 addresses with embedded IPv4 addresses.
   Alternatively, the IPv4 routes may be fed into IPv6 routing 
   protocols. If the latter approach is used, then the routes may be 
   fed in using only one prefix (0:0:0:0:0:0), or using both 
   IPv4-compatible prefixes (0:0:0:0:0:0 and 0:0:0:0:0:FFFF). Note 
   that using two prefixes is the most straightforward, but implies 
   some duplication of function (since in most cases the same route 
   should be used for a given IPv4address, regardless of whether it is
   used for an IPv4 packet, an IPv6 packet with an IPv4-mapped address
   of the form "0:0:0:0:0:0<IPv4-address>", or an IPv4-compatible 
   address of the form "0:0:0:0:0:FFFF<IPv4-address>". The one case 
   where this apparent duplication of function is required is when
   the translators and encapsulators are not located in the boundary 
   routers between dissimilar routing regions. In this case, the path 
   followed by a IPv6 packet with an IPv4-compatible address may be 
   different from the path followed an IPv4 packet with the same 
   address. 



5  MORE HARD PROBLEMS


 5.1	IPv4 --> IPv6, Translate or Encapsulate?


   Consider an IPv4 packet, which is leaving an IPv4-only routing 
   region and has arrived at a border router which needs to forward 
   the packet into an IPv6-only routing region. Furthermore, lets 
   assume that the packet is entering a backbone service provider, and
   the final destination for the packet is "relatively remote", such 
   as in another domain which served via a different service provider. 
   In this case, the packet needs to be either translated or 
   encapsulated in order to transit the IPv6 region. However, note 
   that the boundary router entering the first IPv6 public service 
   provider can not reasonably be expected to know whether the final 
   destination is an IPv4-only or IPv6-only or dual system. Thus, 
   there is no way to know for sure whether the packet will ever again
   reach any system which is capable of understanding IPv4. This 
   implies that the packet will need to be translated in this case.



Expires May 1995                                             [Page 10]

Internet Draft     Routing Aspects Of IPv6 Transition    November 1994



   If the packet later has to exit the IPv6-only region and enter
   an IPv4-only region, then the packet may need to be translated 
   again. This implies that it is possible that the packet may need to
   be translated multiple times before it is delivered to its final 
   destination (with implicit performance consequences). 

   Also, note that when the packet it being translated from IPv4 to 
   IPv6, it is also impractical for the border router to know whether 
   the addresses should be translated using the 0:0:0:0:0:0 or 
   0:0:0:0:0:FFFF prefix. Therefore, a single prefix will need to be 
   used (presumably 0:0:0:0:0:0), and then the prefixes may need to be
   fixed by IPv6-only routers or border routers closer to the 
   destination routing region. 



 5.2	Finer Scale for Translation


   Note that translation is required because of the expectation that 
   there will be IPv6-only systems in the near future (i.e., well 
   before IPv4 ceases to be commercially important). However, if 
   companies ship IPv6-only systems, then these are likely to be mixed
   in the same environment with IPv4-only systems. 

   This implies that it will not be sufficient to *just* translate on 
   major region boundaries. Rather, it may be necessary for routers to
   translate between two devices in the same routing region, or even 
   on the same LAN. 

   To make this work in practice, it is important to simplify the 
   operation of routing in the dual environment which contains both 
   IPv4-only and IPv6-only systems. In particular, we should require 
   that all routers in the region be able to calculate routes to both 
   IPv4 and IPv6 addresses, to translate between IPv4 and IPv6 
   formats, and to know which locally attached hosts are IPv4-only, 
   which are dual, and which are IPv6-only. The last router along the 
   path of the packet therefore translates when necessary. This 
   approach has been called "Ships In the Night, Translate Only When 
   Necessary", abbreviated SINTOWN). 












Expires May 1995                                             [Page 11]

Internet Draft     Routing Aspects Of IPv6 Transition    November 1994



6  CONCLUSION


   Of two route dissemination techniques presented in this paper, the 
   route tunneling approach seems to be the more straightforward 
   solution which has the following advantages over the route leaking 
   scheme:

   -	All types of IPv6 routing prefixes can be disseminated as 
	opposed to the IPv4-compatible IPv6 addresses only.

   -	Only dual protocol border routers at boundaries between IPv6 
	and IPv4 routing regions need to implement the tunneling 
	mechanism.  All packet encapsulation/decapsulation is 
	performed by these border routers only. Contrary, since 
	automatic tunneling is utilized in the route leaking scheme,  
	with this scheme packet destination nodes may need to do 
	decapsulation also.

   -	No need to deploy decapsulating routers for decapsulation of 
	tunneled traffic for which such routers are not tunnel 
	endpoints (termed "early decapsulation" in [4]).

   -	Since tunnels between IPv6 routing regions are manually 
	configured, there is a better control over data path of IPv6 
	packet.  This facilitates use of IPv6 routing extensions.

   -	Even though tunnels between isolated routing regions need to 
	be manually configured (as opposed to the automatic tunneling 
	of other scheme), the management of the routing infrastructure
	can be significantly simpler due to the clear separation of 
	routing information between two different protocol stacks.

   -	No need to tweak IPv6 routing protocols to process IPv4 routes
	and vise versa -- there is no cross-pollination.

   -	It scales better since there is no need to duplicate routing 
	information on dual protocol routers.

   The advantages of the route leaking approach are:

   -	No need to manually configure tunnels between isolated routing
	regions.

   -	Packets sent between IPv4-only and IPv6-only nodes can be 
	dynamically routed end-to-end.

   Where translation is necessary, it is desirable that all boundary
   routers are dual-stack and capable of translation. This will allow



Expires May 1995                                             [Page 12]

Internet Draft     Routing Aspects Of IPv6 Transition    November 1994



   routing of IPv6 packets with IPv4-compatible addresses and the 
   routing of IPv4 packets to use the same routes.

   Since route leaking allows end-to-end routing of packets sent 
   between IPv4-only and IPv6-only nodes, it solves routing problem of
   directing traffic which needs translation to an appropriate 
   translating router.  Nevertheless, authors feel that it may be 
   possible to come with some routing mechanism (e.g. use of default 
   routes) to dynamically route packets between IPv4-only and 
   IPv6-only nodes without resorting to route leaking technique or,
   at least, use route leaking in some limited way. Further study
   of routing in the presence of translation is necessary.



7  SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS


   It is indicated that use of tunnelling may violate firewalls of 
   underlining routing infrastructure.

   No other security issues are discussed in this paper.



8  REFERENCES


  [1]	IP Next Generation Overview,
    	R. Hinden, Internet Draft

  [2]	Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Specification,
  	R.Hinden (Editor), Internet Draft.

  [3]	IP Next Generation Addressing Architecture,
    	R.Hinden (Editor), Internet Draft

  [4]	Simple IPv6 Transition (SIT) Overview,
     	R. Gilligan, Internet Draft

  [5]	Transition Mechanism for IPv6 Hosts and Routers,
    	R. Gilligan, E. Nordmark, Internet Draft










Expires May 1995                                             [Page 13]

Internet Draft     Routing Aspects Of IPv6 Transition    November 1994



9  AUTHORS' ADDRESSES


   Dimitry Haskin
   Bay Networks, Inc.
   2 Federal Street
   Billerica, MA 01821
   email: dhaskin@baynetworks.com

   Ross Callon
   Bay Networks, Inc.
   3 Federal Street
   Billerica, MA 01821
   email: rcallon@baynetworks.com






































Expires May 1995                                             [Page 14]
