ENUM Working Group                                          R. Brandner
Internet Draft                                                  Siemens
                                                              L. Conroy
                                                                Siemens
                                                             R. Stastny
                                                                  OeFEG
Expires: August 2003                                      February 2003


            Registration for enumservices of group messages
                <draft-brandner-enumservice-msg-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.




Abstract

   This document registers a group of 'enumservices' [5] to be used to 
   indicate that the associated resources are capable of receiving 
   discrete messages.

   Specifically, the "enumservices" registered with this document are 
   'email', 'fax', 'sms', 'ems' and 'mms' using the URI schemes 
   'mailto:' and 'tel:'


Table of Contents

   TBD


1.  Introduction

   ENUM (E.164 Number Mapping, RFC2916bis [5]) is a system that 
   transforms E.164 numbers [6] into domain names and then uses DNS 
   (Domain Name Service, RFC1034 [7]) services like delegation through 
   NS records and NAPTR records to look up what services are available 
   for a specific domain name.

   This document registers 'enumservices' according to the guidelines 
   given in RFC2916bis to be used for provisioning in the services 
   field of a NAPTR[10] resource record to indicate what class of 
   functionality a given end point offers. The registration is defined 
   within the DDDS (Dynamic Delegation Discovery System [9] [10] [11] 
   [12] [13]) hierarchy, for use with the "E2U" DDDS Application 
   defined in RFC2916bis

   The following 'enumservices' are registered with this document: 
   'email', 'fax', 'sms', 'ems' and 'mms'. These share a common feature 
   in that they each indicate that the functionality of the given end 
   points and the associated resources are capable of receiving 
   discrete messages, albeit of different types.

   According to RFC2619bis, the 'enumservice' registered must be able 
   to function as a selection mechanism when choosing one NAPTR 
   resource record from another. That means that the registration MUST 
   specify what is expected when using that very NAPTR record, and the 
   URI scheme which is the outcome of the use of it.

   Therefore an 'enumservice' acts as a hint, indicating the kind of 
   service with which the URI constructed using the regexp field is 
   associated. There can be more than one 'enumservice' included within 
   a single NAPTR; this indicates that there is more than one service 
   that can be achieved using the associated URI scheme.

   The common thread with this set of definitions is that they reflect 
   the kind of service that the end user will hope to achieve with the
   communication using the associated URI. 

   The services specified here are intended NOT to specify the protocol 
   or even method of connection that MUST be used to achieve each 
   service. Instead they define the kind of interactive behavior that 
   an end user will expect, leaving the end system to decide (based on 
   policies outside the remit of this specification) how to execute the 
   service.

   Since the same URI scheme may be used for different services (e.g. 
   'tel:'), and the same kind of service may use different URI schemes 
   (e.g. for VoIP 'sip:', 'h323:' and 'tel:' may be used), it is 
   necessary in some cases to specify the service and the URI scheme 
   used.

   The service parameters defined in RFC2916bis allow therefore a 
   'type' and a 'subtype' to be specified. Within this set of 
   specifications the convention is assumed that the 'type' (being the 
   more generic term) is defining the service and the 'subtype' is 
   defining the URI scheme.

   Although currently only one URI scheme is associated with a given 
   service, it should be considered that an additional URI scheme to be 
   used with this service may be added later. Thus the subtype is 
   needed to identify the specific 'enumservice' intended.


2.  Abbreviations

   TBD


3.  E-mail Service Registration

   Enumservice Name: "email"

   Type: "email"

   Subtype: "mailto"

   URI Scheme: 'mailto:'

   Functional Specification:

   This enumservice indicates that the remote resource can be addressed 
   by the associated URI scheme in order to send an email.

   Security Considerations:

   An e-mail address is a canonical address by which a user is known. 
   Placing this address in ENUM is comparable to placing a SIP or H.323 
   address in the DNS.

   DNS does not make any policy decisions about the records that is 
   shares with an inquirer. All DNS records must be assumed to be 
   available to all inquirers at all times. The information provided 
   within an ENUM NAPTR resource record must therefore be considered to 
   be open to the public, which is a cause for some privacy 
   considerations.

   Therefore ENUM Subscribers should be made aware of this risk. Since 
   it is within the responsibility of the ENUM Subscriber which data is 
   entered in ENUM, it is within the ENUM Subscribers control if he 
   enters e-mail addresses:
      1. allowing inference of private data e.g. his first and last 
         name
      2. at all

   It should also be considered that it is the purpose of public 
   communication identifiers to be publicly known. To reduce spam and 
   other unwanted communication other means should be made available.

   See also section 7.

   Intended Usage: COMMON

   Author: Rudolf Brandner, Lawrence Conroy, Richard Stastny
           (for author contact detail see section 10)

   Any other information the author deems interesting:

   None


4.  Fax Service Registration

   Enumservice Name: "fax"

   Type: "fax"

   Subtype: "tel"

   URI Scheme: 'tel:'

   Functional Specification: 

   This enumservice indicates that the resource identified by the 
   associated URI scheme is capable of being contacted to provide a 
   communication session during which facsimile documents can be sent.

   A client selecting this NAPTR will have support for generating and 
   sending facsimile documents to the recipient using the PSTN session 
   and transfer protocols specified in [ITU1] and [ITU2] - in short, 
   they will have a fax program with a local or shared PSTN access over 
   which they can send faxes.



   Security Considerations:

   An fax number as any other phone number may give not so much privacy 
   away then a name in the format user@host (e.g. an email or sip 
   address), but there is still the risk of unwanted messages. 
   Therefore in principle the same applies as stated in the security 
   consideration for e-mail.

   See also section 7.

   Intended Usage: COMMON

   Author: Rudolf Brandner, Lawrence Conroy, Richard Stastny
           (for author contact detail see section 10)

   Any other information the author deems interesting:

   None


5.  MMS, EMS, SMS Service

5.1  Introduction

   An ENUM NAPTR indicates ability on the part of the Subscriber to 
   receive specified communication service (or services) provided via 
   the contact address (shown in the generated URI).

   In the case of MMS, EMS, and SMS services, the capability of these 
   services is a nested superset; thus a service supporting MMS can 
   support also delivery of EMS or SMS messages to a recipient, whilst 
   a service supporting EMS can also deliver SMS messages.

   Thus, if a client is capable only of generating and sending an SMS 
   message, they MAY choose to consider also NAPTRs indicating support 
   for EMS and MMS services as well as SMS, as these services will be 
   able to deliver an SMS message to the recipient address.

   Conversely, a client capable of sending MMS messages may choose to 
   consider also NAPTRs indicating support for EMS or SMS messages, 
   "downgrading" their User Interface to allow only generation of 
   messages that conform to SMS or EME standards.

   These behaviors on the part of the client are purely optional, and 
   are NOT the subject of any protocol standardization.


5.2  SMS Service Registration



   Enumservice Name: "sms"

   Type: "sms"

   Subtype: "tel"

   URI Scheme: 'tel:'

   Functional Specification: 

   This enumservice indicates that the resource identified by the 
   associated URI scheme is capable of receiving a message using the 
   Short Message System (SMS).

   Security Considerations: 

   There are no specific security issues with this 'enumservice'. 
   However, the general considerations of section 7 apply.

   Intended Usage: COMMON

   Author: Rudolf Brandner, Lawrence Conroy, Richard Stastny
           (for author contact detail see section 10)

   Any other information the author deems interesting:

   None


5.3  EMS Service Registration

   Enumservice Name: "ems"

   Type: "ems"

   Subtype: "tel"

   URI Scheme: 'tel:'

   Functional Specification: 

   This enumservice indicates that the resource identified by the 
   associated URI scheme is capable of receiving a message using the 
   Extended Message System (EMS).

   Security Considerations:

   There are no specific security issues with this 'enumservice'. 
   However, the general considerations of section 7 apply.



   Intended Usage: COMMON

   Author: Rudolf Brandner, Lawrence Conroy, Richard Stastny
           (for author contact detail see section 10)

   Any other information the author deems interesting:

   Note that an indication of EMS can be taken as implying that the 
   recipient is capable of receiving SMS messages at this address as 
   well.


5.4  MMS Service Registration

   Enumservice Name: "mms"

   Type: "mms"

   Subtype: "tel"

   URI Scheme: 'tel:'

   Functional Specification: 

   This enumservice indicates that the resource identified by the 
   associated URI scheme is capable of receiving a message using the 
   Multimedia Message System (MMS).

   Security Considerations:

   There are no specific security issues with this 'enumservice'. 
   However, the general considerations of section 7 apply.

   Intended Usage: COMMON

   Author: Rudolf Brandner, Lawrence Conroy, Richard Stastny
           (for author contact detail see section 10)

   Note that an indication of MMS can be taken as implying that the 
   recipient is capable of receiving EMS or SMS messages at this 
   address.


6.  Additional Information

   Editor note: Is there any necessary additional information? TBD




7.  Security Considerations 

   DNS, as used by ENUM, is a global, distributed database. Thus any 
   information stored there is visible to anyone anonymously. Whilst 
   this is not qualitatively different from publication in a Telephone 
   Directory, it does open the data subject to having "their" 
   information collected automatically without any indication that this 
   has been done or by whom.

   Such data harvesting by third parties is often used to generate 
   lists of targets for unrequested information; in short, they are 
   used to address "spam". Anyone who uses a Web-archived mailing list 
   is aware that the volume of "spam" email they are sent increases 
   when they post to the mailing list; publication of a telephone 
   number in ENUM is no different, and may be used to send "junk faxes" 
   or "junk SMS" for example.

   Many mailing list users have more than one email address and use 
   "sacrificial" email accounts when posting to such lists to help 
   filter out unrequested emails sent to them. This is not so easy with 
   published telephone numbers; the PSTN E.164 number assignment 
   process is much more involved and usually a single E.164 number (or 
   a fixed range of numbers) is associated with each PSTN access. Thus 
   providing a "sacrificial" phone number in any publication is not 
   possible.

   Due to the implications of publishing data on a globally accessible 
   database, as a principle the data subject MUST give their explicit 
   informed consent to data being published in ENUM.

   In addition, they should be made aware that, due to storage of such 
   data during harvesting by third parties, removal of the data from 
   publication will not remove any copies that have been taken; in 
   effect, any publication may be permanent.

   However, regulations in many regions will require that the data 
   subject can at any time request that the data is removed from 
   publication, and that their consent for its publication is 
   explicitly confirmed at regular intervals.

   When placing a fax call via the PSTN or a sending a message via the 
   Public Land Mobile Network, the sender may be charged for this 
   action. In both kinds of network, calling or messaging to some 
   numbers is more expensive than sending to others; both networks have 
   "premium rate" services that can charge considerably more than a 
   "normal" call or message destination. As such, it is important that 
   the end user be asked to confirm sending the message, and that the 
   destination number be presented to them. It is the originating 
   user's choice on whether or not to send a message to this 


   destination number, but they SHOULD be shown the destination number 
   so that they can make this decision

   In addition to the specific security considerations given above, all 
   security considerations given in RFC2916bis apply.


8.  References

1  Scott Bradner, RFC2026,
      "The Internet Standards Process - Revision 3",
      October 1996.

2  ITU-T T.4,
      "Standardization of Group 3 facsimile terminals for 
      document transmission",
      April 1999

3  ITU-T T.30,
      "Procedures for document facsimile transmission in the  
      general switched telephone network",
      April 1999

4  H. Schulzrinne, A. Vaha-Sipila, 
      "URIs for Telephone Calls",
      draft-antti-RFC2806bis-07.txt,
      Work in progress, December 2002

5  P. Faltstrom, M. Mealling,
      "The E.164 to URI DDDS Application (ENUM)",
      draft-ietf-enum-rfc2916bis-03.txt,
      Work in progress, January 2003

6  ITU-T, 
      "The International Public Telecommunication Number Plan",
      Recommendation E.164,
      May 1997

7  P. Mockapetris, RFC1034,
      "DOMAIN NAMES - CONCEPTS AND FACILITIES",
      November 1987

8  ETSI TS 102 172,
      "Minimum Requirements for Interoperability of 
      European ENUM Trials",
      February 2003

9  M. Mealling, RFC 3401,
      "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part One:


      The Comprehensive DDDS",
      October 2002

10 M. Mealling, RFC 3402,
      "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part Two:
      The Algorithm",
      October 2002

11  M. Mealling, RFC 3403,
      "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part Three:
      The Domain Name System (DNS) Database",
      October 2002

12  M. Mealling, RFC 3404,
      "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part Four:
      The Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI)",
      October 2002

13  M. Mealling, RFC 3405,
      "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part Five:
      URI.ARPA Assignment Procedures",
      October 2002


9.  Author's Addresses

   Rudolf Brandner
      Siemens ICN
      Hofmannstrasse 51
      Munich
      Germany
      email: <mailto:rudolf.brandner@siemens.com>
      voice: <tel:+49-89-72251003>
      web:   <http://www.siemens.com>

   Lawrence Conroy
      Siemens Roke Manor Research
      Roke Manor
      Romsey
      U.K.
      email: <mailto:lwc@roke.co.uk>
      voice: <tel:+44-1794-833666>

   Richard Stastny
      OeFEG
      Postbox 147
      1103 Vienna
      Austria
      email: <mailto:richard.stastny@oefeg.at>


      voice: <tel:+43-664-420-4100>


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

