


SIPPING                                                          D. York
Internet-Draft                                                     Voxeo
Intended status: Informational                         February 18, 2008
Expires: August 21, 2008


                  SIP Usage Scenarios Similar to SPIT
            draft-york-sipping-spit-similarity-scenarios-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 21, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   This document outlines scenarios in which legitimate SIP traffic may
   appear similar to traffic associated with voice spam, also known as
   "SPIT" or "Spam for Internet Telephony.  This document is created to
   provide input into the current discussions about how best to address
   the issue of SPIT.






York                     Expires August 21, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     SIP Usage Scenarios Similar to SPIT     February 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Outbound SIP Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Emergency Notification Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.2.  Urgent Notification Systems  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.3.  Event-Driven Notification Systems  . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.4.  Routine Notification Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  Inbound SIP Scenarios  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.1.   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.2.   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.  Network Failures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Other Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Summary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   10. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 11































York                     Expires August 21, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     SIP Usage Scenarios Similar to SPIT     February 2008


1.  Introduction

   If the administrator of a VoIP network suddenly noticed 10,000
   outbound SIP INVITE messages traversing the network in the space of a
   minute or two, could this be a spammer generating voice spam on the
   network?  Or could this be the legitimate triggering of an emergency
   notification system?

   As outlined in the recently published RFC 5039 [RFC5039],
   communication using the Session Iniatiation Protocol (SIP) could be a
   target for a form of spam commonly known as either "voice spam",
   "Spam for Internet Telephony" or simply "SPIT".  Essentially, SPIT is
   the transmission of bulk unsolicited messages via SIP.  It is
   telemarketing brought to the world of IP where the traditional costs
   and delays associated with telemarketing in the PSTN world are
   removed.  Telemarketers can now very rapidly and inexpensively send
   out a very high volume of calls, which we might see as "spam".  For
   reasons outlined in RFC 5039, SPIT attacks are not yet widely seen,
   but can be expected as further interconnections occur between SIP
   systems.

   RFC 5039 and related Internet Drafts
   ([I-D.tschofenig-sipping-framework-spit-reduction] and
   [I-D.niccolini-sipping-spitstop]) outline the potential threat of
   SPIT and also lay out suggestions for possible solutions.  Beyond the
   potential solutions offered thus far, it is very conceivable that
   traditional network security vendors will seek to use existing tools
   to combat SPIT at a network traffic level.  For instance, a system
   designed to monitor network traffic and trigger alerts based on
   anomolies seen in network traffic could be modified to look for
   anomolies in the base rate of SIP traffic.

   The purpose of this document is to provide input into the ongoing
   discussions around preventing SPIT that highlights the fact that
   there are cases where legitimate SIP traffic may in fact look like
   SPIT.  If the administrator of a VoIP network suddenly noticed 10,000
   outbound SIP INVITE messages traversing the network in the space of a
   minute or two, this could be SPIT being generated by a system
   connected to that VoIP network - or it could be an emergency
   notification system.

   Solutions to the potential problem of SPIT do need to take into
   account that some legitimate uses of SIP communication might resemble
   the launch of a SPIT session or indeed might resemble a Denial of
   Service (DoS) attack.  This document outlines some of those
   scenarios.

   It should be noted that the concern addressed in this document is for



York                     Expires August 21, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     SIP Usage Scenarios Similar to SPIT     February 2008


   the spammer who may generate a large amount of SIP traffic in a short
   period of time and thus potentially come to the attention of network
   monitoring tools.  This may be the case, for instance, when a spammer
   connects to another party's network (for instance, one using
   unprotected WiFi) and wants to send out the most messages in the
   least amount of time.  A spammer may also simply be trying to send
   the messages out as fast as possible for one client in order to move
   on to other clients.

   Obviously a spammer could simply slow down the rate of sending SIP
   messages to evade this type of detection.  In that case the SPIT
   traffic would resemble normal SIP traffic and be subject to the
   concerns and potential solutions suggested in RFC 5039 and other
   Internet-Drafts.

   NOTE: Reflecting the fact that SIP can be used for far more than
   voice, RFC 5039 discusses call spam, IM spam and presence spam.  This
   document, however, primarily focuses on call spam.


2.  Outbound SIP Scenarios

   Given the ease with which SIP systems can be connected to existing
   applications such as databases, creating a system to do large scale
   initiation of SIP messages is easy to do and both commercial and open
   source implementations of such functionality exist today.

   Any system that generated a large amount of outbound SIP traffic
   might potentially be viewed as a generator of SPIT.  This section
   breaks down those systems into several categories.

2.1.  Emergency Notification Systems

   In the wake of recent school shootings in the USA, particularly the
   April 2007 event at Virginia Tech, academic institutions at all
   levels are seeking technical solutions which will allow them to do
   "emergency notification" on a massive scale.  Such systems can be
   triggered by school administrators or potentially public safety
   officials and immediately begin notifying students, faculty and now
   even parents.  Notification may take the form of phone calls, text
   messages (SMS), IM messages or all of the above.

   Were such a system to be SIP-based, the triggering of the system
   might result in the immediate flow of:

   o  SIP INVITE messages to phones, conceivably to every known SIP
      endpoint on the campus




York                     Expires August 21, 2008                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     SIP Usage Scenarios Similar to SPIT     February 2008


   o  SIP messages to PSTN gateways to initiate outbound calls to
      regular phones

   o  SIP messages to SMS gateways to initiate outbound text messages

   o  SIP messages to IM networks

   If a university were to have, for instance, 10,000 students and
   several thousand more staff and faculty, an extremely large number of
   SIP messages would be sent in a very short time.

   It is important to note that in the case of an emergency notification
   system, messages are typically extremely time-sensitive and are
   looking for immediate delivery.  There also may be health, legal or
   at least public relations ramifications if the messages are blocked
   from delivery.  There will also typically be no notification of the
   triggering of such a system and, hopefully, the system will almost
   never be used.  To the unaware system administrator just routinely
   monitoring network traffic, this would be an extremely surprising
   event.

   Beyond usage in educational settings, emergency notification systems
   like this are also be established in a variety of other situations
   such as government alerts about impending weather or natural events
   (ex. tornados, fires).

2.2.  Urgent Notification Systems

   While not rising to the same level of criticality as "emergency"
   systems, there are other "urgent" notification systems that follow a
   similar profile.  Examples include:

   o  Airline systems notifying travelers of delayed or cancelled
      flights

   o  School systems notifying families of school delays or
      cancellations

   o  Stock price change notifications

   Again, the notification system may trigger on an infrequent basis or
   go through seasonal cycles and may involve a large number of calls.
   In some situations, such as a school notification, the number of
   calls may be close to the same in each event.  For example, the
   number of student families to notify may fluctuate slightly but
   typically not by much.  In other situations the number of calls may
   vary widely.  For example, the number of calls to be made by an
   airline notification system may depend upon how many people are



York                     Expires August 21, 2008                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     SIP Usage Scenarios Similar to SPIT     February 2008


   traveling and how many of those travelers provided contact
   information or requested to be notified..

2.3.  Event-Driven Notification Systems

   In a similar fashion to the previous scenarios, it is quite
   conceivable that automated systems will be used by a wide variety of
   organizations to alert people to impending events.  For instance, a
   professional sports team might use a system to alert all the members
   of a fan club about an upcoming game.  A business group might remind
   all of its members about an upcoming conference.  A political
   campaign might call a list reminding people to go out and vote.  The
   list of potential users of such a system could be quite lengthy.
   Some examples might be:

   o  Professional sports teams

   o  School events

   o  Local theatres

   o  Business groups

   o  Town/city governments/associations

   o  Political campaigns

   The key element here is that the calls might happen on an infrequent
   basis.  There might be a large number of calls made in a short period
   of time - and once the event is over there are no more calls made by
   that entity until the next similar event.

2.4.  Routine Notification Systems

   While the previous scenarios have outlined situations where a large
   amount of traffic was generated with no warning, there also exist a
   class of scenarios where a large amount of traffic might be generated
   on a regular interval.  For instance, some school systems in the USA
   are starting to use notification systems to alert parents to events
   that have occurred that day or will be occurring.  They might receive
   a phone call each day stating what homework their child had and/or
   informing them of a school meeting occuring later in the week.  With
   a large school district, the automated notification system might
   initiate thousands of calls every day at, for example, 3pm.

   Similarly, a movie theater might call every subscriber in a special
   promotional club on every Thursday afternoon to let them know what
   movies might be premiering during the upcoming weekend.



York                     Expires August 21, 2008                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     SIP Usage Scenarios Similar to SPIT     February 2008


   Again, there are a large number of potential users of such a system.
   The key difference in this scenario is that the traffic may occur at
   a regular time and period.  Security systems that monitor network
   traffic might flag these notification systems as potential sources of
   SPIT but conceivably those systems could be configured in such a way
   that this notification traffic is incorporated into a network
   "baseline" as known and expected traffic.


3.  Inbound SIP Scenarios

   In a similar fashion to outbound SIP scenarios, it is possible that
   sufficient legitimate inbound traffic to a SIP system/network might
   cause administrators or automated systems to believe they are
   receiving a large amount of voice spam/SPIT.  For instance, if a
   system were on the receiving end of an emergency notification system
   (ex. an IP-PBX operated by a department within a university) a high
   level of SIP INVITE messages would be received that might go to all
   extensions on the system.

   Similarly, the system/network might be receiving calls due to a
   contest or other event (ex. an "American Idol"-type of show where
   people call in and vote or a radio station contest).  Note, though,
   that in this situation the calls might be coming in from a range of
   different endpoints and could also resemble a Denial of Service (DoS)
   or Distributed Denial of Service (DDos) attack.

   The primary difference from outbound scenarios is that with the
   inbound scenario the destination of all the traffic would typically
   be the SIP proxy/gateway for a given network.  Again, this may make
   differentiation between legitimate traffic and SPIT - or a DoS or
   DDoS - difficult.

3.1.

   Similar to the Event-Driven outbound systems, there may be legitimate
   inbound calling due to specific *known* events.  Examples include:

   o  "American Idol"-style TV shows

   o  Radio station listener contests, ticket giveaways, etc.

   o  Interview shows (Ex.  "Call now to ask your mayor questions about
      the school budget.")

   o  Advertising (Ex.  "Call in the next 5 minutes to obtain your copy
      of ____ for only $19.95!")




York                     Expires August 21, 2008                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     SIP Usage Scenarios Similar to SPIT     February 2008


   The major distinction here is that at some point it is known that
   this traffic will be generated, in comparison to the section below.
   For instance, the time when callers may be calling in to vote in the
   TV show will be known in advance.  (Whether or not all systems in the
   path of the call will be alerted to this is a separate matter.)

3.2.

   Unexpected events such as those that might cause a significant amount
   of outbound calling (as outlined in the Emergency Notification
   Systems earlier) may also create a significant amount of *inbound*
   calling.  Such events include, but are certainly not limited to, such
   things as:

   o  Natural disasters

   o  School shootings

   o  Large traffic accidents

   o  Bombings

   Again the issue here is that these events are entirely unexpected and
   therefore the traffic entering a SIP network could very easily be
   viewed as a Distributed Denial-of-Service attack.


4.  Network Failures

   Another scenario to consider is the case where excessive amounts of
   SIP traffic are not the result of exceptional amounts of inbound or
   outbound calling but rather a failure in the actual network
   infrastructure.  For instance, consider the case where there is a
   wide area network with multiple SIP-to-PSTN gateways and a large
   distributed infrastructure.  An outage at specific points in the
   network might result in all the traffic for the larger network being
   routed through a single SIP signaling node.  To the administrators of
   that node, the sudden influx of additional traffic might cause
   concern of a DoS or SPIT attack.  One might hope that the
   administrators would also be able to easily ascertain the network
   status and understand why they are receiving this traffic, but that
   might not be possible in all network configurations.


5.  Other Considerations

   One logical reaction to these scenarios might be to suggest that the
   legitimate senders simply reduce their send rate to be below any



York                     Expires August 21, 2008                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     SIP Usage Scenarios Similar to SPIT     February 2008


   timing thresholds that might trigger automated systems.  For
   instance, if a system needing to contact 10,000 endpoints were to
   send one SIP INVITE every half-second, the INVITEs would then all go
   out over the space of a bit under 1.5 hours.  For some systems, such
   the "Routine Notification Systems" identified earlier, spacing out
   the INVITE messages might be fine and in fact might actually be
   required in order for the media servers to keep with streaming the
   outbound media to all the invited endpoints.  However, in other
   situations, such as emergency notification systems, some spacing out
   of INVITE messages may be possible but at some threshold any further
   delays may be unacceptable and indeed in some cases could be life-
   threatening.


6.  Summary

   Voice spam, also known as "SPIT", has the potential to be a serious
   problem if we move to a space where we have interconnected systems
   where any SIP endpoint can call any other SIP endpoint - and we do
   not have any mechanisms in place to prevent abuse of the system to
   generate large volumes of unsolicited calls.  Solutions are being
   discussed and such work needs to be continued.

   In looking at potential solutions, it is important to recognize that
   there are legitimate cases where SIP systems may generate large
   volumes of calls in a rapid timeframe.  Any solutions to addressing
   the problem of SPIT do need to take into account these legitimate
   scenarios.


7.  Acknowledgements

   The author is grateful for the work done by the SPITSTOP mailing list
   and the authors of the associated drafts as well as the authors of
   RFC 5039.  The author thanks Dan Burnett for feedback on an initial
   version of this document.

   Comments were appreciated on the initial draft from Dan Wing, Hannes
   Tschofenig, Brian Rosen, Harsha Ramanagoudra, Raphael Tryster and
   others.


8.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.






York                     Expires August 21, 2008                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft     SIP Usage Scenarios Similar to SPIT     February 2008


9.  Security Considerations

   This document relates entirely to security considerations for
   potential voice spam.


10.  Informative References

   [I-D.niccolini-sipping-spitstop]
              Niccolini, S. and J. Quittek, "Signaling TO Prevent SPIT
              (SPITSTOP) Reference Scenario",
              draft-niccolini-sipping-spitstop-00 (work in progress),
              January 2007.

   [I-D.tschofenig-sipping-framework-spit-reduction]
              Tschofenig, H., Schulzrinne, H., Wing, D., Rosenberg, J.,
              and D. Schwartz, "A Framework to tackle Spam and Unwanted
              Communication for Internet  Telephony",
              draft-tschofenig-sipping-framework-spit-reduction-02 (work
              in progress), November 2007.

   [RFC5039]  Rosenberg, J. and C. Jennings, "The Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP) and Spam", RFC 5039, January 2008.


Author's Address

   Dan York
   Voxeo Corporation
   Burlington, VT
   USA

   Phone: +1-407-455-5859
   Email: dyork@voxeo.com
   URI:   http://www.voxeo.com/
















York                     Expires August 21, 2008               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft     SIP Usage Scenarios Similar to SPIT     February 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





York                     Expires August 21, 2008               [Page 11]

