IETF PKIX Working Group                                     Sean Turner 
Internet Draft                                                     IECA 
Intended Status: Standard Track                        Santosh Chokhani 
                                                     CygnaCom Solutions 
Expires: April 30, 2009                                October 31, 2008 
 
 
                                      
          Clearance Attribute and Authority Clearance Constraints 
                           Certificate Extension 
                draft-turner-caclearanceconstraints-02.txt 


Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 30, 2009. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 

Abstract 

   This document defines the syntax and semantics for the Clearance 
   attribute and the Authority Clearance Constraints extension in X.509 
   certificates.  The Clearance attribute is used to indicate the 
   clearance held by the subject.  The Clearance attribute may appear in 
 
 
 
Turner & Chokhani       Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft  Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraints  Oct 2008 
    

   the subject directory attributes extension of a public key 
   certificate or in the attributes field of an attribute certificate.  
   The Authority Clearance Constraints certificate extension values in a 
   Trust Anchor (TA), CA public key certificates, and an Attribute 
   Authority (AA) public key certificate in a public key certification 
   path constrain the effective Clearance of the subject. 

Table of Contents 

   1. Introduction...................................................2 
      1.1. Terminology...............................................3 
      1.2. ASN.1 Syntax Notation.....................................3 
   2. Clearance Attribute............................................4 
   3. Authority Clearance Constraints Certificate Extension..........5 
   4. Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraints Processing in PKC6 
      4.1. Collecting Constraints....................................7 
         4.1.1. Certification Path Processing........................7 
   5. Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraints Processing in AC11 
      5.1. Collecting Constraints...................................12 
         5.1.1. Certification Path Processing.......................12 
   6. Computing Intersection of securityCategories..................13 
   7. Recommended securityCategories................................14 
   8. Security Considerations.......................................14 
   9. IANA Considerations...........................................15 
   10. References...................................................15 
      10.1. Normative References....................................15 
      10.2. Informative References..................................15 
   Appendix A. ASN.1 Module.........................................16 
   Author's Addresses...............................................18 
   Full Copyright Statement.........................................19 
   Intellectual Property............................................19 
    
1. Introduction 

   Organizations that have implemented a security policy can issue 
   certificates that include an indication of the clearance values held 
   by the subject.  The Clearance attribute indicates the security 
   policy, the clearance levels held by the subject, and additional 
   authorization information held by the subject.  This specification 
   makes use of the ASN.1 syntax for clearance from [3281bis]. 

   Clearance attribute may be placed in the Subject Directory extension 
   of a PKC or may be placed in a separate attribute certificate (AC). 

   The placement of Clearance attribute in PKCs is desirable when the 
   credentials such as PKCs need to be revoked when the clearance 
   information changes or when clearance information is relatively 
 
 
Turner & Chokhani       Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft  Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraints  Oct 2008 
    

   static, and clearance information can be verified as part of PKC 
   issuance process (e.g., using local databases).  The placement of 
   Clearance attribute in PKCs may also be made to simplify the 
   infrastructure, to reduce the infrastructure design cost, or to 
   reduce the infrastructure operations cost.  An example of placement 
   of Clearance attribute in PKCs in operational PKI is the Defense 
   Messaging Service.  An example of placement of attributes in PKCs is 
   Qualified Certificates [RFC3739]. 

   The placement of Clearance attribute in ACs is desirable when the 
   clearance information is relatively dynamic and changes in the 
   clearance information does not require revocation of credentials such 
   as PKCs, or the clearance information can not be verified as part of 
   PKC issuance process. 

   Since [RFC3281] does not permit chain of ACs, the Authority 
   Clearance Constraints extension may only appear in the PKCs of CA or 
   AA.  The Authority Clearance Constraints extension may also appear 
   in a TA or may be associated with a TA. 

   Some organizations have multiple TAs, CAs, and/or AAs and these 
   organizations may wish to indicate to relying parties which clearance 
   values from a particular TA, CA, or AA should be accepted.  For 
   example, consider the security policies described in [RFC3114], where 
   a security policy has been defined for Amoco with three security 
   classification values (HIGHLY CONFIDENTIAL, CONFIDENTIAL, and 
   GENERAL). To constrain a CA for just one security classification, the 
   Authority Clearance Constraints certificate extension would be 
   included in the CA's PKC. 

   Cross-certified domains can also make use of the Authority Clearance 
   Constraints certificate extension to indicate which clearance values 
   should be acceptable to relying parties. 

1.1. Terminology 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119]. 

1.2. ASN.1 Syntax Notation 

   All X.509 PKC [RFC5280] extensions are defined using ASN.1 [X.680].  
   All X.509 AC [RFC3281] extensions are defined using ASN.1 [X.680]. 



 
 
Turner & Chokhani       Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft  Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraints  Oct 2008 
    

2. Clearance Attribute 

   The Clearance attribute in a certificate indicates the clearances 
   held by the subject.  It uses the clearance attribute syntax from 
   Section 4.4.6 of [3281bis], which is included below for convenience, 
   in the Attributes field.  A certificate MUST include either zero or 
   one instance of the Clearance attribute.  If the Clearance attribute 
   is present, it must contain a single value. 

   The following object identifier identifies the Clearance attribute 
   (either in the subject directory attributes extension of a PKC or in 
   the Attributes field of an AC): 

     id-at-clearance OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { joint-iso-ccitt(2) 
       ds(5) module(1) selected-attribute-types(5) clearance(55) } 

   The ASN.1 syntax for the Clearance attribute is as follows [PKI-ASN]: 

     Clearance  ::=  SEQUENCE { 
       policyId            OBJECT IDENTIFIER, 
       classList           ClassList DEFAULT {unclassified}, 
       securityCategories  SET OF SecurityCategory OPTIONAL 
     } 

     ClassList  ::=  BIT STRING { 
       unmarked       (0), 
       unclassified   (1), 
       restricted     (2), 
       confidential   (3), 
       secret         (4), 
       topSecret      (5) 
     } 

     SECURITY-CATEGORY ::= TYPE-IDENTIFIER 

     SecurityCategory ::= SEQUENCE { 
       type  [0]   
           TYPE-IDENTIFIER.&id({SupportedSecurityCategories}), 
       value [1] 
           EXPLICIT TYPE-IDENTIFIER.&Type 
                                 ({SupportedSecurityCategories}{@type}) 
     } 

   The Clearance attribute takes its meaning from Section 4.4.6 of 
   [RFC3281], which is repeated here for convenience: 


 
 
Turner & Chokhani       Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft  Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraints  Oct 2008 
    

     - policyId identifies the security policy to which the clearance 
      relates.  The policyId indicates the semantics of the classList 
      and securityCategory fields. 

     - classlist identifies the security classifications. Six basic 
      values are defined in bit positions 0 through 5 and more may be 
      defined by an organizational security policy. 

     - securityCategories provides additional authorization information. 

   If a trust anchor's public key is used directly, then the Clearance 
   associated with the trust anchor, if any, should be used as the 
   effective clearance (also defined as effective-clearance for a 
   certification path). 

3. Authority Clearance Constraints Certificate Extension 

   The Authority Clearance Constraints certificate extension indicates 
   to the relying party what clearances should be acceptable for the 
   subject of the AC or the subject of the last certificate in a PKC 
   certification path.  It is only meaningful in trust anchor, CA PKCs, 
   or AA PKCs.  A trust anchor, CA PKC, or AA PKC MUST include either 
   zero or one instance of the Authority Clearance Constraints 
   certificate extension.  The Authority Clearance Constraints 
   certificate extension MAY be critical or non-critical. 

   Absence of this certificate extension in a TA, in a CA PKC, or in an 
   AA PKC indicates that clearance of the subject of the AC or the 
   subject of the last certificate in a PKC certification path 
   containing the TA, the CA or the AA is not constrained by the 
   respective TA, CA or AA. 

   The following object identifier identifies the Authority Clearance 
   Constraints certificate extension: 

     id-ce-authorityClearanceConstraints OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { 
       id-TBSL } 

   The ASN.1 syntax for the Authority Clearance Constraints certificate 
   extension is as follows: 

     AuthorityClearanceConstraints ::= SEQUENCE SIZE (1..MAX) OF 
                                         Clearance 

   The syntax for Authority Clearance Constraints certificate extension 
   contains Clearance values that the CA or the AA asserts.  The 
   sequence MUST NOT include more than one entry with the same policyId.  
 
 
Turner & Chokhani       Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft  Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraints  Oct 2008 
    

   This constraint is enforced during Clearance and Authority Clearance 
   Constraints Processing described below.  If more than one entry with 
   the same policyId is present in AuthorityClearanceConstraints 
   certificate extension, the certification path is rejected.  In 
   addition, each Clearance attribute in the SEQUENCE must not contain 
   more than one value. 

4. Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraints Processing in PKC 

   This section describes the processing of certification path when 
   Clearance is asserted in PKC. 

   Authority Clearance Constraints certificate extension and Clearance 
   attribute processing determines the effective clearance (henceforth 
   called effective-clearance) for the end PKC.  Authority Clearance 
   Constraints certificate extension in the TA and in each PKC up to but 
   not including the end PKC in a PKC certification path impact the 
   effective-clearance.  If there is more than one path to the end-
   entity PKC, each path is processed independently.  The process 
   involves two steps: 

     1) collecting the Authority Clearance Constraints; and 

     2) using Authority Clearance Constraints in the certification path 
       and the Clearance in the end PKC to determine the effective-
       clearance for the subject of the end PKC. 

   Assuming a certification path consisting of n PKCs, the effective-
   clearance for the subject of the end PKC is the intersection of 
   Clearance attribute in the subject PKC, Authority Clearance 
   Constraints, if present, in trust anchor and all Authority Clearance 
   Constraints present in intermediate PKCs.  Any effective-clearance 
   calculation algorithm that performs this calculation and provides the 
   same outcome as the one from the algorithm described herein is 
   considered compliant with the requirements of this RFC. 

   When processing a certification path, Authority Clearance Constraints 
   are maintained in one state variable: permitted-clearances.  When 
   processing begins, permitted-clearances is initialized to the special 
   value all-clearances if Authority Clearance Constraints certificate 
   extension is not present in or associated with the trust anchor, 
   otherwise this value is initialized to Authority Clearance 
   Constraints associated with the trust anchor.  The permitted-
   clearances state variable is updated each time an intermediate PKC 
   that contains an Authority Clearance Constraints certificate 
   extension in the path is processed. 

 
 
Turner & Chokhani       Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft  Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraints  Oct 2008 
    

   When processing the end PKC, the value in the Clearance attribute in 
   the end PKC is intersected with the permitted-clearances state 
   variable. 

   The output of Clearance attribute and Authority Clearance Constraint 
   certificate extensions processing is the effective-clearance, which 
   could also be an empty list; and success or failure with reason code 
   for failure. 

4.1. Collecting Constraints 

   Authority Clearance Constraints are collected from the trust anchor 
   and the intermediate PKCs in a certification path. 

4.1.1. Certification Path Processing 

   When processing Authority Clearance Constraints certificate extension 
   for the purposes of validating Clearance attribute in the end PKC, 
   the processing described in this section or an equivalent algorithm 
   MUST be included in the certification path validation.  The 
   processing is presented as additions to the certification path 
   validation algorithm described in section 6 of [RFC5280]. 

4.1.1.1. Inputs 

   Trust anchor information may include the 
   AuthorityClearanceConstraints structure to specify Authority 
   Clearance Constraints for the trust anchor.  The trust anchor may be 
   constrained or unconstrained. 

4.1.1.2. Initialization 

   Examine the trust anchor information and verify that it does not 
   contain more than one instance of AuthorityClearanceConstraints 
   extension.  If the trust anchor information contains more than one 
   instance of AuthorityClearanceConstraints extension, set effective-
   clearance to an empty list, set error code to "multiple extension 
   instances", and exit with failure. 

   If any of the Clearance attributes in the 
   AuthorityClearanceConstraints extension contains more than one value, 
   set effective-clearance to an empty list, set error code to "multiple 
   values", and exit with failure. 

   Create a state variable named permitted-clearances.  If the trust 
   anchor contains an AuthorityClearanceConstraints extension, then the 

 
 
Turner & Chokhani       Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft  Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraints  Oct 2008 
    

   initial value of permitted-clearances is the 
   AuthorityClearanceConstraints extension from the trust anchor.   

   Examine the permitted-clearances for the same Policy ID appearing 
   more then once.  If a policyID appears more than once in the 
   permitted-clearances state variable, set effective-clearance to an 
   empty list, set error code to "multiple instances of same clearance", 
   and exit with failure. 

   If the trust anchor does not contain an AuthorityClearanceConstraints 
   extension, the permitted-clearances variable is assigned the special 
   value all-clearances. 

4.1.1.3. Basic Certificate Processing 

   If the PKC is the last PKC (i.e., certificate n), skip the steps 
   listed in this section. 

   Examine the PKC and verify that it does not contain more than one 
   instance of AuthorityClearanceConstraints extension.  If the PKC 
   contains more than one instance of AuthorityClearanceConstraints 
   extension, set effective-clearance to an empty list, set error code 
   to "multiple extension instances", and exit with failure. 

   If any of the Clearance attributes in the 
   AuthorityClearanceConstraints extension contains more than one value, 
   set effective-clearance to an empty list, set error code to "multiple 
   values", and exit with failure. 

   If the AuthorityClearanceConstraints certificate extension is not 
   present in the PKC, no action is taken, and the permitted-clearances 
   value is unchanged. 

   If the AuthorityClearanceConstraints certificate extension is present 
   in the PKC, set the variable temp-clearances to 
   AuthorityClearanceConstraints certificate extension.  Examine the 
   temp-clearances for the same Policy ID appearing more then once.  If 
   a policyID appears more than once in the temp-clearances state 
   variable, set effective-clearance to an empty list, set error code to 
   "multiple instances of same clearance", and exit with failure. 

   If the AuthorityClearanceConstraints certificate extension is present 
   in the PKC and permitted-clearances contains the all-clearances 
   special value, then assign permitted-clearances the value of the 
   temp-clearances. 


 
 
Turner & Chokhani       Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft  Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraints  Oct 2008 
    

   If the AuthorityClearanceConstraints certificate extension is present 
   in the PKC and permitted-clearances does not contain the all-
   clearances special value, take the intersection of temp-clearances 
   and permitted-clearances by repeating the following steps for each 
   clearance in the permitted-clearances state variable: 

     - If the policyID associated with the clearance is absent in the 
      temp-clearances, delete the clearance structure associated with 
      the policyID from the permitted-clearances state variable. 

     - If the policyID is present in the temp-clearances: 

       -- For every classList bit, assign the classList bit a value of 
          one (1) for the policyID in permitted-clearances state 
          variable if the bit is one (1) in both the permitted-
          clearances state variable and the temp-clearances for that 
          policyID; otherwise assign the bit a value of zero (0). 

       -- If no bits are one (1) for the classList, delete the clearance 
          structure associated with the policyID from the permitted-
          clearances state variable and skip the next step of processing 
          securityCategories. 

       -- For the policyID in permitted-clearances, set the 
          securityCategories to the intersection of securityCategories 
          for the policyID in permitted-clearances and in temp-
          clearances using the algorithm described in Section 6.   Note 
          that an empty SET is represented by simply omitting the SET. 

4.1.1.4. Preparation for Certificate i+1 

   No additional action associated with the Clearance attribute or 
   AuthorityClearanceConstraints certificate extensions is taken during 
   this phase of certification path validation as described in section 6 
   of [RFC5280]. 

4.1.1.5. Wrap-up Procedure 

   To complete the processing, perform the following steps for the last 
   PKC (i.e., certificate n). 

   Examine the PKC and verify that it does not contain more than one 
   instance of Clearance attribute.  If the PKC contains more than one 
   instance of Clearance attribute, set effective-clearance to an empty 
   list, set error code to "multiple instances of an attribute", and 
   exit with failure. 

 
 
Turner & Chokhani       Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft  Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraints  Oct 2008 
    

   If the Clearance attribute is not present in the end PKC, set 
   effective-clearance to an empty list and exit with success. 

   Set effective-clearance to the Clearance attribute in the end PKC. 

4.1.1.5.1. Wrap Up Clearance 

   Examine effective-clearance and verify that it does not contain more 
   than one value.  If effective-clearance contains more than one value, 
   set effective-clearance to an empty list, set error code to "multiple 
   values", and exit with failure. 

   Let us say policyID in effective-clearance is X. 

   If permitted-clearances is an empty list, set effective-clearance to 
   an empty list and exit with success. 

   If the permitted-clearances has special value of all-clearances, exit 
   with success. 

   If the policyID X in effective-clearance is absent from the 
   permitted-clearances, set effective-clearance to an empty list and 
   exit with success. 

   Assign those classList bits in effective-clearance a value of one (1) 
   that have a value of one (1) both in effective-clearance and in the 
   clearance structure in permitted-clearances associated with policyID 
   X.  Assign all other classList bits in effective-clearance a value of 
   zero (0). 

   If none of the classList bits have a value of one (1) in effective-
   clearance, set effective-clearance to an empty list and exit with 
   success. 

   Set the securityCategories in effective-clearance to the intersection 
   of securityCategories in effective-clearance and in permitted-
   clearances using the algorithm described in Section 6.  Note that 
   empty an SET is represented by simply omitting the SET. 

   Exit with Success 

4.1.1.6. Outputs 

   If certification path validation processing succeeds, effective-
   clearance contains the effective clearance for the subject of the 
   certification path.  Processing also returns success or failure 
   indication and reason for failure, if applicable. 
 
 
Turner & Chokhani       Expires April 30, 2009                [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft  Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraints  Oct 2008 
    

5. Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraints Processing in AC 

   This section describes the processing of certification path when 
   Clearance is asserted in an AC.  Relevant to processing are: one TA; 
   0 or more CA PKCs; 0 or 1 AA PKC; and 1 AC. 

   Authority Clearance Constraints certificate extension and Clearance 
   attribute processing determines the effective clearance (henceforth 
   called effective-clearance) for the AC.  Authority Clearance 
   Constraints certificate extension in the TA and in each PKC up to and 
   including the AA PKC in a certification path impact the effective-
   clearance.  If there is more than one path to the AA PKC, each path 
   is processed independently.  The process involves two steps: 

     1) collecting the Authority Clearance Constraints; and 

     2) using Authority Clearance Constraints in the PKC certification 
       path and the Clearance in the AC to determine the effective-
       clearance for the subject of the AC. 

   The effective-clearance for the subject of the AC is the intersection 
   of Clearance in the subject AC, Authority Clearance Constraints, if 
   present, in trust anchor and all Authority Clearance Constraints 
   present in PKC certification path from the TA to the AA.  Any 
   effective-clearance calculation algorithm that performs this 
   calculation and provides the same outcome as the one from the 
   algorithm described herein is considered compliant with the 
   requirements of this RFC. 

   Authority Clearance Constraints is maintained in one state variable: 
   permitted-clearances.  When processing begins, permitted-clearances 
   is initialized to the special value all-clearances if Authority 
   Clearance Constraints certificate extension is not present in or 
   associated with the trust anchor, otherwise this value is initialized 
   to Authority Clearance Constraints associated with the trust anchor.  
   The permitted-clearances state variable is updated each time a PKC 
   (other than AC holder PKC) that contains an Authority Clearance 
   Constraints certificate extension in the path is processed. 

   When processing the AC, the value in the Clearance attribute in the 
   AC is intersected with the permitted-clearances state variable. 

   The output of Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraint 
   certificate extensions processing is the effective-clearance, which 
   could also be an empty list; and success or failure with reason code 
   for failure. 

 
 
Turner & Chokhani       Expires April 30, 2009                [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft  Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraints  Oct 2008 
    

5.1. Collecting Constraints 

   Authority Clearance Constraints are collected from the trust anchor 
   and all the PKCs in a PKC certification path. 

5.1.1. Certification Path Processing 

   When processing Authority Clearance Constraints certificate extension 
   for the purposes of validating Clearance in the AC, the processing 
   described in this section or an equivalent algorithm MUST be included 
   in the certification path validation.  The processing is presented as 
   additions to the PKC certification path validation algorithm 
   described in section 6 of [RFC5280] for the AA PKC certification path 
   and the algorithm described in section 5 of [RFC3281] for the AC 
   validation. 

5.1.1.1. Inputs 

   Same as Section 4.1.1.1.  

   In addition, let us assume that the PKC certification path for the AA 
   consists of n certificates. 

5.1.1.2. Initialization 

   Same as Section 4.1.1.2.  

5.1.1.3. Basic PKC Processing 

   Same as Section 4.1.1.3. except that the logic is applied to all n 
   PKCs. 

5.1.1.4. Preparation for Certificate i+1 

   Same as Section 4.1.1.4.  

5.1.1.5. Wrap-up Procedure 

   To complete the processing, perform the following steps for the AC. 

   Examine the AC and verify that it does not contain more than one 
   instance of Clearance attribute.  If the AC contains more than one 
   instance of Clearance attribute, set effective-clearance to an empty 
   list, set error code to "multiple instances of an attribute", and 
   exit with failure. 


 
 
Turner & Chokhani       Expires April 30, 2009                [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft  Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraints  Oct 2008 
    

   If the Clearance attribute is not present in the AC, set effective-
   clearance to an empty list and exit with success. 

   Set effective-clearance to the Clearance attribute in the AC. 

5.1.1.5.1. Wrap Up Clearance 

   Same as Section 4.1.1.5.1.  

5.1.1.6. Outputs 

   Same as Section 4.1.1.6.  

   In addition, apply AC processing rules described in Section 5 of 
   [RFC3281]. 

6. Computing Intersection of securityCategories 

   This section describes how to compute the intersection of 
   securityCategories A and B.  It uses the state variable temp-set. 

   Set the SET temp-set to empty. 

   If SET A is empty (i.e., securityCategories is absent), return temp-
   set. 

   If SET B is empty (i.e., securityCategories is absent), return temp-
   set. 

   For every element (i.e., securityCategory) in the SET A carry out the 
   following steps: 

     1. If there is no element in SET B with the same Type OID as the 
        type OID in the element from SET A, go to step 6. 

     2. If there is an element in SET B with the same Type OID and value 
        as in the element in SET A, carry out the following steps: 

          a) Add an element containing the Type OID and the value to the 
             SET temp-set. 

          b) Delete all elements with the same Type OID and the same 
             value from the SET B. 

          c) Go to step 6. 


 
 
Turner & Chokhani       Expires April 30, 2009                [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft  Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraints  Oct 2008 
    

     3. If the processing semantics of Type OID in the element in SET A 
        is not known, go to step 6. 

     4. Perform Type OID specific intersection of the value in the 
        element in SET A with the values in the applicable elements in 
        SET B with the same Type OID. 

     5. If the intersection is not empty, add and element containing the 
        Type OID and intersection result as value to temp-set. 

     6. If more elements remain in SET A, process the next element 
        starting with step 1. 

   Return temp-set. 

7. Recommended securityCategories 

   This RFC also include a recommended securityCategories as follows: 

   SecurityCategory ::= SEQUENCE { 
       type  [0]  OID id-TBSL, 
       value [1]  BIT STRING 
     }  

   Note that Type specific intersection of two values for this Type will 
   be simply setting the bits that are set in both values.  If the 
   resulting intersection has none of the bits set, the intersection is 
   considered empty. 

8. Security Considerations 

   Certificate issuers must recognize that absence of the 
   AuthorityClearanceConstraints in a CA or AA certificate means that in 
   terms of the clearance, the subject Authority is not constrained. 

   Absence of Clearance attribute in a certificate means that the 
   subject has not been assigned any clearance. 

   If there is no Clearance associated with a TA, it means that the TA 
   has not been assigned any clearance. 

   If the local security policy considers the clearance held by a 
   subject or those supported by a CA or AA to be sensitive, then the 
   Clearance attribute or Authority Clearance Constraints should only be 
   included if the subject's and Authority's certificate can be privacy 
   protected.  Also in this case, distribution of trust anchors and 

 
 
Turner & Chokhani       Expires April 30, 2009                [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft  Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraints  Oct 2008 
    

   associated Authority Clearance Constraints extension or Clearance 
   must also be privacy protected. 

9. IANA Considerations 

   None.  Please remove this section prior to publication as an RFC. 

10. References 

10.1. Normative References 

   [PKI-ASN]   Hoffman, P., and J. Schaad, "New ASN.1 Modules for PKIX", 
               draft-ietf-pkix-new-asn1, work-in-progress. 

   [RFC2119]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
               Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

   [RFC3281]   Farrell, S., and Housley, R., "An Internet Attribute 
               Certificate Profile for Authorization", RFC 3281, April 
               2002. 

   [3281bis]   Farrell, S., Housely, R., and S. Turner, "An Internet 
               Attribute Certificate Profile for Authorization: Update", 
               draft-ietf-pkix-3281update-01, work-in-progress. 

   [RFC5280]   Cooper, D. et. al., "Internet X.509 Public Key 
               Infrastructure Certificate and Certification Revocation 
               List (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, May 2008. 

   [X.680]     ITU-T Recommendation X.680 (2004) | ISO/IEC 8824-1:2004. 
               Information Technology - Abstract Syntax Notation One. 

10.2. Informative References 

   [RFC3114]   Nicolls, W., "Implementing Company Classification Policy 
               with S/MIME Security Label", RFC3114, May 2002. 

   [RFC3739]   Santesson, S. et. al., "Internet X.509 Public Key 
               Infrastructure: Qualified Certificate Profile", RFC 3739, 
               March 2004. 







 
 
Turner & Chokhani       Expires April 30, 2009                [Page 15] 

Internet-Draft  Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraints  Oct 2008 
    

Appendix A. ASN.1 Module 

   This appendix provides the normative ASN.1 definitions for 
   the structures described in this specification using ASN.1 as defined 
   in X.680. 

   Clearance-AuthorityClearanceConstraints93 { id-TBSL } 

   DEFINITIONS IMPLICIT TAGS ::= 

   BEGIN 

   -- EXPORTS ALL -- 

   IMPORTS 

   -- IMPORTS from [PKI-ASN] 

   id-at-clearance, Clearance 
      FROM PKIXAttributeCertificate 
      { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)  
        security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) id-mod(0) 
        id-mod-attribute-cert(12) 
      } 

   -- IMPORTS from [PKI-ASN] 

   EXTENSION 
     FROM PKIX-CommonTypes 
      { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1) 
        security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) id-mod(0) 
        id-mod-pkixCommon(43) 
      } 
   ; 

   -- Clearance attribute OID and syntax 

   -- The following is a '93 version for clearance. 
   -- It is included for convenience. 

   -- id-at-clearance OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= 
   --  { joint-iso-ccitt(2) ds(5) module(1) selected-attribute-types(5) 
   --    clearance (55) 
   --  } 



 
 
Turner & Chokhani       Expires April 30, 2009                [Page 16] 

Internet-Draft  Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraints  Oct 2008 
    

   -- Clearance  ::=  SEQUENCE { 
   --   policyId            OBJECT IDENTIFIER, 
   --   classList           ClassList DEFAULT {unclassified}, 
   --   securityCategories  SET OF SecurityCategory  OPTIONAL 
   -- } 

   -- ClassList  ::=  BIT STRING { 
   --   unmarked      (0), 
   --   unclassified  (1), 
   --   restricted    (2), 
   --   confidential  (3), 
   --   secret        (4), 
   --   topSecret     (5) 
   -- } 

   -- SECURITY-CATEGORY ::= TYPE-IDENTIFIER 

   -- SecurityCategory ::= SEQUENCE { 
   --   type  [0]   
   --      TYPE-IDENTIFIER.&id({SupportedSecurityCategories}), 
   --   value [1] 
   --      EXPLICIT TYPE-IDENTIFIER.&Type 
   --                           ({SupportedSecurityCategories}{@type}) 
   -- } 

   -- Authority Clearance Constraints certificate extension OID 
   -- and syntax 

   id-ce-authorityClearanceConstraints OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-TBSL } 

   authorityClearanceConstraints EXTENSION ::= { 
     SYNTAX         AuthorityClearanceConstraints 
     IDENTIFIED BY  id-ce-AuthorityClearanceConstraints 
   } 

   AuthorityClearanceConstraints ::= SEQUENCE SIZE (1..MAX) OF Clearance 

   END 









 
 
Turner & Chokhani       Expires April 30, 2009                [Page 17] 

Internet-Draft  Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraints  Oct 2008 
    

Author's Addresses 

   Sean Turner 

   IECA, Inc. 
   3057 Nutley Street, Suite 106 
   Fairfax, VA 22031 
   USA 

   EMail: turners@ieca.com 

   Santosh Chokhani 
   CygnaCom Solutions, Inc. 

   Email: SChokhani@cygnacom.com 
































 
 
Turner & Chokhani       Expires April 30, 2009                [Page 18] 

Internet-Draft  Clearance and Authority Clearance Constraints  Oct 2008 
    

Full Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS 
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

Intellectual Property 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

Acknowledgment 

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF 
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA). 



 
 
Turner & Chokhani       Expires April 30, 2009                [Page 19]