





Internet Engineering Task Force                                 IPTEL WG
INTERNET-DRAFT                                              ronald davis
draft-ietf-iptel-pgrp-framework-00.txt               Lucent Technologies
                                                        20 November 1998
                                                     Expires 20 May 1999


           A Framework for a Peer Gatekeeper Routing Protocol


STATUS OF THIS MEMO

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), it's areas,
   and it's working groups. Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check the
   "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
   Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net (Northern
   Europe), ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific
   Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

Abstract

   Within the ITU H.323 recommendation, the gatekeeper is a central
   point of communication for H.323 elements within a zone. All elements
   within the zone establish a communication channel with the gatekeeper
   over a registration, admission, and status (RAS) channel. Elements
   within a zone register with the gatekeeper and are subsequently able
   to communicate with other elements in the zone, or outside of the
   zone.

   What is needed in addition to the normal registration and connection
   admission procedures of H.323 is a means of acquiring information
   about elements in other zones. This document describes the framework
   for a peer gatekeeper routing protocol (pgrp) which allows
   gatekeepers to exchange information with other gatekeepers about
   elements in their respective zones.

   PGRP is a protocol supports the exchange of information among




davis                                                           [Page 1]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


   gatekeepers which may be used to make call routing decisions in a
   network. PGRP attempts to extend reliability concepts from
   telecommunications by incorporating maintenance state information
   exchange. This allows call routing decisions to be based upon the
   operational state of elements in the network. This feature is
   particularly useful in the H.323 gatekeeper mediated call model where
   a call may be completed to a pool of connection endpoints. An example
   of such a scenario is in the use of an H.323 to connect telecom end
   offices which connect to multiple H.323 gateways. In this context,
   pgrp is also able to support call distribution to balance the call
   load among the connection gateways serving an end office.

Table of Contents

   1.      Introduction...............................................3

   2.      Peer Gatekeeper Routing Protocol...........................5

   2.1     Protocol Overview..........................................5

   2.2     Network Initialization....................................10

   2.2.1   Gatekeeper Initialization.................................10

   2.2.1.1 Zone Registration.........................................10

   2.2.1.2 Locating a Topology Server................................11

   2.2.1.3 gatekeeper <--> topology server information exchange......11

   2.2.2   support for redundant gatekeeper architecture.............12

   2.3     scaling the topology server architecture..................12

   2.3.1   topology server initialization............................14

   2.3.1.1 hello protocol description................................14

   2.3.1.2 election of designated and backup topology servers........16

   2.3.1.3 topology state information exchange.......................17

   2.3.2   requesting topology state updates.........................19

   2.3.3   topology state information updates........................20





davis                                                           [Page 2]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


   2.4     summary of system initialization..........................21

   3.      recovery from system errors...............................23

   3.1     introduction..............................................23

   3.2     aging of topology state information.......................24

   3.3     failure of designated topology server.....................25

   3.4     failure of backup topology server.........................26

   3.5     topology server failure detected by a gatekeeper..........26

   3.6     gatekeeper failure detected by a topology server..........28

   3.7     gatekeeper failure detected by elements in zone...........29

   3.7.1   detection of simultaneous registration in multiple zones..29

   3.7.2   handling of existing calls by a new gatekeeper............29

   3.8     Element Failure Detected by the Gatekeeper................30

   3.9     Connection Failure Between Elements in the Same Zone......30

   3.10    Connection Failure Between Elements in the Different Zones30

   3.11    Connection Failure Between Elements in the Different Areas31

   4.      References................................................31

   5.      Full Copyright Statement..................................31

   6.      security..................................................32

   7.      Author's Address..........................................32

1.      Introduction

   ITU recommendation H.323 supports mechanisms by which H.323 terminals
   and gateways may register with a gatekeeper [1]. Through this
   exchange, the gatekeeper derives direct knowledge of the elements in
   it's zone based upon the information exchanged during the
   registration process [2]. This information provides the gatekeeper
   with direct knowledge of the elements in the zone which the




davis                                                           [Page 3]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


   gatekeeper is able to use in routing calls among elements in the
   zone.

   What is needed in addition to information obtains through the normal
   registration and connection admission procedures of H.323 is a means
   of acquiring information about elements in other zones. There are two
   means of gaining this information:


     1.  Static provisioning: in which the gatekeeper and/or elements
         within the zone maintain a static table containing information
         about all elements in all zones.


     2.  Gatekeeper information exchange: in which gatekeepers acquire
         information about elements in other zones through a peer
         exchange of information with other gatekeepers.

   One of the key disadvantages of the static provisioning approach is
   in it's inability to capture dynamic state information about the
   network. For example, if certain elements are unavailable, or
   otherwise out of service, there is no direct means for a call
   initiating element to take this information into account when making
   decisions about how to route a call through the network.

   While H.323 was initially proposed as an access-type protocol along
   the lines of Q.931 a number of proposals have emerged for the use of
   H.323 networks to provide tandem interconnection between telecom end
   offices using gateways as originating and terminating endpoints in
   the H.323 network.

   In this context, there may be multiple H.323 gateways serving a given
   end office. Thus, for a network consisting of multiple zones, it is
   useful for the gatekeeper serving the originating endpoint (or
   originating gatekeeper) to have information about terminating
   endpoints in another zone in order to route a call to a selected
   terminating endpoint - information which is not available to the
   originating gatekeeper through normal H.323 registration procedures.

   PGRP provides a mechanism by which gatekeepers may acquire knowledge
   of both static and dynamic information from other zones. Some of the
   key concepts in pgrp are:


      - Zone: The basic information unit in pgrp. As defined in ITU
        recommendation H.323, the zone consists of a gatekeeper and




davis                                                           [Page 4]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


        H.323 elements (endpoints, and gateways) which establish RAS
        channel communications with the gatekeeper.


      - Topology Server: An element which distributes information among
        gatekeepers in an area. This exchange allows the gatekeeper to
        obtain information to be used for establishing connectivity to
        elements outside of the zone.


      - Area: A collection of zones associated with a topology server.
        Gatekeepers within an area establish a client-server
        relationship with the topology server serving the area.


      - Network: A collection of areas. Topology servers exchange
        information with one another about their respective areas. In
        turn, each topology server distributes the information to each
        of the gatekeepers within it's area. As a result, each
        gatekeeper has a network level view of connectivity among
        elements in the network.


      - Maintenance of Dynamic State Information: PGRP allows
        gatekeepers to be kept up to date about changes in the network.
        This includes changes in operational state of existing elements,
        addition of new elements, and removal of existing elements.

   PGRP allows gatekeepers to discover network/transport addresses of
   H.323 elements in other zones. In addition, pgrp extends reliable
   system concepts traditionally used in telecom networks by
   incorporating in-service/out-of-service operational state information
   about elements.  Thus, pgrp allows gatekeepers to route calls based
   not only upon static address/location information, but upon dynamic
   operational state information.

   PGRP is even useful in either when using either direct, or gatekeeper
   mediated call models. In the direct call model, pgrp gives the
   originating gatekeeper information that allows intelligent selection
   of a destination endpoint for a call. In the gatekeeper mediated call
   model, prgp allows an originating gatekeeper to route a call to a
   specific terminating gatekeeper. This capability is useful at large
   end offices which may be connected to gateways which are members of
   multiple H.323 zones. This selection may be based upon either the
   operational state as represented by the zone's gatekeeper, or it may
   be based upon considerations of distribution of calls among the zones




davis                                                           [Page 5]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


   connecting to the destination end office.

2.      Peer Gatekeeper Routing Protocol

2.1     Protocol Overview

   In pgrp, the gatekeeper aggregates information collected from the
   registrations of individual elements in it's zone to form a zone view
   of connectivity, or topology state view, among elements in the zone.
   Information aggregated in this topology state view includes:


      - ELEMENT ADDRESS-this is the transport address for the element
        being registered.


      - ELEMENT IDENTIFIER-this is a name for the element being
        registered. unlike the element transport address, this
        identifier refers to a physical/logical element. Thus, an
        element with interfaces on multiple local area networks will
        have a different element addresses for each interface but one
        element identifier.


      - ELEMENT TYPE-identifies the element as being either a gateway,
        terminal, gatekeeper, mcu, or vendor specific.


      - LOGICAL ELEMENT IDENTIFIER-this field allows the topology server
        to treat distinct elements in a zone having the same logical
        element identifier as a single logical entity. This field
        applies to the gatekeeper element type only and is primarily
        useful in redundant gaetkeeper architectures as described in
        section 2.2.2.


      - REGISTRATION TIME TO LIVE-indicates the period of time for which
        the registration is valid at the gatekeeper. The element must
        reregister before this time interval in order to maintain
        membership in the zone. To prevent global synchronization which
        could produce floods of registrations at the same time, the
        reregistering element is to use a randomly selected scale factor
        between 0.75 and 0.9 times this value for determining when to
        reregister. After each registration a news scale factor is to be
        selected to determine when the next registration is to occur.





davis                                                           [Page 6]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


      - ZONE IDENTIFIER-which identifies the zone in which the element
        is being registered. this identifier is to be unique in the
        network and will take the value of the gatekeeper ip address by
        default. This field is useful in allowing gatekeepers to detect
        element interfaces that are registered to more than one
        gatekeeper at the same time (which is an h.323 protocol
        violation).


      - LIST OF ELEMENTS-with which the registrant is able to connect.
        For each element in the list the gatekeeper maintains a
        connection state which represents the state of connectivity
        between the registrant and each element in the list. This
        connection state indicates whether connection between the
        registering element to each of the elements in the list
        individually is enabled or disabled. By default, it is assumed
        that all elements are able to establish connections with one
        another.


      - OPERATIONAL STATE-which indicates the operational state of the
        registering element to determine whether the element may or may
        not be available to originate or terminate calls. Currently
        identified states are:


           - ACTIVE: the element is in service and able to send or
             receive new and established calls;


           - OUT OF SERVICE: the element is not available for receiving
             new calls and is no longer able to process any established
             calls. Any established calls are terminated when the
             element enters this state;


           - OUT OF SERVICE-TRANSITION: the element is not available for
             completing new calls but is able to continue processing
             established calls.


      - ADMINISTRATIVE STATE-which provides supplementary information
        related to the operational state. Administrative states include:







davis                                                           [Page 7]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


           - MANUAL: indicates that the current operational state of the
             element is the result of manual action at an element
             management system;


           - AUTOMATIC: indicats that the current operational state of
             the element is the result of automatic fault recovery
             actions.


      - OVERLOAD STATE-gives an indication of the call processing load
        being placed upon the element. This information may be used by
        the gatekeeper to perform call load balancing among elements.
        Overload states are: low, medium, and high.


      - SERVICE MAPPING-this includes mapping of network addresses to
        E.164 addresss, or other information related to the services
        associated with a given alias address.

   In pgrp a topology server establishes a client server communication
   with each of the gatekeepers in an area. each gatekeeper, then, sends
   a summary of it's topology state view to the topology server. the
   topology server in turns integrates the individual topology state
   views from each of the zones into an overall network topology state
   view which is then advertised to each of the gatekeepers. in this
   way, the gatekeepers acquire enough knowledge to route connections
   between any elements in the network.

   The LIST OF ELEMENTS consists of a linked list of elements which
   describes the state of connectivity between the registering element
   (as identified by the `element id' and `element address' fields) and
   each of the elements in the linked list. If the linked list member is
   a gateway, terminal, or mcu, this linked list contains the following
   information for each element entry:


      - ELEMENT TYPE of the linked list member.


      - ELEMENT ADDRESS of the linked list member.


      - CONNECTIVITY STATE-which describes the ability of the
        registering element to connect to the element address in the
        entry. Values for this parameter are:




davis                                                           [Page 8]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


           - ENABLED: which indicates that the registering element is
             able to establish direct connection to the element;


           - DISABLED:       which indicates that the registering
             element is not currently able to establish direct
             connection to the element. The service state of the
             element, however, is not OUT OF SERVICE. This implies that
             other elements are believed able to connect to this
             element. In this case, the registering element is to
             occasionally test for network layer connectivity to the
             element. An element whose service state is OUT OF SERVICE
             is to be removed from the linked list.


      - OVERLOAD STATE of the linked list member.


      - SERVICE MAPPING information pertaining to the linked list
        member.

   If the linked list member is a gatekeeper, the entry is used for
   gatekeeper mediated signalling. In this case the element entry
   contains the following information:


      - ELEMENT TYPE-in gatekeeper mediated signalling, the gatekeeper
        is acting as a proxy for elements within it's zone. In this
        case, the element type field represents the type of element to
        which the gatekeeper will mediate signalling within it's zone.
        In this context, the gatekeeper may mediate signalling for
        multiple elements of this type by representing a single entry in
        the LIST OF ELEMENTS linked list. This allows hiding of the
        details of the contents within a zone by abstracting only the
        information relating to the types of services available within
        the zone for broadcast across the network. Elements aggregated
        by a single entry in this list must have common ELEMENT TYPE,
        and SERVICE MAPPING fields.


      - ELEMENT ADDRESS of the gatekeeper which is to mediate signalling
        to the element type.


      - CONNECTIVITY STATE which, in this case, indicates the ability of
        the registering element to establish connectivity with the




davis                                                           [Page 9]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


        gatekeeper in another zone.


      - OPERATIONAL STATE-in gatekeeper mediated signalling, the
        gatekeeper represents an aggregate operational state for the
        elements being represented in this entry. As such, the
        operational state of the aggregate set of elements is ACTIVE as
        long as there is at least one element in the aggregated group
        whose operational state is active. Since signalling is
        gatekeeper mediated, elements outside of the zone do not need to
        know the details of the operational state of individual elements
        within the zone. It is the responsibility of the gatekeeper to
        mediate signalling and to relay received messages to elements
        within the zone which are in an operational state to receive
        them.


      - OVERLOAD STATE-as with the OPERATIONAL STATE parameter, this
        represents an aggregated view of the overload state for the
        represented elements. The aggregate group is in the LOW overload
        state as long as there is at least one element within the zone
        in that state. As with the OPERATIONAL STATE parameter
        evaluation, elements outside of the zone do not need to know the
        details of elements within the zone.


      - SERVICE MAPPING information pertaining to aggregate group. All
        elements aggregated in a common LIST OF ELEMENTS entry must
        support a common service mapping. It is possible, however, for
        elements to support services in addition to this common service
        mapping which results in the possibility that a given element in
        a zone may be represented by multiple entries in the linked
        list. This detail, however, is hidden from elements outside of
        the zone.

2.2     Network Initialization

   The details of how elements select and register with a gatekeeper are
   beyond the scope of this document. However, it is assumed that there
   is a procedure by which this is done. The elements of interest for
   pgrp are those elements which are actively engaged in the
   distribution of topology state information across the network:
   gatekeepers, and topology servers. In the following, we will describe
   how a network is to initialize within the context of pgrp.

2.2.1   Gatekeeper Initialization




davis                                                          [Page 10]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


2.2.1.1 Zone Registration

   Upon initialization the gatekeeper enters a registration_wait state.
   in this state it is waiting for elements to register for membership
   in it's zone. registrations are effected when an h.323 registration
   request (rrq) message is received from an element and when the
   gatekeeper returns to the element an h.323 registration confirmation
   (rcf) message.

   after the registration_wait period of time has elapsed, the
   gatekeeper leaves the registration_wait state and aggregates a
   topology state view of it's zone based upon the registrations which
   have been received during the wait state.

2.2.1.2 Locating a Topology Server

   If the gatekeeper is configured to join an area upon initialization,
   then it next enters topology_server_locate state. in this state the
   gatekeeper sends a topology_server_request (TSR) message over the
   topology server multicast address (TS_MULTI_ADDR). All topology
   servers register to this multicast address upon initialiation [3].
   the TSR message is sent by the gatekeeper to request a topology
   server. the message identifies the gatekeeper which is sending the
   message and the topology area in which it is seeking membership. the
   topology server which serves the requested area will send a
   topology_server_confirmation (TSC) to the gatekeeper which indicates
   the topology server for the area. The serving topology server returns
   to confirmation as a unicast message sent directly to the requesting
   gatekeeper.

   In the event of failure to locate a topology server, the gatekeeper
   may be configured with a list of areas to which it may seek topology
   server membership. After a provisionable number of attempts to locate
   a topology server in a given area, the gatekeeper may attempt to
   locate a topology server for another area.

   As an alternative to dynamic topology server location the gatekeeper
   may, by static provisioning, be configured with a prioritized list of
   potential topology servers.

2.2.1.3 gatekeeper <--> topology server information exchange

   after locating a topology server, the gatekeeper initiates
   communication by sending a topology_state_channel_open (TSC_OPEN)
   message to the topology server. in response, the topology server
   sends a TSC_open message back to the gatekeeper.




davis                                                          [Page 11]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


   after this exchange of TSC_open messages the gatekeeper and topology
   server enter the topology_server_connection_established state. in
   this state the gatekeeper has established a bidirectional
   communication channel with the topology server.

   next, the gatekeeper and topology server engage in a topology state
   information exchange (described in section 2.3.1.3). since the
   relationship between gatekeeper and topology server is client-server
   and not peer (as is the case with topology servers), the roles for
   the gatekeeper and topology server are predetermined: the gatekeeper
   acts in the controller role while the topology server acts in the
   responder role.

2.2.2   support for redundant gatekeeper architecture

   Reliability considerations may lead to the deployment of a redundant
   gatekeeper architecture in which there is an ACTIVE gatekeeper, and a
   STANDBY gatekeeper which is able to take over management of the zone
   should the active gatekeeper fail.

   the topology server architecture provide a update mechanism to keep
   the topology state databases of the redundant gatekeepers in
   synchronization. in order to achieve this, the standby gatekeeper,
   gatekeeper2, declares membership in the same zone in it's
   registration with the topology server to which the active gatekeeper,
   gatekeeper1, has registered. Both gatekeepers must also have the same
   LOGICAL ELEMENT IDENTIFIER field which allows the topology server to
   distinguish the two gatekeepers from a single gatekeeper (represented
   by an ELEMENT IDENTIFIER field) with multiple ELEMENT ADDRESS values.
   the topology server will send the same information to both
   gatekeepers, effecting synchronization between the pair of
   gatekeepers.

   The topology server is not concerned with which elements register
   with gatekeeper1, versus gatekeeper2 but through the use of the
   LOGICAL ELEMENT IDENTIFIER field, it is able to determine if an
   element has simultaneously registered with both gatekeepers.

   this mechanism is also able to support a pool of gatekeepers.

2.3     scaling the topology server architecture

   to provide scaleability as the number of zones in a network
   increases, pgrp supports a distributed topology server architecture
   in which multiple topology servers exist in the network. in this
   case, the network is divided into areas with each area consisting of




davis                                                          [Page 12]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


   one or more zones. a zone is to reside entirely within an area and is
   to be a member of only one area at any time. the gatekeeper
   establishes a client-server relationship with the topology server
   within it's area. topology servers among the areas form relationships
   for information exchange across a multicast channel. among the
   topology servers a designated topology server (DTS) is elected which
   has the responsibility for distributing information among the
   topology servers. the election of the designated topology server is
   described in section 2.3.1.2.

   through information exchange, each topology server is able to
   aggregate topology state information from among the areas in the
   network to form a network level topology state view. the topology
   servers then distribute this view among the gatekeepers in their
   respective areas.

   the topology server model requires information to be provisioned at
   the gatekeeper for each zone. such information includes:


      - topology server identifier-this is a prioritized list of network
        address for the topology servers to be used by the gatekeeper.
        this can refer to a separate processor whose sole function is
        aggregation of topology information, or it can be the address at
        a gatekeeper for implementations which colocate topology server
        and gatekeeper functionality in a single unit. address 0.0.0.0
        means that there is no topology server. in this case the
        gatekeeper has knowledge of it's own zone and no other zone.
        furthermore, it also indicates that the gatekeeper will not
        accept information about other zones.


      - topology area identifier-identifies the topology area in which
        the gatekeeper is a member. this is typically set to the ip
        address of the primary topology server. topology area 0.0.0.0
        indicates that the gatekeeper belongs to a single area network.
        in this

   information provisioned at the topology server includes:


      - topology area exchange-this is a boolean value which indicates
        whether the topology server is enabled to exchange information
        with other topology servers. if topology area exchange is not
        enabled, the topology server will not exchange information with
        topology servers in other areas. furthermore, it will not




davis                                                          [Page 13]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


        participate in the hello protocol and will, therefore, not be
        discovered by other topology servers.


      - topology server multicast address (TS_MULTI_ADDR)-this is a
        multicast address used by the topology servers to discover other
        topology servers using the hello protocol. this address is also
        used by the designated topology server to distribute topology
        state updates among the topology servers.


      - designated topology server multicast address (DTS_MULTI_ADDR)-
        this multicast address is used by topology servers to send
        information to both the designated topology server and the
        backup designated topology server.


      - topology server priority-this value is used during the hello
        protocol to elect a designated topology server. the designated
        topology server is the only topology server which will form
        peering relationships with the other topology servers for the
        exchange of topology state information across zones. the
        designated topology server distributes topology update
        information using the topology multicast address.

2.3.1   topology server initialization

   prior to engaging in exchanges with other topology servers, an
   initializing topology server waits a preliminary_wait period of time
   for gatekeepers enlist in the area and to send their topology state
   views to the topology server. after this period of time expires, the
   topology server has acquired a view of it's area. it is then able to
   begin to exchange area views with other topology servers. this
   exchange begins with the hello protocol.

2.3.1.1 hello protocol description

   the hello protocol begins with the topology server sending HELLO
   packets over the topology server multicast address. an initializing
   topology server starts out with no knowledge of what other topology
   servers are present in the network. these HELLO packets contain the
   following information:


      - topology server identifier-which identifies the topology server
        sending the HELLO packet.




davis                                                          [Page 14]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


      - topology area identifier-identifies the topology area being
        served by the topology server.


      - HELLO packet interval-which identifies the frequency with which
        HELLO packets will be sent by this topology server.


      - peer server dead interval-specifies the period of time after
        which a peer topology server will be considered dead if no HELLO
        packets are received from that peer.


      - MINIMUM MESSAGE TRANSFER INTERVAL-specifies the minimum interval
        for transmission of non-HELLO messages between topology servers.
        This mechanism allows for the throttling of message traffic
        between topology servers. Message types which may be throttled
        are:


           - Generic Error messages: there are messages which indicate a
             possible error condition within an area that is detected
             outside of the area.


           - Topology State Update messages: the types of TSU messages
             which may be throttled are described in section 2.3.3.


      - designated topology server (DTS)-specifies the topology server
        which this server considers to be the designated topology
        server. this server will establish a peering relationship with
        this server and send and topology state updates to this
        designated topology server for distribution among the set of
        topology servers.


      - backup topology server (BTS)-specifies the topology server which
        this server considers to be the backup topology server. the
        backup topology server will become the designated topology
        server in the event of failure of the designated topology server
        (or, if the designated topology server relinquishes it's
        designated status for any reason).







davis                                                          [Page 15]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


      - known topology servers-this is a list of topology server
        identifiers known to the server sending the HELLO packet. this
        information is significant in informing receiving topology
        servers that their presense is known to the sender and that a
        topology state information exchange may begin between the two
        servers.

   at initialization, the topology server begins sending HELLO packets
   at regular intervals. in order to avoid global synchronization with
   multiple topology servers predictably sending HELLO packets at the
   same time, the topology server will use a randomly selected scale
   factor between 0.75 and 1.0 to determine the exact time to send each
   HELLO packet.

2.3.1.2 election of designated and backup topology servers

   when the topology server begins sending HELLO packets it transitions
   to an initialization_wait state during which the designated topology
   server and backup topology server will be determined. if designated
   and backup topology servers have already been elected, then these
   will be accepted by the initializaing topology server. if there is no
   DTS and BTS, they are determined by election.

   the designated topology server and backup topology server serve a
   central role in the topology state information distribution
   architecture. all other topology servers send topology state
   information to these servers which then distribute the received
   information among all the topology servers. this structure allows a
   topology server to have to only know about two topology servers
   (designated and backup). for a network of n topology servers, a total
   of 2n information exchange relationships are needed to distribute
   information across the network.

   if there were no designated and backup topology server roles, each
   topology server would have to establish individual information
   exchange relationships with every other topology server. in this
   case, a network of n topology servers would produce a total of n*(n-
   1)/2 information exchange relationships.

   information exchange in this model uses two different multicast
   addresses. information is sent to the designated topology server and
   the backup topology server using the designated topology server
   multicast address. topology state updats are distributed to the other
   topology servers by the designated topology server only using the
   topology server multicast address.





davis                                                          [Page 16]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


   in the election procedure the BTS is elected first. the topology
   server inspects the HELLO packet packets received from each topology
   server. if the topology server sees it's topology server id in the
   known topology servers list in the HELLO packet the packet is
   inspected to determine if the topology server which sent the HELLO
   packet is declaring itself to be the BTS. if it is, the topology
   server id and topology server priority fields are evaluated. if,
   during this waiting state, multiple topology servers declare
   themselves to be the BTS, the topology server with the highest
   priority is selected. in the event of a tie, the topology server with
   the highest topology server id is selected. if no topology servers
   has declared candidacy to be a BTS, then the topology server with the
   highest priority is selected.

   topology servers which declare themselves to be the DTS are
   ineligible for consideration as BTS.

   next, the DTS is selected. again, the if multiple topology servers
   declare themselves to be the DTS, the topology server with the
   highest priority is selected. if no topology servers declare
   themselves to be the DTS, the BTS is selected as the DTS.

   the algorithm is repeated but this time the previous BTS has been
   promoted to DTS and is now eliminated for consideration as the BTS.
   the remaining list of contending BTS is evaluated and a new BTS
   selected. the new DTS and BTS register for membership at the DTS
   multicast address.

   a topology server declares BTS or DTS value of 0 if it wishes to not
   declare a known BTS or DTS. when initializing a topology server, 0 is
   the initial value used for BTS and DTS. a topology server with
   priority value of 0 is ineligible for election to either BTS or DTS.

2.3.1.3 topology state information exchange

   once the designated and backup topology server have been determined,
   the initializing topology server enters the
   information_exchange_negotiation state. topology state information
   exchange is based upon communication between topology servers in
   which one acts as a controller while the other acts as a responder.
   the controller polls the responder for topology state information
   which is sent from the responder only upon being polled by the
   controller.

   the negotiation begins with the initiating topology server sending a
   topology_exchange_negotiation (tpen) packet to the designated and




davis                                                          [Page 17]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


   backup topology servers over the topology server multicast channel.
   this packet contains the topology server id and topology server
   priority. in addition, the TPEN packet contains a control/response
   bit which the topology server set to declare itself to be the
   controller of the information exchange.

   `state' in this context refers to the status of a dialog between a
   given pair of topology servers in the network. in these information
   exchanges, one of the topology servers is the designated topology
   server and it's state with respect to the dialog should reflect that
   of the other topology server entity in the dialog. however, since the
   HELLO packet exchange is not reliable, at the beginning of this
   negotiation stage the entities in the dialog are not certain of the
   role of the other. therefore, each topology server in this
   negotiation stage sends a TPEN packet asserting itself to be the
   controller.

   upon receipt of an TPEN packet, the receiving topology server
   inspects the topology server priority field in the packet to
   determine which entity has the higher priority. the higher priority
   topology server is declared the controller in the exchange.

   information exchange begins while still in the information exchange
   negotiation state with the controlling topology server sending a
   topology state advertisment (TSA). the TSA is sequence numbered. the
   TSA message is comprised of element descriptors which are headers
   that describe the state of elements within the the network. the TSA
   message header identifies the sending of the message. element
   descriptors contain the following:


     1.  element address: as described above.


     2.  timestamp: which indicates the last time that a state change
         occurred on the element referenced by the element address.

   there may be multiple TSAs required to exchange topology state
   information between topology servers. if there are multiple TSAs to
   be sent, the more bit is set in the packet. the control/respond bit
   is also set to indicate the TSA sender's role in the exchange. in
   this case the bit is set to indicate the control role. all TSAs also
   contain the topology server priority of the sender.

   when a responding topology server receives this TSA it replies with
   it's own TSA. the sequence number in the response TSA is to be the




davis                                                          [Page 18]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


   same as that of the received TSA which triggered the response. the
   control/respond bit in the reply TSA is set to indicate a respond
   role.

   during this exchange of TSAs, only a single TSA is to be outstanding
   from a topology server at a time. TSAs are sequenced numbered and
   acknowledged by the responding topology server by sending a TSA with
   the same sequence number as was in the control TSA. this procedure
   ensures a reliable exchange of topology state information between the
   topology servers. this exchange also negotiates the control/respond
   roles for the exchange. if, in the above exchange, both TSAs
   indicated that they still each considered themselves to be the
   controller, the TSAs would be retransmitted until the roles are
   successfully negotiated.

   after determination of the controlling and responding entities in the
   ensuing information exchange, the initializing topology server enters
   the information_exchange state.

   while in the information_exchange state, the topology server notes
   the timestamp associated with each element descriptor and compares it
   against information in its current topology state database. if the
   element does not currently exist in the database, the topology server
   puts the element descriptor on a topology state request list. if the
   element does currently exist but the timestamp in the element
   descriptor indicates that it is more recent than what is currently in
   the topology state database, the topology server also puts the
   element descriptor on the topology state request list.

   TSA exchange continues in the information exchange state until both
   topology servers have sent element descriptors for all known H.323
   elements.

2.3.2   requesting topology state updates

   after completion of information exchange the topology servers inspect
   their topology state request lists. if the list is not empty, the
   topology server sends a topology state request (tsr) message to
   request updated information about any elements on the list. the tsr
   contains the list of element descriptors received during the
   information exchange procedure.

   when a topology server receives a tsr message it is to retrieve the
   topology state information that it has for the elements and package
   them in a topology state update (tsu) message. the tsu is flooded
   among the topology servers: the designated topology server floods




davis                                                          [Page 19]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


   it's TSUs using the topology server multicast address; other (non-
   DTS/non-BTS) topology servers ensure that their TSUs get to both DTS
   and BTS by using the DTS multicast address.

   flooding ensures that all topology servers get the latest topology
   state information because it allows each topology server to see
   updated topology state information even if it did not initiate the
   request for the information. if we assume that the topology state
   information is synchronized among the topology servers, then if one
   topology server sends a tsr to the designated topology server all of
   the other topology servers can be expected to follow with TSRs for
   the same information. so a flooded tsu over the topology server
   multicast address provides a more efficient method of responding to a
   tsr from any topology server than would be the case if the designated
   topology server sent only a unicast response to each topology server
   individually.

   in order that topology state updates be reliable, all TSUs must be
   acknowledged by a topology state acknowledgement (TSACK) message. the
   TSACK contains only those element descriptors whose receipt is being
   acknowledged by the sending topology server. thus, if a topology
   server receives a tsu message which contains unrecognized topology
   state information, the TSACK message will reflect the fact that not
   all elements were successfully received by that topology server.
   unrecognized elements may then be retransmitted in another tsu
   message. Retransmitted TSUs are unicast to the topology server(s)
   requiring message retransmission.

   TSACK messages are unicast by the DTS and BTS to the topology server
   which sent the TSU. TSACK messages are sent by non-DTS/non-BTS
   topology servers using the designated topology server multicast
   address. this allows the DTS, BTS, and each other topology server to
   stay in topology state database synchronization with a single message
   transmission.

   A non-DTS/non-BTS topology server expects to receive TSACKs from both
   DTS and BTS in response to a sent TSU. The DTS and BTS expect to
   receive TSACKs from all non-DTS/non-BTS topology servers in response
   to a sent TSU. Since only the DTS sends TSUs the designated topology
   server also expects to receive a TSACK from the backup topology
   server.

2.3.3   topology state information updates

   gatekeepers are to send topology state update messages to the
   topology server when a new element registers with the gatekeeper or




davis                                                          [Page 20]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


   when a registered element changes operational state. in order to
   prevent a flood of messages to the topology servers, TSUs from
   gatekeepers may be throttled by setting of a minimum_tsu_interval
   (mti) parameter. this prevents the gatekeeper from sending TSUs at
   intervals shorter than this period. after this period a single
   summary tsu is sent summarizing state change information over the
   intervening period. optional parameters associated with the mti
   parameter enable different types of tsu information to be throttled.
   the types of tsu information include:


      - new registration-reporting of registration of new elements.


      - network connectivity change-the gatekeeper is advertising a new
        (network address, network mask) tuple for the zone.


      - out of service to active state change-reporting of existing
        elements which have changed from an oos to active maintenance
        state.


      - active to out of service state change-reporting of existing
        elements which have changed from an active to oos maintenance
        state.

   the optional parameter allows, for example, throttling of new
   registrations and network connectivity changes while state changes of
   existing elements are reported immediately. this throttling procedure
   is to be bidirectional with the capability to throttle tsu’s from the
   topology server to each of the gatekeepers. these parameters are
   communicated between the gatekeeper and the topology server during
   the topology_state_channel_open message exchange.

2.4     summary of system initialization

   the following is a summary of the steps toward system initialization.
   in this summary, same numbered steps indicate tasks which may be
   performed independently:


     1.  gatekeeper initialization







davis                                                          [Page 21]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


     1.  topology server initialization.


     2.  topology server registers to the topology server multicast
         address.


     3.  gatekeeper generates a topology state map for the zone based
         upon registrations.


     4.  topology server sends HELLO packets over the topology server
         multicast address to discover other topology servers.


     5.  gatekeeper locates a topology server serving the gatekeeper’s
         topology area.


     6.  a backup topology server is elected.


     7.  gatekeeper opens a two way dialog with the topology server.


     8.  the backup topology server registers to the designated topology
         server multicast address.


     9.  gatekeeper and topology server exchange information: gatekeeper
         reports zone topology state information to topology server and
         topology server sends information aggregated from other zones
         to gatekeeper.


    10.  a designated topology server is elected


    11.  the designated topology server registers to the designated
         topology server multicast address.


    12.  topology server and designated topology server negotiate
         topology state information exchange relationship.






davis                                                          [Page 22]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


    13.  topology server and designated topology server exchange
         topology state advertisements.


    14.  topology server sends topology state updates to designated and
         backup topology servers over the designated topology server
         multicast address.


    15.  designated topology server sends topology state updates to all
         topology servers over the topology server multicast address.


    16.  topology state information is to be refreshed periodically
         based upon zone reregistrations. aged information is be be
         marked as invalid in the topology state database.

3.      recovery from system errors

3.1     introduction

   this section considers possible failure modes and the strategies for
   recovering from them. failure modes may be grouped into two
   categories:


     1.  failures associated with elements: topology servers,
         gatekeepers, gateways, terminals, &c.


     2.  topology state synchronization errors: inconsistent topology
         state information among elements.

   in this section, the following failure modes are considered:


     1.  aging of topology state database entries


     2.  failure of the designated topology server


     3.  failure of the backup topology server







davis                                                          [Page 23]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


     4.  topology server failure detected by a gatekeeper


     5.  gatekeeper failure detected by a topology server


     6.  gatekeeper failure detected by elements in zone


     7.  Element failure detected by a gatekeeper


     8.  connection failure between elements in the same zone


     9.  connection failure between elements in different zones-same
         topology server area


    10.  connection failure between elements in different zones-
         different topology server areas

3.2     aging of topology state information

   as elements reregister with the gatekeeper in their zone, and as
   gatekeepers in turn send topology state advertisements to their
   topology servers, the timestamp associated with each element entry is
   updated to reflect the most recent element registrations. if,
   however, an element fails to reregister with it's gatekeeper, or if
   the gatekeeper fails to send TSAs to the topology server the topology
   state information is `aged out'.

   if an element within a zone does not reregister within the
   registration lifetime as specified by the gatekeeper when the element
   registered, the gatekeeper is to age out the element registration. in
   response, the gatekeeper is to send an h.323 unregistration request
   (urq) to the element. upon receipt of the urq, the element is to
   respond with an unregistration confirmation (ucf) to the gatekeeper.

   the gatekeeper then invalidates the topology state entry that it
   maintained for the element and sends a topology state update message
   containing information about the change in state for the element to
   it's topology server. the topology server forwards the information on
   to the designated topology server which distributes the information
   among the other topology servers. each topology server in turn
   distributes the information among the gatekeepers in the respective




davis                                                          [Page 24]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


   areas.

3.3     failure of designated topology server

   a failure of a topology server is detected by other topology servers
   when the interval between it's HELLO packets exceeds the
   peer_server_dead interval specified in the HELLO packet. when this
   occurs with the designated topology server the topology servers
   reenter the initialization wait state to elect a replacement. in this
   case, the backup topology server is elected as designated topology
   server and a new backup topology server is elected. this new backup
   topology server registers to join the designated topology server
   multicast channel.

   this realignment to elect new designated and backup topology servers
   causes a temporary disruption in the ability of the topology servers
   to distribute topology state information across the network since
   only the designated topology server does the distribution of topology
   state information across the network of topology servers. the backup
   topology server, however, does receive all messages being sent to the
   failed designated topology server. since each topology server is
   expecting an acknowledgement from both the designated and backup
   topology server, the topology servers retransmit their topology state
   messages as unicasts to the designated topology server until a new
   DTS has been elected. the sending of retransmissions as unicasts
   spares elements from having to process message traffic for which it
   has already returned an acknowledgement.

   the backup topology server expects the designated topology server to
   distribute the topology server updates to the network of topology
   servers. when this doesn't happen, the backup topology server does
   the distribution of updates when it is elected to the role of
   designated topology server. this procedures allows topology state
   information to be distributed without loss of information, albeit
   with some delay, even if the designated topology server is lost.

   when a topology server is declared dead it is removed from the list
   of known topology servers in the hello message of the detecting
   topology servers. this makes it possible for the implicated topology
   server to detect when other topology servers have declared it to be
   dead. in addition, entries in the topology state database which are
   associated with the topology server are invalidated. this action
   effectively isolates the area served by the dead topology server from
   the network.

   note that the election scheme is based upon the assumption that all




davis                                                          [Page 25]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


   topology servers are able to communicate with one another across the
   topology server multicast channel. it is assumed that if a topology
   server is not able to communicate with another topology server over
   this channel that other topology servers will have the same
   difficulty since they are using a common multicast channel for
   communication as opposed to individual point to point communication
   between pairs of topology servers as would be the case if each
   topology server formed a peering relationship with every other
   topology server. consequently, if one topology declares another
   topology server to be dead due to a lack of hello message exchanges,
   the other topology servers will make the same declaration. thus, we
   do not expect an exception case where one topology server declares
   another topology server to be declared dead while other topology
   servers consider the implicated topology server to still be alive.

   if the topology area exchange parameter at a topology server is set
   to disable topology information exchange the topology server is to
   cease sending HELLO packets to other topology servers and is to
   ignore traffic from other topology servers. in addition, the topology
   server is to invalidate topology state information associated with
   all other areas. this effectively allows the area to isolate itself
   from all other areas in the network.

3.4     failure of backup topology server

   a failure of the backup topology server results in each of the
   topology servers reverting to the initialization_wait state, and in
   the subsequent election of a new backup topology server. the existing
   designated topology server remains the same.

3.5     topology server failure detected by a gatekeeper

   in order to reduce the amount of message traffic that is propagated
   across the network the gatekeeper only sends information to the
   topology server when there is a topology state view change within the
   zone. thus, topology servers do not age topology state information as
   do the gatekeepers. however, there is still a need to determine the
   status of the channel between the gatekeeper and the topology server
   even if there is no information exchange for extended periods of
   time. to this end the gatekeeper and topology server are to send
   KEEPALIVE mesages across the channel at regular intervals as
   determined during the topology_state_channel_open message exchange.
   if the topology server does not send a KEEPALIVE message to the
   gatekeeper within the specified interval, the gatekeeper is to
   determine the topology server to be dead. in this case, the
   gatekeeper is to perform the following steps:




davis                                                          [Page 26]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


     1.  the gatekeeper is to close the communication channel with the
         topology server by sending a topology_state_channel_close
         message;


     2.  the topology server is to send a topology state channel close
         message to the gatekeeper in response;


     3.  if the gatekeeper is not provisioned for standalone zone
         operation (i.e. primary topology server id set to value
         0.0.0.0) the gatekeeper is to attempt to join another area if
         it is provisioned to do so. in which case it is either
         provisioned with a backup topology server or an alternate area
         and can use procedures to locate the topology server serving
         that area. in any case, the gatekeeper is to continue
         attempting to join an area until successful.

   upon joining a new area, the subsequent exchange of topology state
   information between the gatekeeper and new topology server, will
   allow the topology server to detect that the elements in the zone
   were previously registered in another area based upon the current
   information in the topology state database. in this case the new
   topology server is to take the following actions:


     1.  compare the timestamps of the element descriptors in the
         topology state advertisement sent from the gatekeeper with
         current topology state database information;


     2.  if the timestamp of an element descriptor in the TSA is no more
         recent than information in the topology state database, the
         topology server is to update the topology state view to
         represent the current area in which the element is a member;


     3.  if the timestamp in an element descriptor in the TSA is more
         recent than the information in the topology state database, the
         topology server is to send a topology state request to the
         gatekeeper to get further information on the element;


     4.  the topology server sends the more recent topology state update
         information to the designated topology server which distributes
         the information among the other topology servers.




davis                                                          [Page 27]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


   if the gatekeeper is provisioned for standalone zone operation, no
   further action is taken by the gatekeeper after closing of the
   channel to the topology server. provisioning of the gatekeeper for
   standalone zone operation, where it was previously not so
   provisioned, is to trigger the gatekeeper to initiate closing of an
   open channel to the topology server.

3.6     gatekeeper failure detected by a topology server

   if the gatekeeper does not send a KEEPALIVE message to it's topology
   server within the specified interval, the topology server is to
   determine the gatekeeper to be dead.

   in this case, the topology server invalidates all topology state
   information associated with the zone. from this point the process is
   as described in follows:


     1.  the topology server is to close the communication channel with
         the gatekeeper by sending a topology_state_channel_close
         message to the gatekeeper;


     2.  the gatekeeper is to send a topology state channel close
         message to the topology server in response.


     3.  the topology server which invalidates the zone information is
         to send a topology state update message to the designated
         topology server;


     4.  the designated topology server sends topology state update
         messages to each of the topology servers reflecting the change
         in topology state view;


     5.  the topology servers then send topology state update messages
         to each of the gatekeepers in it's area;

   if the gatekeeper is not provisioned for standalone zone operation,
   the gatekeeper is to take actions to allow the elements in the zone
   to reregister with another gatekeeper. in this event, the gatekeeper
   to unregister each of the elements in it's zone by sending h.323 urq
   messages over the ras channel. each element is to respond with a ucf
   message to the gatekeeper and subsequently reregister with another




davis                                                          [Page 28]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


   gatekeeper if they are provisioned with an alternative gatekeeper.

3.7     gatekeeper failure detected by elements in zone

3.7.1   detection of simultaneous registration in multiple zones

   Failure of a gatekeeper may prompt elements in the zone to register
   with a gatekeeper in a different zone. The specific mechanisms though
   which this happens is beyond the scope of this document. However,
   should the element register in a different zone, the gatekeeper
   serving that zone is to detect a topology state information change in
   it's zone. the gatekeeper next sends a topology state update message
   to the topology server. if the topology server detects registration
   of the element address in another zone it reconciles the conflict
   between registrations using procedures described in section 3.5. upon
   resolving this conflict, the topology server is to send a generic
   error message to the `losing' gatekeeper with error cause: redundant
   registration in multiple zones. the generic error message is to
   implicate the element for which the redundant registration was
   detected. in response, the gatekeeper is to issue an unregistration
   request message to the implicated element.

   in the event that the `losing' gatekeeper is in a different area, the
   topology server detecting the registration conflict is to send the
   generic error message to the topology server which serves the area in
   which the `losing' gatekeeper is located. this procedure ensures that
   the losing gatekeeper receives only one generic error message from
   it's topology server as opposed to being potentially bombarded with
   multiple messages from every topology server detecting the
   registration conflict.

   if the element registers in the new zone using a different network
   address, no registration conflict is detected by the topology server
   and the original registration is either aged by the original
   gatekeeper or invalidated by the topology server serving the original
   gatekeeper.

   A minimum message transmission interval may be defined during the
   TSC_OPEN message exchage when the channel between the gatekeeper and
   the topology server is established. This parameter may be used to
   throttle GENERIC_ERROR message traffic over the channel.

3.7.2   handling of existing calls by a new gatekeeper

   at the time or registration to a new gatekeeper the element may have
   existing communications which were initiated based upon arq/acf




davis                                                          [Page 29]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


   exchanges with the previous gatekeeper. in such case, the new
   gatekeeper will have no state information associated with those
   existing communications as the pgrp does not attempt to disseminate
   call state information.

   in such cases the element is to not attempt to repeat the admission
   request procedure with the new gatekeeper for any communications in
   progress prior to registration. subsequent ras channel messages (such
   as disengage requests, &c.) are to be sent to the new gatekeeper.

3.8     Element Failure Detected by the Gatekeeper

   Element failure is detected by a gatekeeper through the H.323 message
   exchange over the RAS channel. If the gatekeeper declares an element
   to have failed by this mechanism, the element is to have it's
   operational state changed to OUT OF SERVICE and all connectivity to
   this element is to be represented as being in the DISABLED state. The
   gatekeeper is to also send a TOPOLOGY STATE UPDATE message to the
   topology server reflecting the change of operational state.

3.9     Connection Failure Between Elements in the Same Zone

   In the event that the gatekeeper determines that an originating
   element has failed in an attempt to communicate with a target element
   within the same zone, the gatekeeper is to update the topology state
   information for the originating element to indicate that it's
   connectivity with the target element is represented as being in the
   DISABLED state. The gatkeeper is to also send a TOPOLOGY STATE UPDATE
   message to the topology server, however, this information is of local
   (to the zone) interest only and is not propagated to other zones.

3.10    Connection Failure Between Elements in the Different Zones But
   Same Area

   Element failure is detected by a gatekeeper through the H.323 message
   exchange over the RAS channel. If the gatekeeper declares an element
   to have failed by this mechanism, the element is to have it's
   operational state changed to OUT OF SERVICE and all connectivity to
   this element is to be represented as being in the DISABLED state. The
   gatekeeper is to also send a TOPOLOGY STATE UPDATE message to the
   topology server reflecting the change of operational state. At this
   point this information is of originating zone interest only.

   The gatekeeper is to also send a GENERIC ERROR message to the
   topology server with cause: connection failure. This message is to
   implicate the target element for which the connection attempt failed.




davis                                                          [Page 30]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


   The topology server, upon determining that the implicated element is
   within it's area, is to send the GENERIC ERROR message to the
   gatekeeper serving the zone of the target element. The receiving
   gatekeeper may use this information to perform diagnostics to
   determine whether the target element has failed. If the target
   element has indeed failed this case is handled as described in
   section 3.8.

3.11    Connection Failure Between Elements in the Different Areas

   The gatekeeper serving the originating element follows the procedure
   as described in section 3.10. This time, however, the topology server
   determines that the target element is in an area served by another
   topology server. The originating topology server then sends the
   GENERIC ERROR message to the destination topology server. The
   destination topology server then locates the zone in which the target
   element is a member and sends the GENERIC ERROR message to the
   gatekeeper for that zone. The receiving gatekeeper follows a
   procedure as described in section 3.10.

4.      References


  [1] ITU Recommendation H.323, ITU-T, 1998


  [2] Call Signalling Protocols and Media Stream Packetization for
      Packet Based Multimedia Communications Systems, ITU Recommendation
      H.225, ITU-T, February 1998.


  [3] Fenner, W., Internet Group Management Protocol, Version 2, RFC
      2236, November 1997.


  [4] Moy, J., OSPF Version 2, STD 54, RFC 2328, April 1998.


  [5] Rekhter, Y., and T. Li, A Border Gateway Protocol 4 (BGP-4), RFC
      1771, March 1995.

5.      Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1996).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to




davis                                                          [Page 31]






Internet Draft               PGRP Framework          Expires 20 May 1999


   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in it's implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or it's successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

6.      security

   authentication and security issues for pgrp are to be addressed in a
   future version of this document.

7.      Author's Address

   ronald h. davis
   Lucent Technologies
   2000 North Naperville Road
   Naperville, IL 60566-7033

   Phone:  630.979.1720

   email:  ronald.h.davis@lucent.com












davis                                                          [Page 32]



