

6man WG                                                       F. Garneij
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Intended status: Informational                         February 14, 2014
Expires: August 18, 2014


             IPv6 Periodic RA Cellular Impact Investigation
                draft-garneij-ipv6-nd-m2m-issues-00.txt

Abstract

   The use of IPv6 in 3GPP cellular broadband for accessing the Internet
   and other data services like VoLTE via smartphones has increased as a
   result of EPS network deployments worldwide and new IPv6 capable
   smartphones tablets, and netbook computers.  The upcoming rise of
   IoT/M2M is anticipated to bring billions of new devices into these
   networks and the majority of these devices will be using only IPv6.
   This document discusses the EPS network impact of IoT/M2M IPv6
   connectivity specifically targeting the IPv6 Stateless Address Auto
   Configuration (SLAAC), as specified in [RFC4861] and [RFC4862], which
   currently is the only supported IPv6 address configuration mechanism
   in 3GPP standards.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 18, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of



Garneij                  Expires August 18, 2014                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     IPv6 ND and Cellular networks impact    February 2014


   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Background  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  The M2M Scenario and Neighbor Discovery Impact  . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  Definition Of Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Analysis of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     6.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     6.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Appendix A.   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6































Garneij                  Expires August 18, 2014                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     IPv6 ND and Cellular networks impact    February 2014


1.  Background

   Conceptually, IPv6 multicast messages are supposed to avoid broadcast
   messages, but in practice, the multicast operation at many link
   layers the mutlicast message is a broadcast. 3GPP links are cellular
   links consuming expensive radio spectrum.  Thus such radio networks
   like to limit unnecessary signals in the network.  IPv6 neighbor
   discovery being the heart of IPv6 protocol, the document shows how it
   can affect the cellular networks for M2M. M2M networks are usually
   low bandwidth radio networks.

   In 3GPP networks, mobility and connectivity is generated by the
   arrangement of allocated radio resources and EPC node resources into
   a PDN connection.  The following list gives the logical functions
   performed within the Evolved Packet System (EPS):
   o  Network Access Control Functions.
   o  Packet Routing and Transfer Functions
   o  Mobility Management Functions.
   o  Security Functions
   o  Radio Resource management functions
   o  Network Management Functions

   For a User Equipment (UE) attached to a 3GPP network there are
   procedures defined related to device mobility, EPS Mobility
   Management (EMM) states and connectivity session, EPS Connectivity
   Management (ECM) states as described in [TS.23401] Section 4.6.  The
   purpose of this document is to analyze the EPS resources impacted by
   the procedures of the IPv6 Stateless Address Auto Configuration
   (SLAAC), as specified in [RFC4861] and [RFC4862], as it is utilized
   in 3GPP standards.  Special attention is put on EPS control signaling
   load and UE targeting packets generated by IPv6 periodic Router
   Advertisements (unsolicited multicast Router Advertisements).  In an
   effort to adapt initial and periodic Router Advertisements in order
   to preserve radio resources and UE power consumption while still
   allowing for appropriate robustness and fast user-plane set-up time
   even in bad radio conditions to the radio, 3GPP has defined specific
   values and behavior for Router Advertisement in 3GPP TS 29.061
   Section 11.2.1.3.4 IPv6 Router Configuration Variables.

   Since in EPS, radio and network resources are not permanently
   assigned to a specific UE there is a cost associated with the
   allocation and release of resources and associated changes of states
   in EPS nodes.  It is desirable to reduce or avoid any additional
   periodic packets that are not of any use to the application using the
   3GPP derived UE connectivity. 2G and 3G radio resource allocation
   have their own mechanisms with similar functionality but these are
   not described or considered in this document.




Garneij                  Expires August 18, 2014                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     IPv6 ND and Cellular networks impact    February 2014


2.  The M2M Scenario and Neighbor Discovery Impact

   The analysis considers an IoT/M2M UE deployment scenario with less
   frequent packet communications occurrences than would normally be
   seen in a smartphone.  Given an infrequent communication pattern the
   current ECM state before a downlink packet is to be sent, UE ECM
   state is with high probability going to be found in state IDLE.
   Sending a packet to the UE while in ECM_IDLE state triggers UE Paging
   followed by a UE Service Request and radio resource allocation.
   These procedures are considered as among the heavier procedures in
   EPS with regards to control signaling load and node state changes.
   They are energy consuming in radio and in node processing power
   utilized by the procedures.  It is also likely that other devices
   with different communications usage patterns like smartphones may
   compete over network resources causing the procedure to be repeated
   on order to complete.  It should be noted that in addition to
   establishing connectivity, security functions create node state that
   are used in the UE Service Request procedure to provide
   authentication, ciphering and integrity protection.

   The use case to be analyzed considers the following network
   dimensioning for a single P-GW node based on estimations and derived
   from real world network deployment best practices:
   o  There are 10,000,000 simultaneous IPv6 PDN connections to IoT/M2M
      devices.  No dedicated bearers.  Communication direction for IoT/
      M2M service is from network to UE infrequent (e.g. twice a day or
      less).  GTP-U is used between P-GW and S-GW as described in
      TS.23401 of 3GPP specification
   o  EPS Connectivity Management (ECM) state is ECM_IDLE, paging will
      be done
   o  Tracking Area (TA) contains 100 base stations (eNodeB)
   o  MME UE Tracking Area Identifier (TAI) list containing 10 TA which
      gives 10 * 100 eNodeB = 1000 eNodeB for a UE TAI list
   o  Calculation: periodic Router Advertisement interval is 18900 s
      (5,25h)

   The analysis focus on the connectivity state changes and resource
   allocation are related to 1) Packet Routing and Transfer Functions 2)
   Mobility Management Functions 3) Radio Resource Management Functions


3.  Definition Of Terms

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].





Garneij                  Expires August 18, 2014                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     IPv6 ND and Cellular networks impact    February 2014


   3GPP
      Third Generation Partnership Project.  Throughout the document,
      the term "3GPP networks" refers to architectures standardized by
      3GPP, in Second, Third, and Fourth Generation releases: 99, 4, and
      5, as well as future releases.
   EPS
      Evolved packet System
   eNodeB
      The eNodeB is a base station entity that supports the Long-Term
      Evolution (LTE) air interface.
   MME
      Mobility Management Entity
   UE
      User Equipment or host terminal
   M2M
      Machine to Machine Communication networks and related standards.
      M2M includes industrial networks and communication.


4.  Analysis of Results

   If the periodic router advertisements are allowed in the network, the
   measurement result shows that approximately 529 PPS(RA) can be sent
   to the eNodeB from the Edge Router/Gateway device(PDN GW).  And there
   is ~100 to ~1000 state changes per second for MME, eNodeB, UE in the
   network.

   It has been shown that a single downlink packet consumes energy and
   bandwidth and ties up resources in the EPS network and UE.  It is
   desirable to free up the 3GPP networks from periodic signaling
   traffic (in this case IPv6 ND) so that the bandwith can be used for
   packets that have business values.


5.  Acknowledgements


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2434]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 2434,
              October 1998.




Garneij                  Expires August 18, 2014                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     IPv6 ND and Cellular networks impact    February 2014


   [6LOWPAN-ND]
              Shelby, Z., Chakrabarti, S., Nordmark, E., and C. Bormann,
              "ND Optimizations for 6LoWPAN", RFC 6775, November 2012.

   [ND]       Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman,
              "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6", RFC 4861,
              September 2007.

6.2.  Informative References

   [IPV6]     Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6), Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998.

   [AUTOCONF]
              Thomson, S., Narten, T., and T. Jinmei, "IPv6 Stateless
              Autoconfiguration", RFC 4862, September 2007.

   [3GPP]     Korhonen, J., "IPv6 in 3rd Generation Partnership Project
              (3GPP) Evolved Packet System (EPS)", RFC 6459,
              January 2012.


Appendix A.


Author's Address

   Fredrik Garneij
   Ericsson
   Sweden

   Email: fredrik.garneij@ericsson.com



















Garneij                  Expires August 18, 2014                [Page 6]


 
