Internet Draft                               September 16. 2002
Expires 3-15-2003

                draft-robinson-clec-application-00.txt

           Application of Paul Robinson for CLEC permit

                        Paul Robinson

This document is an Internet-Draft and is NOT offered in accordance
with Section 10 of RFC2026, and the author does not provide the
IETF with any rights other than to publish as an Internet-Draft 
The following is submitted to allow the Internet community to
read and comment. 

As a matter of law this document is a public record.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet
Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working
groups. Note that other groups may also distribute working
documents as Internet-Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft
documents valid for a maximum of six months and may be
updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
reference material or to cite them other than as
"work in progress."  The list of current Internet-Drafts
can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html 
The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be
accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

ABSTRACT

This document shows an application to obtain a permit to
operate a telephone company.  This was included as an
internet-draft because of the common use of telephone
connections for dial-up internet service and thus may be
of interest to the Internet community.  The actual tariff
schedules as filed as part of this application
will be included as a later internet-draft.



          APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY 
          AS A COMPETITIVE LOCAL EXCHANGE COMPANY
          BEFORE THE VIRGINIA CORPORATION COMMISSION 
          ("CLEC App")

          Name, Address and Telephone number of Applicant: 
               Paul Robinson <postmaster@paul.washington.dc.us>
               4300 S 35th Street
               Arlington, VA 22206-1834
               703-931-1147

          List of principals of the Applicant:
               Paul Robinson
               "An individual, a computer programmer and a Notary
               Public in and for the Commonwealth of Virginia"

          Name, address and telephone numbers of legal counsel of
          Applicant:
               Paul Robinson, in propria persona
               4300 S 35th Street
               Arlington, VA 22206-1834
               703-931-1147

          Approximate Date of Filing: September 16, 2002

          Page Status: This is page 1.  All pages of this document
          are Original Issue unless stated otherwise.

          Check Sheet:  Not negotiable, no cash value.  Pages 1
          through 23, original issue.

          Copy Number: An original and 15 copies of this document
          have been filed. 








CLEC App of Paul Robinson   September 16, 2002    Page 2 of 23

                                  Table of Contents

      APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY  .     1
           Name, Address and Telephone number of Applicant: .....     1
           List of principals of the Applicant: .................     1
           Name, address and telephone numbers of legal counsel   
                of Applicant:  ..................................     1
           Approximate Date of Filing ...........................     1
           Page Status  .........................................     1
           Check Sheet  .........................................     1
           Copy Number  .........................................     1

      Table of Contents .........................................     2

      Specification of requirements .............................     5
           Section (B) requirements .............................     5
                1. An original and 15 copies of an ..............     5
                2. Notice of the application shall be given .....     5
                3. The application shall identify the ...........     5
                4. Each incorporated applicant shall  ...........     6
                5. Applicants shall be required to show .........     6
                     a. As a minimum requirement, a showing of
                          financial ability .....................     6
                     b. To demonstrate managerial experience  ...     6
                     c. The applicant shall demonstrate its .....     7
                6. Each application for a certificate to ........     8
                7. The applicant shall file maps  ...............     8
                8. Each application shall include the applicant's
                     proposed form of regulation  ...............     9
           Section (C) requirements .............................     9
                1. In the public interest evaluation of the .....     9
                     a. Access to 911 and E911 services .........     9
                     b. White page directory listings ...........    10
                     c. Access to telephone relay services  .....    10
                     d. Access to directory assistance  .........    10
                     e. Access to operator services .............    10
                     f. Equal access to interLATA long ..........    11
                     g. Free blocking of 900- and 700-type  .....    11
                     h. Interconnection on a ....................    12
                2. To the extent economically and technically ...    12
                3. The new entrant shall have procedures to .....    12
                4. The new entrant shall comply .................    13
                5. The new entrant shall, at a minimum  .........    13
           D. Regulation of new entrants  .......................    13
                1. Unless otherwise allowed by the ..............    13
                2. The new entrant may petition the .............    14
                3. Unless otherwise allowed by the ..............    14
                     a. Price decreases shall become ............    14
                     b. Price increases below ceiling rates .....    14
                     c. Price ceilings shall be .................    15



CLEC App of Paul Robinson   September 16, 2002    Page 3 of 23

                     d. The commission may permit ...............    15
                     e. These pricing requirements shall not ....    15
                4. Services offered by the new entrant that .....    15
                5. A new entrant may  ...........................    16
           6. No form of earnings regulation shall be ...........    16
           7. No new entrant providing local exchange telephone
                    service shall abandon .......................    16
           8. Should the commission determine that the form of
                    regulation  .................................    16

      Financial and reporting requirements for new entrants.  ...    17
           1. All providers of local exchange telephone .........    17
                a. Annual report on the number of access ........    17
                b. Annual price list for all detariffed ......       17
                c. Quarterly statement of units and revenues  ...    17
                d. Audited financial statement  .................    17
           2. Reports and information required by the Division   
                of Public Service Taxation ......................    17
           3. A new entrant shall be required to remit  .........    17
           4. Any expansion or reduction of the geographic 
                service area  ...................................    18
               5. Upon request of the commission staff, any 
                    new entrant shall file  .....................    18
               6. A new entrant, determined by the commission 
                    to have a monopoly  .........................    18

      F. Interconnection. .......................................    19
               1. Interconnection arrangements between 
                    local exchange carriers  ....................    19
               2. Interconnection arrangements should apply .....    19
               3. Interconnection arrangements shall be made ....    19
               4. Local exchange carriers shall provide 
                    nondiscriminatory use .......................    19
               5. Negotiation of interconnection agreements 
                    should be completed .........................    20
               6. No sooner than 45 days from the initial 
                    interconnection request .....................    20
               7. Unbundled functional elements of a local 
                    exchange carrier's network ..................    20

          G. Terminating traffic compensation.  .................    20
               1. Any compensation arrangement  .................    20
               2. The commission may establish  .................    21
               3. Local exchange carriers may only deliver  .....    21
               4. Any compensation arrangements .................    21

          H. Number portability and number assignment.  .........    21
               1. Consumers shall have the ability  .............    21
               2. True number portability shall be made .........    21


CLEC App of Paul Robinson   September 16, 2002    Page 4 of 23

               3. Interim number portability arrangements shall 
                     be utilized ................................    21
               4. To the extent feasible, the incumbent local 
                     telephone company shall provide ............    22
          I. Universal service  .................................    22
               1. The commission may, if necessary, establish ...    22
               2. The establishment of a Universal Service Fund .    22
               3. The incumbent local exchange companies shall 
                    be designated  ..............................    22

          J. Commission authority. The commission may, in its 
                   discretion ...................................    22






































CLEC App of Paul Robinson   September 16, 2002    Page 5 of 23

          Specification of requirements

          Section (B) requirements

          Pursuant to 20VAC5-400-180. Rules governing the offering of
          competitive local exchange telephone service, the applicant
          supplies the following information for section (B), Certification
          requirements.  The original text of the requirement will be
          repeated, followed by the applicant's response.

          1. An original and 15 copies of an application for a certificate
          of public convenience and necessity shall be filed with the Clerk
          of the State Corporation Commission. 

          Applicant's Response:    Well, I kind of suspect you are reading
                                   it right now.  A copy of the application
                                   and tariffs will be enclosed on floppy
                                   disk so additional copies may be made as
                                   desired.

          2. Notice of the application shall be given to all local exchange
          carriers in the applicant's proposed service territory. Each
          applicant shall publish notice in newspapers having general
          circulation in the proposed service territory in a form to be
          prescribed by the commission.

          Applicant's Response:    Mail out one page letters or a postcard
                                   to all my about 300 alleged competitors
                                   telling them I'm going to try to run
                                   them into Chapter 11 if I can by doing
                                   better than they can, and maybe by
                                   charging less than they do, or do the
                                   same to myself if I don't, or at least
                                   have a lot of fun trying, and maybe make
                                   a lot of money doing it, or again, at
                                   least have a lot of fun trying and make
                                   a little money.  Or have a lot of fun
                                   trying and eat some of the costs. 
                                   Gotcha, I'll either do that once I have
                                   their addresses or I'll have done that
                                   before I file this.  Put a notice up in
                                   the paper(s) saying I'm doing this using
                                   whatever you tell me I have to say. 
                                   Okay, I think I can do that.

          3. The application shall identify the applicant including (i) its
          name, address, and telephone number; (ii) the name, address, and
          telephone number of its corporate parent or parents, if any;
          (iii) a list of its officers and directors or, if the applicant
 
 
CLEC App of Paul Robinson   September 16, 2002    Page 6 of 23

          is not a corporation, a list of its principals; (iv) the names,
          addresses, and telephone numbers of its legal counsel; and (v)
          any other identifying information the commission determines to be
          necessary. 

          Applicant's Response:    Been there, done that, see page 1.

          4. Each incorporated applicant shall demonstrate that it is
          authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Virginia as a
          public service company. 

          Applicant's Response:    Not incorporated, not applicable, so
                                   there.

          5. Applicants shall be required to show their financial,
          managerial, and technical ability to render local exchange
          telephone service. 

          Applicant's Response:    Oh, well that might be a problem but let
                                   me take a swing at it.

          a. As a minimum requirement, a showing of financial ability shall
          include the applicant's most recent audited financial statements,
          most recent stockholders annual report and most recent SEC Form
          10-K if the company is publicly traded. 

          Applicant's Response:    I have the strong suspicion those only
                                   apply to corporations so I'm going to
                                   say they are not applicable to me.  If
                                   not and I have to say something in
                                   response, what I will say is that as for
                                   being able to pay for the cost of
                                   operating this business, generally I'll
                                   have the customers pay in advance for
                                   anything that's going to cost me much
                                   more than pocket change, especially
                                   anything I have to pay someone else to
                                   provide.  I'll have a few dollars on
                                   hand to pay bills between the time I can
                                   charge the customers and my bills come
                                   due plus the inevitable unexpected
                                   costs, not to mention payments I have to
                                   make where someone occasionally stiffs
                                   me on paying.  And it will be very
                                   occasionally as I won't be extending
                                   much credit, if any.

          b. To demonstrate managerial experience, each applicant shall
          attach a brief description of its history of providing
          telecommunications or other relevant services, if any; shall list


CLEC App of Paul Robinson   September 16, 2002    Page 7 of 23

          the geographic areas in which it has and is currently providing
          service; and shall list the experience of each principal officer. 

          Applicant's Response:    This sounds sort of like some Catch 22
                                   that is used to keep upstarts like
                                   myself out of this racket, since you
                                   can't have experience providing
                                   communications service if you haven't
                                   done it before, but I think I can take a
                                   shot at it.

                              This is my first application as a CLEC so I
                              guess that makes me a virgin as I have no
                              experience as a CLEC and am not now providing
                              service anywhere yet.  Further, I thought the
                              whole reason I had to file this paper is that
                              I'm not allowed to lose my virginity until I
                              get permission from God.  Correction, change
                              the previous sentence to read, "Further, I
                              thought the whole reason I had to file this
                              paper is that I'm not allowed to operate a
                              CLEC until I have permission from the
                              Commission."


                              As for management experience, I was a
                              telephone operator at a government agency,
                              working for a government contractor.  I was
                              managing operator which means I had to answer
                              the phones as well as schedule people because
                              we ran continuous service, 24 hours a day, 7
                              days a week, and the contractor supplied
                              operators were classified as essential
                              government personnel.  That means that we
                              could even go to work if they declared
                              Martial Law as we'd have a pass to get by. 
                              It may not be much, but in view of how
                              important the service I managed provided was,
                              I would say it fits into the requirements, so
                              I think I can just squeak by.

          c. The applicant shall demonstrate its technical ability by
          attaching a description of its experience in providing
          telecommunications or other relevant services, if any, or the
          applicant may provide other documentation which supports its
          technical abilities. 

          Applicant's Response:    I installed the phone lines inside my
                                   house and they work.  I've been doing

 
CLEC App of Paul Robinson   September 16, 2002    Page 8 of 23

                                   that since I started taking phones apart
                                   - and putting them back together and
                                   they still were in operating condition -
                                   when I was 8 years old.  So, since I'm
                                   over 40, I can claim over 30 years of
                                   experience in repairing, maintaining and
                                   installing telecommunications equipment. 
                                   Since before 1995,  I have hooked up and
                                   configured modems on mine and other
                                   people's computers and I've been a
                                   telephone operator as I noted above. 
                                   I've installed someone else's computer
                                   to a cable modem and configured their
                                   dialing capacity after I got rid of the
                                   piece of garbage Packard Bell computer
                                   they had and replaced it with a decent
                                   Hewlett Packard computer.  I also set up
                                   the networking of computers I've
                                   installed (over 80) at the Consumer
                                   Product Safety Commission where I worked
                                   for a contractor.  Before that I was a
                                   technical support operator for a
                                   subcontractor to a telephone company's
                                   Internet dial-up service, telling people
                                   over the phone on how to fix their
                                   computers settings from the way
                                   Microsoft misconfigured them (so it
                                   would work with its MSN service, I do
                                   believe) so that they would work with
                                   our service.  So that gives me over 5
                                   years of paid and volunteer experience
                                   in providing telecommunications
                                   services.  Wow, I hadn't realized how
                                   much I really had done.

          6. Each application for a certificate to provide local exchange
          service shall include the applicant's initial tariffs, which
          shall include rules, regulations, terms, and conditions.
          Applicants that desire to have any of their services deregulated
          or detariffed shall file such a proposal in accordance with
          subsection D of this section. 

          Applicant's Response:    Tariffs will follow as a separate volume
                                   (because there's lots of noise in it). 
                                   You want `em, you got `em.  Whether you
                                   like `em or not is not really important
                                   since they tell me I have to file new
                                   ones anyway if this application is
                                   approved.


CLEC App of Paul Robinson   September 16, 2002    Page 9 of 23

          7. The applicant shall file maps or other acceptable documents
          with the application for certification in sufficient detail to
          designate the actual geographic area or areas to be served. Such
          maps should also identify each proposed initial local calling
          area of the applicant. 

          Applicant's Response:    See the pages in the tariff schedule
                                   under "Maps."

          8. Each application shall include the applicant's proposed form
          of regulation for its services if such form of regulation differs
          from that set forth in subsection D of this section. 

          Applicant's Response:    I can live with everything in section D,
                                   no biggie, no problem.


          Section (C) requirements

          Pursuant to 20VAC5-400-180. Rules governing the offering of
          competitive local exchange telephone service, the applicant
          supplies the following information for section (C), Conditions
          for certification.  The original text of the requirement will be
          repeated, followed by the applicant's response.

          1. In the public interest evaluation of the applicant's request
          for a certificate to provide local exchange service, the
          commission will, at a minimum, require a new entrant, either
          directly or through arrangements with others, to provide the
          following: 

          a. Access to 911 and E911 services; 
          Applicant's Response:    Scenario 1: Customer dials 911, I'm
                                   using lines I'm buying at bulk from
                                   someone else and reselling them, I have
                                   no idea what you're doing as I have no
                                   control or concern about it, all I do is
                                   bill you for something more than what he
                                   charges me.  He gives you dial tone, you
                                   dial the call, how and where it gets
                                   there, is his problem, not mine.
                              Scenario 2: Customer dials 911, I'm using my
                              own lines that I've connected him to.  I
                              (meaning my equipment, I'm not stupid enough
                              to sit around manually routing calls, I've
                              got more important things to do)  hand off
                              his call with customer's phone number
                              ("Automatic Number Identification" or "ANI")
                              to whomever I'm buying the trunk lines that


CLEC App of Paul Robinson   September 16, 2002    Page 10 of 23

                              connect my network to the Public Switched
                              Telephone Network ("PSTN").  I'll have given
                              him the customer's name and address as part
                              of the interconnection because I don't want
                              the customer suing me because I didn't give
                              them the address and his house burns down
                              before the fire department shows up, or he
                              drops dead with a heart attack and his heirs
                              sue me because the ambulance couldn't find
                              him.  So anyway, my supplier is handed off
                              the call, the ANI and has the customer info
                              to tie into that ANI.  He's got the call and
                              now it's his problem, not mine.
                              Scenario 3: Customer dials 911, I'm using my
                              own lines that I've connected him to, and I
                              can make enough money to be worth the hassle
                              and expense that would be involved in
                              providing a direct connection to the Public
                              Service Access Terminal ("PSAT") of the local
                              Emergency Operations Center or whatever it is
                              called, then I do that along with whatever
                              else they need to identify the caller.  Once
                              I (again, meaning my equipment will) give
                              them the call and the information, they've
                              got the call and now it's their problem, not
                              mine.

          b. White page directory listings; 
          Applicant's Response:    Verizon does that for everyone else (I
                                   have my own personal line through
                                   Starpower but it's listed in Verizon's
                                   book), so charge the customer whatever
                                   Verizon charges me, if anything.

          c. Access to telephone relay services; 
          Applicant's Response:    Someone else does that, Sprint, I think,
                                   is big on that.  But again, see the info
                                   in 911 above.  Either I'm just bulk
                                   reselling in which case I don't handle
                                   the calls, and it's the other guy's
                                   problem, not mine, or I just take
                                   whatever number they dial and hand it
                                   off to the trunk lines and the call goes
                                   through the network ("PSTN") and it's
                                   someone else's problem, not mine.
          d. Access to directory assistance; 

          Applicant's Response:    See white pages above.  If it's not
                                   Verizon it will probably be whomever I


CLEC App of Paul Robinson   September 16, 2002    Page 11 of 23

                                   buy my trunk lines from.  As I said,
                                   they dial the call, either I'm bulk
                                   reselling and I don't do calls, or I
                                   hand it off to the PSTN and it's someone
                                   else's problem, not mine.

          e. Access to operator services; 

          Applicant's Response:    Applicant tediously repeats that
                                   response to this question is more-or-
                                   less identical to that provided in (c)
                                   and (d) above.  To the extent necessary
                                   they are incorporated by reference.

          f. Equal access to interLATA long distance carriers; 
          Applicant's Response:    Same as in (c) through (e) except that
                                   if I'm handling my own lines and he's
                                   willing to loan me several thousand - or
                                   several hundred thousand - dollars worth
                                   of his equipment to connect his long
                                   distance network to mine, I'll be happy
                                   to do it and maybe he can pay me instead
                                   of my trunk line supplier too, and
                                   possibly pay me less so I still make
                                   money out of the deal and he saves
                                   money.  And I wouldn't like it if I had
                                   to use some long distance company at
                                   whatever they wanted to charge just
                                   because the phone company is getting a
                                   kickback or rebate or a commission on
                                   each call, so I'm not going to do it
                                   either.  The few cents on each call
                                   isn't worth the hassle and bad vibes
                                   from customers who feel - and rightly so
                                   - that I'm cheating them.  I could not
                                   care less what 10-10 junk my customer
                                   wants to dial or which company he wants
                                   to use when he dials 1 plus the number.


          g. Free blocking of 900- and 700-type services so long as the

          same requirement applies to incumbent local exchange companies;
          and
          Applicant's Response:    Those will go out directly over the PSTN
                                   and if I get charges I pass them on to
                                   the customer.  If the customer doesn't
                                   pay I chargeback the supplier as it's
                                   not my problem.  If the supplier


CLEC App of Paul Robinson   September 16, 2002    Page 12 of 23

                                   complains I'll block the number but I
                                   still won't pay him if the customer is
                                   stiffing him; I'll give him the
                                   customer's name and address (he'll
                                   already have the phone number) and tell
                                   him to settle it between the two of
                                   them.  If the customer doesn't want
                                   those type calls to go through I'll
                                   block them too.
                              This is again only applicable if I'm
                              providing lines to customers directly, if I'm
                              bulk reselling it's the supplier's problem
                              other than I'll specifically tell them the
                              customer wants the lines blocked, either via
                              calling it in or using the automated system
                              for installing lines or whatever.  If the
                              customer wants to call some sex line - or
                              doesn't - it doesn't make any difference to
                              me one way or the other, I just pass on the
                              charges for them to pay or chargeback the
                              ones the customers don't pay.
                              If my contract with my supplier makes me
                              liable for customers 700 and 900 calls
                              whether or not the customer pays me then
                              those numbers will be automatically blocked
                              from the get-go and the customer will not be
                              able to unblock them unless I trust them a
                              lot.  Nobody spends my money without my
                              permission.


          h. Interconnection on a nondiscriminatory basis with other local
          exchange telephone service companies. 
          Applicant's Response:    I'll hook up with anyone who'll let me. 
                                   See my comments above in (f) above as
                                   applicable to long distance companies. 
                                   If the other guy is willing to leave me
                                   the equipment to pass my customer's
                                   calls to him I'll be happy to do it, I
                                   don't care where the customer is
                                   calling.

          2. To the extent economically and technically feasible, the new
          entrant should be willing and able to provide service to all
          customers in the same service classification in its designated
          geographic service area in accordance with its tariff offerings. 

          Applicant's Response:    I have no problem with that.  If I am
                                   reselling in bulk, the more customers I


CLEC App of Paul Robinson   September 16, 2002    Page 13 of 23

                                   sell the more money I make.  If I'm
                                   providing my own lines, I'll rent them
                                   out to anyone if I can get to them and I
                                   have the available capacity.  If they're
                                   willing to pay me it's worth the effort
                                   to try.

          3. The new entrant shall have procedures to prevent deceptive and
          unfair marketing practices.

          Applicant's Response:    The procedure for that is really simple. 
                                   I probably won't advertise. That costs
                                   money and I dislike spending money
                                   unnecessarily.  If they want someone who
                                   spends a lot of money on advertising let
                                   them go to MCI (if it's still in
                                   business since its owner Worldcom just
                                   went belly up) or Verizon.  If I do
                                   advertise, I'll tell people exactly what
                                   I'm doing and what they can expect from
                                   me.  I don't want some guy to think he's
                                   been cheated and either leave (and thus
                                   I lose money) or come punch me in the
                                   nose for lying to him.  Besides that,
                                   not only would he get mad, he'll almost
                                   certainly bad mouth me to his friends
                                   and there's more customers I'll never
                                   get to sell to.

          4. The new entrant shall comply with applicable commission
          service and billing standards or rules. 

          Applicant's Response:    Where it's reselling of bulk service the
                                   service part is the supplier's problem,
                                   not mine; he has the Commission to watch
                                   over him.  As far as billing is
                                   concerned, I'm going to send my bills
                                   out right away, I want to be paid.  And
                                   I'll make sure they're right because I
                                   don't want to be on the phone all day
                                   with customers complaining about errors
                                   in their bills.
                              Where the service is provided over my lines,
                              the standards will be as specified in the
                              appropriate tariffs or as otherwise required
                              by law to the extent it is possible to
                              comply.  This will become clear when reading
                              the tariffs, which you should do the next
                              time you have severe insomnia and need


CLEC App of Paul Robinson   September 16, 2002    Page 14 of 23

                              instant relief.

          5. The new entrant shall, at a minimum, comply with the
          applicable intraLATA access requirements of incumbent local
          exchange telephone companies as determined in Case No. PUC850035,
          Commonwealth of Virginia, ex rel. State Corporation Commission Ex
          Parte: Investigation of competition for intraLATA, interexchange
          telephone service (20VAC5-400-120). 

          Applicant's Response:    Applicant incorporates response to 1(f),
                                   above, by reference as if it were set
                                   down here in full.  Cut, copy, paste.

          D. Regulation of new entrants providing local exchange telephone
          service. 

          Applicant's Response:    Ooh, that big word `regulation' sounds
                                   scary but I'll take a crack at it.

          1. Unless otherwise allowed by the commission, tariffs are
          required for all local exchange service offerings except those
          that are comparable to "competitive" offerings of the incumbent
          telephone company that do not require tariffs. The commission may
          convene a hearing to determine the applicable requirements and
          classification of any new entrant's local exchange service
          offerings. 
          Applicant's Response:    Translation, if Verizon can sell it
                                   without filing a tariff, I can too.
                                   Otherwise I have to file one.  Gotcha.


          2. The new entrant may petition the commission to consider
          deregulation or detariffing treatment for any of its specific
          service offerings.

          Applicant's Response:    Translation, if I want to sell something
                                   without a tariff I can sit on my hind
                                   legs at a commission hearing and beg
                                   like a dog to do so.  Okay, if it comes
                                   to that I'll do that.

          3. Unless otherwise allowed by the commission, prices for local
          exchange services provided by the new entrant shall not exceed
          the highest of the comparable tariffed services provided by the
          incumbent local exchange telephone company or companies in the
          same local serving areas. Tariff changes within this price
          ceiling plan shall be implemented as follows: 

          Applicant's Response:    Well, duh, that's kind of obvious,


CLEC App of Paul Robinson   September 16, 2002    Page 15 of 23

                                   nobody's going to pay me more than
                                   they'll pay Verizon for the same thing.
                                   Unless I'm doing something so fantastic
                                   Verizon can't touch it.  Which probably
                                   ain't that hard to do but chances are I
                                   can still do it for less, I don't have
                                   the overhead they do.


          a. Price decreases shall become effective on one-day notice to
          the commission.

          Applicant's Response:    You mean I can't cut prices then tell
                                   people?  I guess I can live with that.


          b. Price increases below ceiling rates shall become effective
          after 30 days notice is provided to the commission, and notice to
          customers is provided through billing inserts or publication for
          two consecutive weeks as display advertising in newspapers having
          general circulation in the areas served by the new entrant.

          Applicant's Response:    Well, yeah, you're not supposed to bait
                                   and switch people.  Too bad you can't
                                   make cable companies follow the same
                                   rules.

          c. Price ceilings shall be the highest tariffed rates as of
          January 1, 1996, for comparable services of any incumbent local
          exchange telephone company or companies serving within the
          certificated local service area of the new entrant. Price
          ceilings shall be increased as the highest tariffed rate of an
          incumbent is raised through applicable regulatory procedures.
          Unless otherwise determined by the commission, price decreases
          for an incumbent's service, whether initiated by the carrier or
          adopted by the commission, shall not require a corresponding
          decrease in the price ceilings applicable to the new entrant.

          Applicant's Response:    See my answer to 3, above, again,
                                   nobody's going to buy something from me
                                   if they can buy it elsewhere for less. 
                                   And I don't have to cut my prices just
                                   because Verizon does.


          d. The commission may permit pricing structures or rates of a new
          entrant's local exchange service(s) that do not conform with the
          established price ceilings, unless there is a showing that the
          public interest will be harmed.


CLEC App of Paul Robinson   September 16, 2002    Page 16 of 23
 
          Applicant's Response:    Meaning I can ask to charge more if I
                                   want.  Well, as I said before, I think
                                   it would be very difficult to get people
                                   to pay me, someone they don't even know,
                                   more than lil' ol' Verizon.


          e. These pricing requirements shall not apply to a new entrant's
          services that: (i) are comparable to services classified as
          competitive for the incumbent, or (ii) have been provided
          regulatory treatment different than that specified by these
          rules. 

          Applicant's Response:    Meaning I can charge anything I want to
                                   for detariffed services.

          4. Services offered by the new entrant that are not comparable to
          services offered by the incumbent and for which the commission
          has not provided regulatory treatment different than that
          specified by these rules shall be filed with 30-days notice to
          the commission. Price decreases for these services shall become
          effective on one-day notice to the commission. Price increases
          shall become effective after 30-days notice to the commission and
          notice to customers in the manner prescribed by subdivision 3 b
          of this subsection. 
          Applicant's Response:    If you've never seen it before, you have
                                   to see if it's reasonable for me to
                                   charge whatever I want to gouge people
                                   for it.  Oh, excuse me, insert, "charge
                                   a price determined by the commission
                                   based on cost of providing the service
                                   plus reasonable profit" where "gouge"
                                   appears.


          5. A new entrant may, pursuant to S56-481.2 of the Code of
          Virginia, submit an alternative regulatory plan to that described
          in this section for the commission's consideration in the
          applicant's certification proceedings or at a later date. 

          Applicant's Response:    Translation, I can pick some other way
                                   of doing this if I want.

          6. No form of earnings regulation shall be required for the

          regulation of new entrants. However, new entrants shall be
          required to file financial and other reports as identified in
          subsection E of this section to enable the commission to evaluate
          the effectiveness of local exchange telephone competition. 
          Applicant's Response:    I don't have to prove what I'm charging
                                   goes beyond gouging (see definition,
                                   above) but I have to tell you how much
                                   money I do rip the customers off for, or
                                   whether I'm losing my shirt in the
                                   process.  Gotcha.

          7. No new entrant providing local exchange telephone service


CLEC App of Paul Robinson   September 16, 2002    Page 17 of 23

          shall abandon or discontinue local exchange service except with
          the approval of the commission, and upon such terms and
          conditions as the commission may prescribe. 
          Applicant's Response:    Well, if I'm doing bulk reselling all
                                   I'm doing is charging an override; if he
                                   quits then I can buy it from someone
                                   else.  If it's a steep increase in costs
                                   then I'll pass them on to the customers
                                   after telling the commission and putting
                                   ads in the papers and waiting 30 days.

                              If I am providing my own lines it will be
                              subject to the appropriate requirements as
                              specified in the Tariffs.


          8. Should the commission determine that the form of regulation of
          new entrants does not effectively, or is no longer necessary to,
          regulate the prices of their services, it may, pursuant to S56-
          481.2 of the Code of Virginia, modify the form of regulation. 

          Applicant's Response:    Translation: if the rules for how the
                                   game is played don't work anymore then
                                   you can change them or get rid of them.  

           Financial and reporting requirements for new entrants. 
          1. All providers of local exchange telephone service certificated
          under this regulation shall be required to file the following
          reports with the commission's Division of Economics and Finance: 
          a. Annual report on the number of access lines by local exchange
          area and classified by residential and business lines. 

          Applicant's Response:    So I have to let them know how many
                                   lines I've got running.  Since if I'm
                                   charging people for them I have to know
                                   that in order to bill them and get paid,
                                   that shouldn't be a problem.

          b. Annual price list for all detariffed competitive local
          exchange telephone services provided by the applicant. 

          Applicant's Response:    Show what I charge for what I don't have
                                   to have tariffs for.  Ok.

          c. Quarterly statement of units and revenues for all competitive
          telephone services provided by the applicant. 
          Applicant's Response:    Oh, more paperwork but I can live with
                                   it if I have to.


CLEC App of Paul Robinson   September 16, 2002    Page 18 of 23

          d. Audited financial statement, stockholders annual report, SEC
          Form 10-K and FCC Form M for the parent company and the new
          entrant, if available. 
          Applicant's Response:    Not incorporated, not applicable.

          2. Reports and information required by the Division of Public
          Service Taxation in performing its functions under SS58.1-2600
          through 58.1-2690 of the Code of Virginia shall be filed with the
          commission's Division of Public Service Taxation. 

          Applicant's Response:    Well, they gotta go somewhere, so it
                                   might as well be there.


          3. A new entrant shall be required to remit the
          telecommunications relay surcharge amount to the commission
          pursuant to the October 5, 1990, order issued in Case No.
          PUC900029, Commonwealth of Virginia at the relation of the State
          Corporation Commission Ex Parte: In the matter of implementing
          dual-party relay service pursuant to Article 5, Chapter 15, Title
          56 of the Code of Virginia (20VAC5-400-170). The remittance,
          along with any other required information, shall be made to the
          commission's Division of Public Service Taxation. 
          Applicant's Response:    I suspect all that long talk refers to
                                   the deaf relay tax or E-911 surcharges. 
                                   Whatever, customer pays it (or I do if
                                   it's circuits for my own account) and I
                                   pay it to the DPST.


          4. Any expansion or reduction of the geographic service area of a
          new entrant that does not involve an expansion of the territory
          covered by an existing certificate shall require the filing of
          amended maps or other acceptable documentation with the
          commission's Division of Communications. 

          Applicant's Response:    If I change where I'm offering service I
                                   have to update the map.

          5. Upon request of the commission staff, any new entrant shall

          file such other information with respect to any of its services
          or practices as may be required of public service companies under
          Virginia law. 
          Applicant's Response:    Bend over on request and submit to
                                   proctology exam.


          6. A new entrant, determined by the commission to have a monopoly


CLEC App of Paul Robinson   September 16, 2002    Page 19 of 23
 
          over any of its services, whether or not those services are
          telephone services, shall file annual data to demonstrate that
          its revenues from local exchange telephone services cover the
          long run incremental costs of such local exchange telephone
          services in the aggregate. 


          Applicant's Response:    Translation, we aren't supposed to
                                   subsidize monopoly services as a means
                                   to make it impossible for competitors to
                                   offer something else which competes with
                                   ours by making it impossible for them to
                                   sell it except by eating part of the
                                   cost.  If I ever get to be the monopoly
                                   provider of anything it would have to be
                                   because I'm making money hand over fist,
                                   so I doubt that's going to happen.  I'd
                                   probably have incorporated the business
                                   long before then and  - as is my usual
                                   response - it won't be my problem then .


          F. Interconnection. 
          1. Interconnection arrangements between local exchange carriers
          shall make available network features, functions, interface
          points, and other service elements on an unbundled basis. The
          commission shall, on petition by any party to the proposed
          interconnection or on its own motion, determine the
          reasonableness of any interconnection request. 

          Applicant's Response:    I can buy what I need to set up phone
                                   services for my customers ala carte, I
                                   don't have to take one service from a
                                   company just because I get something
                                   else from them.  And I can come running
                                   and complain if I think they're being
                                   greedy or playing games to keep from
                                   providing service to a potential
                                   competitor, or the commission can do
                                   that too.


          2. Interconnection arrangements should apply equally and on a
          nondiscriminatory basis to all local exchange carriers. 
          Applicant's Response:    To quote infamous bank robber and poster
                                   child for the police benevolent
                                   association Rodney King, "We all have to
                                   get along."  Or something like that.


CLEC App of Paul Robinson   September 16, 2002    Page 20 of 23

          3. Interconnection arrangements shall be made available pursuant
          to a bona fide written request. No refusal or unreasonable delay
          by any provider to another carrier will be tolerated.
          Applicant's Response:    Yeah, right.  You would not believe the
                                   number of stunts a company can pull to
                                   create all sorts of delays, none of
                                   which you could put your finger on to
                                   really prove they were "unreasonable." 
                                   But I have no reason to pull stunts like
                                   that if someone wants something from me
                                   because I'm going to charge him for it
                                   and the faster I do the faster I get
                                   paid.  If he's willing to bother with me
                                   instead of going with one of my much
                                   larger companies who can probably do
                                   more (and probably take longer than I
                                   will, but that's beside the point.)


          4. Local exchange carriers shall provide nondiscriminatory use of
          pole attachments, conduit space, and rights-of-way. 
          Applicant's Response:    I certainly hope they will for me, but
                                   see (3) above.  As I don't own any of
                                   these, they don't apply.  Yet.  But if I
                                   do, I got no problem as long as the
                                   standard practice for masturbation is
                                   used: do it privately so you don't scare
                                   the public with the appearance of the
                                   equipment, and clean up after themselves
                                   once they are finished playing around.

          5. Negotiation of interconnection agreements should be completed
          within 90 days of a bona fide request. Interconnection agreements
          shall be filed with the commission within 10 days of their
          execution. Upon complaint of any affected party or on its own
          motion, the commission may initiate a proceeding to determine if
          any such agreement is reasonable and nondiscriminatory. 
          Applicant's Response:    Translation, I will try to get it done
                                   while the other side stalls as much as
                                   it can until it can figure out whom to
                                   bribe in order to get away with stalling
                                   further in hopes I'll go away.


          6. No sooner than 45 days from the initial interconnection
          request, any party to the request may petition the commission for
          a hearing in lieu of negotiations or as a result of unsuccessful
          negotiations. Upon such petition, the commission shall establish
          a proceeding to determine tariffed prices and service
          arrangements for interconnection.


CLEC App of Paul Robinson   September 16, 2002    Page 21 of 23

          Applicant's Response:    Translation, same as (5) only the other
                                   side will stall faster.

          7. Unbundled functional elements of a local exchange carrier's
          network that are made available through interconnection
          agreements shall also be made available on an individual tariffed
          basis within 60 days of filing unless otherwise ordered by the
          commission. 
          Applicant's Response:    I can trade connections with them if I
                                   can get them to agree or I can buy them. 
                                   And other people can trade connections
                                   with me or I can sell them to them.


          G. Terminating traffic compensation. 

          1. Any compensation arrangement for the mutual exchange of local
          traffic should reflect the reciprocal relationship between local
          exchange carriers and the development of local exchange
          competition. 

          Applicant's Response:    Meaning the one who uses more of the
                                   other guy's lines should end up paying
                                   more when settlements time comes around.
          2. The commission may establish at any time, upon application or
          its own motion, appropriate compensation levels for mutual
          exchange of local traffic. 

          Applicant's Response:    Anyone can ask to have the rates changed
                                   if they don't like them, or the
                                   commission can too.


          3. Local exchange carriers may only deliver local traffic for
          termination on another carrier's local network at the
          compensation level established in conformance with this
          regulation. 
          Applicant's Response:    Kickbacks and overcharging are frowned
                                   upon.


          4. Any compensation arrangements for the mutual exchange of local
          traffic shall provide for equitable treatment or rates between
          the local exchange carriers. 

          Applicant's Response:    Don't cheat each other.

          H. Number portability and number assignment. 


CLEC App of Paul Robinson   September 16, 2002    Page 22 of 23

          1. Consumers shall have the ability to retain the same telephone
          number if they remain in the same geographic area where the NXX
          is normally provided, regardless of their chosen local exchange
          carrier. 

          Applicant's Response:    Update the switch software to import and
                                   export phone numbers to and from
                                   competitors.


          2. True number portability shall be made available when
          technically and economically feasible. 

          Applicant's Response:    Finally, the phone company no longer
                                   owns the customer's phone number. 
                                   Hallelujah!  It's about time someone
                                   finally did that.

          3. Interim number portability arrangements shall be utilized
          until true number portability is available. 

          Applicant's Response:    A kluge of call forwarding or other
                                   gimmick is okay until (2) above can be
                                   made to work.


          4. To the extent feasible, the incumbent local telephone company
          shall provide new entrants with reservations for a reasonably
          sufficient block of numbers for their use. 
          Applicant's Response:    To which they will do everything they
                                   can to charge too much for providing
                                   them, if they don't simply delay
                                   "reasonably," just delay reasonably over
                                   and over and over and...


          I. Universal service. The goals of universal service and
          affordability of basic local exchange telephone service need to
          be maintained in a competitive local exchange environment for the
          citizens of Virginia. The following requirements shall apply: 


          1. The commission may, if necessary, establish a Universal
          Service Fund and applicable payment mechanism. Any such fund
          shall require the participation and support of all local exchange
          carriers. 
          Applicant's Response:    Just another tax to charge the customer
                                   and possibly a government subsidy.  Pass
                                   the tax on to the customer so the


CLEC App of Paul Robinson   September 16, 2002    Page 23 of 23
 
                                   subsidy can be paid, most likely, to our
                                   friends at Verizon.


          2. The establishment of a Universal Service Fund shall first
          require the evaluation of the definition of basic local exchange
          telephone service and the calculation of the subsidy required to
          support the ubiquity of such service. 
          Applicant's Response:    Determine what, in the range from two
                                   tin cans and a string, to an OC45 Sonet
                                   ATM connection delivered by fiber
                                   optics, is sufficient for most customers
                                   who need subsidized service, and how
                                   much it is going to cost to provide that
                                   subsidized service.


          3. The incumbent local exchange companies shall be designated as
          the carriers of last resort in their current local serving areas
          until such time as the commission determines otherwise. 
          Applicant's Response:    Verizon has to do it if nobody else
                                   will.


          J. Commission authority. The commission may, in its discretion,
          waive or grant exceptions to any of these rules and may also
          attach conditions or limitations to any certificate issued under
          these rules or S56-265.4:4 C of the Code of Virginia. 

          Applicant's Response:    If I need help I can pray to God, err, I
                                   mean if I need relief I may file a
                                   prayer for same with the Commission.
                                   Probably not much difference in terms of
                                   the likelihood of a favorable response
                                   for either option.

