



Network Working Group                                            K. Raza
Internet-Draft                                                   vIPtela
Intended status: Standards Track                            J. Cavanaugh
Expires: April 20, 2016                                          405Labs
                                                             A. Kulawiak
                                                          Morgan Stanley
                                                       P. Pillay-Esnault
                                                               F. Shamim
                                                           Cisco Systems
                                                        October 18, 2015


                          OSPF Stub Neighbors
                    draft-raza-ospf-stub-neighbor-02

Abstract

   Open Shortest Path First stub neighbor is an enhancement to the
   protocol to support large scale of neighbors in some topologies with
   improved convergence behavior.  It introduces limited changes
   protocol behavior to implement a scalable solution for hub and spoke
   topologies by limiting the functionality changes to the hub.  The
   concepts are also applicable to a host running in a virtual machine
   environment.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 20, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.





Raza, et al.             Expires April 20, 2016                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             OSPF Stub Neighbors              October 2015


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Specification of Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Incremental deployment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Link State Advertisement Filtering  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     4.1.  Area Border Router(ABR) Hub Routers . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.2.  Autonomous System Boundary Router (ASBR) Hub Routers  . .   5
     4.3.  Hub Routers which are neither ASBR or ABR . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Proposed Changes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     5.1.  Stub neighbor overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     5.2.  Local Adjacency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     5.3.  Local Router LSA originated on the Hub Router . . . . . .   6
   6.  Hub Router Stub Neighbor Support Discovery and
       misconfiguration detection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   7.  Receiving and propagation of spoke routes . . . . . . . . . .  10
   8.  Demand Circuit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   9.  Benefits  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   10. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   11. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   12. Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   13. Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11

1.  Introduction

   With the growing size of an OSPF-network, most large networks are now
   deploying OSPF in large hub and spoke topologies.  Also in lot of
   cases L3 routing would be extended to Top of rack or even to a host
   running virtual machines.

   In any case these remote devices constitute a stub point in an OSPF
   network.  These devices although being part of OSPF network will
   never be a transit point and thus do not need any topology
   information of the area nor do they require optimal routing
   calculations.





Raza, et al.             Expires April 20, 2016                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             OSPF Stub Neighbors              October 2015


   The spoke router in the case of a hub and spoke (or a host running
   OSPF) only need default route to the rest of the network, but they do
   need to send information about the connected network in the local
   site.  In case of hosts they need to advertise routes in the virtual
   machines.

   OSPF as network protocol was designed for an environment where
   routers were of similar capabilities.  To protect the larger network,
   area hierarchy was introduced.  Network was typically broken up into
   a backbone area and several subordinate areas.  This breakup of the
   topology into areas serves multiple purposes

   As OSPF has become pervasive protocol in the enterprise network it
   needs to evolve for large hub and spoke setups, these are typical
   retail environments.  In a retail setup typical remote branch router
   does not have enough capacity to become part of a larger area, even
   if we break the network in large number of smaller areas.  A remote
   router in one retail store does not need to have routes to all the
   router in other retail store that are part of its area setup.

   Also increasing the number of areas on ABR can burden the ABR, this
   is due to the creation of large number of summary LSA.  Although this
   can be handled by creating the areas as stub with no summary.  Even
   by creating smaller sized areas with stub no summary, it does not
   completely eliminate the problem of having unnecessary information
   from the prospective of intra area.

   With the advent of virtualized hosts, hosts are now advertising an
   increasing number of new virtual machine routes.  These prefixes need
   to be advertised by a router that is connected to the host.
   Traditionally the host would be connected to the router via a shared
   link between the two (host and router).  The host is often sourcing
   subnets that are not connected to the common subnet between the host
   and routers.  However, the hosts (or spokes) themselves just need a
   default route from the router(or hub) to reach rest of the network.
   The solutions using current features of the protocol are not
   scalable.  The overhead of protocol info and flooding of large number
   of unnecessary information to low-end routers caps the number of
   spokes on a hub.

   This document describes extensions to OSPF to support very large Hub
   and spoke topologies more efficiently.  Currently, the spoke router
   receives unnecessary information from the neighboring hub routers
   about all the other routers in the area.  In most cases all a spoke
   router needs is IP reachability to hub routers which are the gateways
   to the rest of the network.

   We presuppose familiarity with the contents of [RFC2328].



Raza, et al.             Expires April 20, 2016                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             OSPF Stub Neighbors              October 2015


2.  Specification of Requirements

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

3.  Incremental deployment

   For ease of deployment, the changes proposed in this document will be
   limited to the hub routers only.

   By limiting changes only to the hub router the feature can be
   incrementally introduced without upgrading other routers in the
   network.  Specifically, the spoke sites do not need to be upgraded.

   It will be the responsibility of the hub router to mask the changes
   from the spoke as well as rest of the OSPF network such that the
   upgrading the network is simple from the point of interoperability
   and ease of deployment.

   The hub router can be a normal router and there is no requirement for
   the hub to be a area border router or an autonomous system boundary
   router.  Hub site is a sort of passive listener.  It is there to
   receive routes from the spoke site, and to just provide exit towards
   rest of the network.  A hub router SHOULD send a default or
   aggregated route towards the spoke and filters out all the
   information about rest of the network from the spoke.

4.  Link State Advertisement Filtering

   Routers establish adjacencies to flood topological information.  The
   flooding process ensures all the information is consistent across the
   entire area and ensures the LSAs are delivered to all routers within
   the same area.

   From the protocol prospective, topological information that is
   carried in the LSAs cannot be filtered, which it is essential to the
   loop free topology.

   The topological information learned, by all routers within an area
   build the consistent graph of the network connections.

   Vendors have implemented LSA filtering function on per neighbors
   basis specially for the purpose of scaling large full mesh
   environments.  ISIS had the concept of mesh groups to avoid n2
   flooding for a link failure and n3 flooding issue in case of node
   failure.  LSA filtering gives the capability to filter information
   since it was done in the past in meshed topologies it was very



Raza, et al.             Expires April 20, 2016                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             OSPF Stub Neighbors              October 2015


   crucial that planning is done to make sure inconsistency does not
   happen inside of database thus causing loops.

   Today prefix aggregation can only be achieved using summary type 3 or
   type 5 LSA.  There is no way to limit or mask intra area information.
   The hub and spoke topologies or Data center cases, it would be
   beneficial to mask intra area information as it would not cause any
   loop.

4.1.  Area Border Router(ABR) Hub Routers

   In the case of hub routers being area border routers, aggregation can
   be achieved at the Hub router level using current features.  The
   aggregation can be done by either using ranges or the default route
   injected as a type 3 LSA.

4.2.  Autonomous System Boundary Router (ASBR) Hub Routers

   In the case of hub routers being ASBR as well , aggregation can be
   achieved at the Hub router level using current features.  The
   aggregation can be done by either using ranges or the default route
   injected as a type 5 or type 7 LSA.

4.3.  Hub Routers which are neither ASBR or ABR

   Currently there is no possibility of aggregating prefixes sent to the
   spoke routers and severely impact the scale.

5.  Proposed Changes

5.1.  Stub neighbor overview

   We propose a new kind of adjacency for neighbors configured as stub.
   This adjacency will have a modified flooding content as the stub
   router only need a gateway through its neighbor.  The hub router will
   send limited information to the remote spoke router without
   overwhelming the host with area topology.  Another benefit is
   failures of the spoke node will be masked and would not impact the
   larger OSPF domain and other spoke nodes in the network.  Spoke nodes
   SHOULD be considered a stub node when the remote site needs to send
   only prefixes to rest of the OSPF network without being considered a
   transit node.

5.2.  Local Adjacency

   The local adjacency concept in only present on a Hub router and it
   applies to those neighbors configured as stub neighbors.  In this
   case, the hub router will maintain the adjacency to stub neighbors as



Raza, et al.             Expires April 20, 2016                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             OSPF Stub Neighbors              October 2015


   local only.  Local adjacencies are not advertised in the normal
   router LSA flooded to other non-stub neighbors, thus masking the
   local adjacencies or stub nodes.

   On the other hand, the hub router will flood a simplified router LSA
   to its local adjacencies so as to mask the area topology behind it.
   The Hub "Local" router LSA will contain only a p2p link to the stub
   neighbor when full adjacency is achieved and advertise one stub link
   with a configured range or the default prefix or both.  The Hub
   router will effectively hide all the area topology including the
   prefixes behind it.

   We are introducing a new type of default route with a local behavior.
   The current use of default route as type 3 or as type 5 cannot solve
   some of the use cases and more specifically in the Data center
   topologies.

   The spoke router will function as normal advertising all its
   connected prefixes to Hub router.

5.3.  Local Router LSA originated on the Hub Router

   The local Router LSA MUST contain at least 2 links.  One p2p link to
   the stub neighbor and a stub link to advertise the default prefix or
   a range defined per configuration.

   Hub router-LSA for any area with default prefix
   LS age = 0                     ;always true on origination
   Options =           ;
   LS type = 1                    ;indicates router-LSA
   Link State ID = 192.0.2.1     ;Hub Router ID
   Advertising Router = 192.0.2.1 ;Hub Router ID
   bit E = 0                      ;not an AS boundary router
   bit B = 0                      ;not area border router
   #links = 2
   Link ID = 192.0.2.2     ;Spoke Router ID.
   Link Data = 192.0.2.1   ;Hub IP interface to net
   Type = 1                ;connects to Point-to-point network
   # TOS metrics = 0
   metric = 1

   Link ID = 0.0.0.0    ;Default prefix
   Link Data = 0x0      ;Network mask
   Type = 3                ;connects to stub network
   # TOS metrics = 0
   metric = 100

              Hub router-LSA for any area with default prefix



Raza, et al.             Expires April 20, 2016                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             OSPF Stub Neighbors              October 2015


   Hub router-LSA for any area with configured ranges
   LS age = 0                     ;always true on origination
   Options =           ;
   LS type = 1                    ;indicates router-LSA
   Link State ID = 192.0.2.1     ;Hub Router ID
   Advertising Router = 192.0.2.1 ;Hub Router ID
   bit E = 0                      ;not an AS boundary router
   bit B = 0                      ;not area border router
   #links = 2
   Link ID = 192.0.2.2     ;Spoke Router ID.
   Link Data = 192.0.2.1   ;Hub interface to net
   Type = 1                ;connects to Point-to-point network
   # TOS metrics = 0
   metric = 1

   Link ID = 198.51.100.0    ;Aggregated prefix
   Link Data = 0xffffff00  ;Network mask
   Type = 3                ;connects to stub network
   # TOS metrics = 0
   metric = 100

            Hub router-LSA for any area with configured ranges


   Hub router-LSA for any area with configured ranges
   LS age = 0                     ;always true on origination
   Options =           ;
   LS type = 1                    ;indicates router-LSA
   Link State ID = 192.0.2.1     ;Hub Router ID
   Advertising Router = 192.0.2.1 ;Hub Router ID
   bit E = 0                      ;not an AS boundary router
   bit B = 0                      ;not area border router
   #links = 2
   Link ID = 192.0.2.2     ;Spoke Router ID.
   Link Data = 192.0.2.1   ;Hub interface to net
   Type = 1                ;connects to Point-to-point network
   # TOS metrics = 0
   metric = 1

   Link ID = 0.0.0.0    ;Default prefix
   Link Data = 0x0      ;Network mask
   Type = 3                ;connects to stub network
   # TOS metrics = 0
   metric = 100

            Hub router-LSA for any area with configured ranges





Raza, et al.             Expires April 20, 2016                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             OSPF Stub Neighbors              October 2015


   A spoke router is usually a leaf node or in some cases may be in a
   dual-homed topology with another hub.  In these cases, both Hub
   routers MUST be configured to view the spoke as a stub neighbor.  The
   Local Router LSA of a Hub will get flooded over the other ospf
   interfaces of a spoke router.  The Hub routers SHOULD ignore local
   router LSAs from other Hub routers flooded by a stub neighbor.



                               Rest of OSPF area
                                   |
                                   |
                                   |       Normal RTR LSA
                                   |<-- Normal link
                                   |
                                   |
                                  HUB
        (site-1)                 /     \                (site-2)
        HOSTS ------SPOKE1 ----+/       \+------- SPOKE2 ------ HOSTS
                             ^            ^
                             |            |
                          Stub Neighbor links

               Simplified HUB Local RTR LSA contains only p2p link
                and a stub link with default or configured range


                          Hub and Spoke Example 1

6.  Hub Router Stub Neighbor Support Discovery and misconfiguration
    detection

   To avoid the possibility of any routing loops and misconfigurations
   due to partial deployments, this draft defines a new OSPF Router
   Functional Capability known as a Hub Router Stub Neighbor Support
   Capability.  The value of this capability is a bit value to be
   assigned by IANA from OSPF Router Functional Capability Bits registry
   [I-D.ietf-ospf-rfc4970bis].

   The Auto Discovery via announcement of the Hub Router Stub Neighbor
   Support Functional Capability ensures that the detection of Hub
   Routers configured with the feature and advertising both a normal and
   a modified router LSA to a spoke.

   The deployment scenario assumes that all hubs will be upgraded with
   the new functionality and configure their link to their the spokes
   appropriately to prevent the modified router LSA of any hub to be
   flooded back over normal links.



Raza, et al.             Expires April 20, 2016                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             OSPF Stub Neighbors              October 2015


   A hub router receiving back its own modified local router LSA over
   one of its non-stub neighbors is an indication of misconfiguration
   and it SHOULD revert back to normal mode or log an error so the
   operation can intervene.

   If a hub router receive both a normal router LSA over a normal link
   and a modified router LSA with aggregation of a known Hub Router with
   stub neighbor support over a stub link then

   1.  It should acknowledge the LSA to form the adjacency but not flood
       it over its normal links

   2.  It MUST ignore the Local Router LSA and use the normal router LSA
       in its own SPF calculations

   Any hub router receiving back a modified local router LSA over one of
   its non-stub neighbors is an indication of misconfiguration and it
   SHOULD log an error so the operation can intervene.

                          Rest of OSPF Area
                         |                |
                      n  |      n         | n
                       HUB1 ----------- HUB2
                          |             /   |
   (site-1)               | s        s /    | s               (site-2)
   HOSTS ------SPOKE1 ----+           /     +------- SPOKE2 ------ HOSTS
                 |                   /
                 |                  /
                 |-----------------/

       (s) Stub neighbor links and (n) normal links.


                          Hub and Spoke Example 2

   The dual homed spoke1 will flood the Local RTR LSAs to the hub.  The
   hubs will not propagate the flooding of local rtr lsa on any normal
   links.  If one of the hubs is misconfigured then the originator can
   detect the misconfiguration if its receives the local router lsa over
   a normal link.

   Implementations are encouraged to provide a knob to manually override
   and enforcement the functionality in partial deployment scenarios for
   cases where the topology guarantees that the router supporting the
   stub neighbor will not cause routing loops.






Raza, et al.             Expires April 20, 2016                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             OSPF Stub Neighbors              October 2015


7.  Receiving and propagation of spoke routes

   Hub router upon receiving the route from the spoke SHOULD NOT treat
   that route as an intra area route.  For interoperability reason rest
   of the network does not have to have any knowledge of this new
   adjacency.

   A hub router that acts as an ABR just converts the entire stub
   neighbor routes as if they were part of an area.  Since in case of
   OSPF area, id is not carried and only the Hub router understands that
   it is connected to stub neighbor it can convert all the stub neighbor
   and treat them as part of single area.  Since the hub router is
   filtering all the LSA it is well aware of all the neighbors being
   part of the same area.

   Hub router will be able to summarize at the area boundary.  That way
   all the spokes could be summarized into a single route.

8.  Demand Circuit

   Sections 4.1, 4.2 described how to reduce the amount of information
   flooded and increase scalability.  The use of Demand Circuit
   capability can further enhance the scalability for some use cases.

   By making the spoke neighbors as demand circuit we will be able to
   suppress the refresh of all the routes we have learned from spoke
   sites.  Only incremental changes are flooded in the network.  Most
   networks have large number of spoke sites, in some large network
   there could be around 18-20K spoke sites each sending up to 3-5
   subnets.  Have to refresh these large number of LSAs can have
   unnecessary information flooded throughout large OSPF domain.

   Second type of spoke sites that are emerging are running over long
   distance wireless networks.  Sending periodic hellos for neighbor
   detection is not desired behavior in long distance wireless network.
   We do understand this can have convergence impact for the spoke that
   is dual homed.

9.  Benefits

   By making hub router define a stub neighbor we would be able to run
   OSPF in a true hub and spoke setup.  Where the router that connects
   to the network and has local routes that needs to be advertising to
   rest of the network does not have to participate in the larger OSPF
   topology.  Also the core network does not get destabilize due to
   flaps on the spoke churns causing impact on core convergence.





Raza, et al.             Expires April 20, 2016                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             OSPF Stub Neighbors              October 2015


10.  Security Considerations

   This memo does not introduce any new security concerns or take any
   directed action towards improving the security of OSPF deployments in
   general.  However, since all links in between OSPF neighbors do not
   add to router link states it could be considered as a security
   improvement by protecting an adjacency that can have larger network
   impact.

11.  IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations.

12.  Acknowledgments

   This document was produced using Marshall Rose's xml2rfc tool.

13.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-ospf-rfc4970bis]
              Lindem, A., Shen, N., Vasseur, J., Aggarwal, R., and S.
              Shaffer, "Extensions to OSPF for Advertising Optional
              Router Capabilities", draft-ietf-ospf-rfc4970bis-07 (work
              in progress), October 2015.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC2328]  Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", STD 54, RFC 2328,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2328, April 1998,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2328>.

Authors' Addresses

   Khalid Raza
   vIPtela
   1735 Technology Drive
   San Jose, CA  95110
   USA

   EMail: khalid.raza@viptela.com








Raza, et al.             Expires April 20, 2016                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft             OSPF Stub Neighbors              October 2015


   John Cavanaugh
   405Labs
   6285 Lusk Blvd
   San Diego, CA  92121
   USA

   EMail: John@405labs.com


   Andrew Kulawiak
   Morgan Stanley
   1 New York Plaza
   New York, NY  10004
   USA

   EMail: andrew.kulawiak@bankofamerica.com


   Padma Pillay-Esnault
   Cisco Systems
   510 McCarty Blvd
   Milpitas, CA  95035
   USA

   EMail: ppe@cisco.com


   Faraz Shamim
   Cisco Systems
   2200 President George Bush TPKE
   Richardson, TX  75082
   USA

   EMail: sshamim@cisco.com

















Raza, et al.             Expires April 20, 2016                [Page 12]
