

Internet Engineering Task Force                               N. Deason
Internet Draft                                        Ubiquity Software
draft-deason-sipping-soap-sessions-00.txt              Corporation Ltd.
23 April 2002                                                          
Expires: October 2002                                                  


                         SIP for SOAP Sessions


Status of this Memo
   
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.
   
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."
   
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.
   
1. Abstract
   
   This document describes how Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) can be
   used to create, modify and terminate sessions of Simple Object
   Access Protocol (SOAP) messages transported over IM Transport
   Protocol (IMTP).
   
   
2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2].
   
   
3. Introduction
   
   Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [3] is an application-layer
   control protocol for creating, modifying and terminating sessions.
   
   Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP) [4] is a lightweight XML
   protocol for the exchange of information in a decentralized,
   distributed environment. SOAP defines a XML vocabulary for encoding

Deason                                                               1 

                          SIP-SOAP-Sessions            April 23, 2002


   messages. SOAP messaging most commonly uses HTTP as a transport
   protocol. However, the definition of the SOAP XML vocabulary is
   transport independent.

   IM Transport Protocol (IMTP) [5] is a subset of SIP which only runs
   over reliable, congestion controlled transports, such as TCP or
   SCTP.
   
   This document describes how applications can be supported that use
   SIP to create, modify and terminate sessions of SOAP messages
   transported over IMTP.
   
   
4. Motivation for using SIP for SOAP sessions
   
   SIP and SOAP are clearly compatible technologies. Both are geared
   towards the delivery of services through the use of Internet
   technology. The architecture for the delivery of these services is
   recognized as being one of a highly distributed and decentralized
   nature [6]. Within such a framework SOAP is ideal for customizable
   exchanges of information. SIP meanwhile can provide the capability
   of component discovery, session duration, and control.
   
   The basic challenge behind transporting SOAP messages is delivery to
   the correct destination. The application layer routing provided by
   SIP is directly applicable to achieving this. The primary purpose of
   SIP is a rendezvous function to deliver a message from the sender to
   a recipient regardless of where either party resides. Significantly
   when the desired destination of a SOAP message is primarily a SIP
   entity, using HTTP for transport would require a mapping of the SIP
   to HTTP namespaces.
   
   In the past, to overcome the lack of such a namespace mapping, SIP
   itself has been contemplated as the transport protocol for SOAP
   messages. However, there are potential deficiencies to this
   approach. If SOAP message sessions are run over SIP, which is then
   in turn layered on top of UDP, issues arise with network congestion
   control, packet fragmentation and NAT/firewall traversal.
   
   Interestingly these are the same problems that have been encountered
   for instant messaging sessions over SIP. It is the author’s belief
   that the same proposed solution to that problem may be reapplied
   here. Instead of using SIP to transport SOAP messages it should be
   used to control SOAP message sessions, while IMTP [7] is used as the
   transport protocol.


5. Example Usage
   
   The following example shows a SIP INVITE message that could be sent
   from a SIP services platform, which wants to broker a call to a
   conferencing service. In doing this the service platform creates a
   multi-modal session with the conference bridge. This session

Deason                                                               2 

                          SIP-SOAP-Sessions            April 23, 2002


   consists of an audio session between the bridge and the caller, plus
   a SOAP over IMTP session for control and event reporting between the
   bridge and the services platform.
   

    INVITE sip:conf83245@bridge.ubiquity.net SIP/2.0
    To: sip:sales_conference@ubiquity.net
    From: 8dsf4i13@asb.ubiquity.net
    Call-ID: fd835c@195.217.169.6
    Via: SIP/2.0/TCP 195.217.169.6:5060
    CSeq: 1 INVITE
    Content-Type: application/sdp
    Content-Length: ...
      
      
    v=0
    o=servicebroker 2890844526 2890842807 IN IP4 asb.ubiquity.net
    s=Conference Service
    t=0 0
    m=audio 5004 RTP/AVP 0
    c=IN IP4 131.160.1.112
    a=rtpmap:0 PCMU/8000
    m=message 49172 IMTP/TCP application/soap+xml
    c=IN IP4 asb.ubiquity.net
    a=direction:both
    a=wsdl:http://schemas.ubiquity.net/conferencecontrol.wsdl
   
   

6. Security Considerations
   
   Using SIP for SOAP sessions does not require any new security
   capabilities to be added to SIP. It is expected that security
   mechanisms already described by SIP will be of value for reuse when
   controlling SOAP sessions.
   
   
7. Future Considerations
   
   This draft is intended as an informational piece of work for
   discussion in the SIP community. Any future path for it within the
   IETF is left undetermined. Opinions are solicited from the community
   to the author.
   
   
8. References

   1  S. Bradner, "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996.
   
   2  S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997


Deason                                                               3 

                          SIP-SOAP-Sessions            April 23, 2002



   
   3  M. Handley, H. Schulzrinne, E. Schooler, and J. Rosenberg, "SIP:
      Session Initiation Protocol" Request for Comments (Proposed
      Standard) 2543, Internet Engineering Task Force, Mar. 1999
   
   4  World Wide Web Consortium, "Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP)
      1.1", May 2000, <http://www.w3.org/TR/SOAP/>.
   
   5  J. Rosenberg, C. Huitema, R. Osborne, A. Houri, “A Proposal for
      IM Transport”, Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force,
      November 2001, Work in progress.
   
   6  J. Rosenberg, P. Mataga, H. Schulzrinne, “An Application Server
      Component Architecture for SIP”, Internet Draft, Internet
      Engineering Task Force, March 2001, Work in progress.

   
9. Author's Addresses
   
   Neil Deason
   Ubiquity Software Corporation
   Ubiquity House
   Langstone Park
   Newport
   United Kingdom
   NP18 2LH
   Phone: +44 1633 765 600
   Email: ndeason@ubiquity.net

























Deason                                                               4 
