

Internet Engineering Task Force					    PINT WG
INTERNET-DRAFT						    Scott Petrack
draft-ietf-pint-basics-00.txt		 	 VocalTec Communications Ltd.
21st Nov 1997			 	 	   petrack@vocaltec.com
Expires: 21st May 1997


				IP Access to PSTN Services:
	Basic Service Requirements, Definitions, and Architecture


Status of this Memo

This document is an Internet-Draft. Internet-Drafts are working 
documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and 
its working groups. Note that other groups may also distribute working 
documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
and may be  updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material 
or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the 
``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow 
Directories on   ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe), 
munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US  East  Coast), or 
ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

Distribution of this document is not limited.

This document is intended for the PSTN-Internet Interworking (PINT) 
working group of the Internet Engineering Task Force. Comments are 
solicited and should be addressed to the working group's mailing list at 
pint@lists.research.bell-labs.com and/or the author at 
petrack@vocaltec.com


					Abstract

This document specifies those PSTN services which will be accessible 
from the Internet via the PINT protocols. It defines these services in 
terms of a simple set of architectural elements and atomic services. It 
gives some concrete examples of these services, and indicates how to 
build the examples out of the presented atomic services.


1.  Introduction

The need to invoke and access a certain number of PSTN services from the 
Internet has been identified by many different groups (public and 
private network operators, call centre service providers, equipment 
vendors, etc.). Obviously, before any protocol or its details can be 
identified as suitable for the purpose, we must specify exactly which 
PSTN services are to made accessible. This draft defines some simple 
"service entities" and "atomic services" in terms of which we can 
specify those services. After defining these architectural elements, we 
verify that they are sufficient to define the example services that have 
been agreed upon as test cases within the PINT working group. The set of 
PSTN services that can be obtained from this architecture is what we 
call "the PINT Services." Finally, we state some security requirements 
for these new services. 


Internet Engineering Task Force (PINT WG) 		    Scott Petrack 
draft-ietf-pint-basics-00.txt				   petrack@vocaltec.com


Because the PINT working group is attended by members of non-
intersecting language groups, it is important to define two key terms 
used within this draft:

PSTN - "Public Switched Telephone Network." The term "PSTN" is used in 
this document interchangeably with "GSTN" (general switched telephone 
network) or "SCN" (switched circuit network). It refers to any switched 
voice and/or voice-band data Telephone Network of any type anywhere in 
the world. Thus it includes the ISDN and the GSM network, the various 
private PBX networks in existence, etc. (As such, it means something 
different from probably any other document which uses the term. PSTN is 
absolutely the wrong term, but unfortunately it appears the name of the 
working group. GINT, SINT, or TINT apparently didn't cut it).

Internet - The term as used here refers to any collection of IP 
networks, including but not limited to the full Internet. It is useful 
to make explicit that the discussion here applies equally well to 
private intranet access to PINT services. The distinctions between 
"internet," "Internet," and "intranet" are very popular among some 
members of the PINT community, but are quite meaningless for the 
purposes of this draft.

So the term "Internet" on the one hand and "PSTN" (or "GSTN") on the 
other are meant to be basically comparable. The first means here "some 
kind of IP network" and the second means "some kind of telephone 
network."


2.  Background

Initial discussions in PINT identified the following rather specific 
services as requiring access from the Internet:

a.  "request to call" - a request sent from an Client to a Server, which 
causes phone A to call phone B.
b.  "request to fax" - a request sent from a Client to a Server, which 
causes a fax to be sent to fax machine B. The content of the fax would 
be identified (possibly included) in the request.
c.  "voice access to web content" - a request sent from a Client to a 
Server, which causes a phone call to be made to phone B, and a certain 
"web content" to be read out to phone B.
d.  "request to conference call" - a request sent from a Client to a 
Server, which causes a conference call to be set up and a certain number 
of phones to ring, to invite the humans to join the conference.
e.  "request to transfer" - a request sent from a Client to a Server, 
which causes (at least) one of the phones to be disconnected from the 
call and (at least) one new phone to be joined to the call.
f.  "request to add new endpoint" - a request sent from a Client to a 
Server, which causes a new phone to be added to the call.

In each request it should be possible to specify a time for the service 
to be invoked, and in each request it should be possible to specify a 
party C to whom a bill can be sent for the service (with some reasonable 
expectation that payment will result).

It should be noted that within the current PINT list, there seems to be 
universal agreement really only about the first three services listed 
above (a,b, and c). There does seem to be rough consensus that the 



Internet Engineering Task Force (PINT WG) 		    Scott Petrack 
draft-ietf-pint-basics-00.txt				   petrack@vocaltec.com


latter three are within PINT's scope as well, however. The definitions 
of service elements and architecture outlined in this draft enable all 
six services listed above. If it is desired to exclude the latter three 
services, we shall see that this is very easy to do.

It should also be noted that although much of the original PINT 
discussion was framed in terms of Intelligent Networking (IN), there is 
wide agreement that the above services make sense in almost any GSTN 
environment, regardless of the availability of IN.

The rest of this draft describes a simple set of natural GSTN service 
elements that can be used to build the six services above, and which can 
be invoked via a request from an IP client to an IP host.


3.  Service Entities for PINT Services

There are five basic building blocks, which we call "service entities," 
from which PINT services can be built: Terminals, Calls, PINT clients, 
PINT Servers, and Billable Parties. They are defined as follows:

3.1  Terminals
	A Terminal is a GSTN terminal, such as phone, a fax machine, a 
voicemail machine, etc. Terminals have identifiers, which may be (but 
are not limited to) E.164 numbers. These identifiers may be globally 
unique, or only unique within some well defined context. A Terminal is 
in principle callable and can in principal make calls.

3.2  Calls
	A Call is a collection of GSTN resources (they can be internal to 
the GSTN and/or within Terminals). A simple point-to-point Call might 
consist of some resources within two Terminals and within the switches 
in between them. Calls have identifiers. For the moment the form of 
these identifiers is left unspecified, although it is required that it 
can be done in some globally consistent way.

3.3 PINT Clients and Servers
	A PINT Client sends a service request to a PINT Server and 
receives a service reply from the PINT Server. 

3.4 Billable Party
	A Billable Party has an identifier and can accept or reject a Bill 
for a particular PINT service. The Bill is sent by a PINT Server to one 
or more Billable Party(ies). It is not yet decided if the the billing 
protocol is within the scope of PINT. But it is within the scope of PINT 
that a service request can contain a request that a Bill with some 
specified content can be sent to a specified Billable Party, and also 
that the service reply can contain secure notification of the acceptance 
or rejection of the bill.


4. Atomic Services and Compound Services

The service entities together act to provide PINT services. A PINT 
service is the result of a service request from a PINT client to a PINT 
Server. The service requests can be for a single atomic service, or for 
a combination of atomic services, called a compound service. The atomic 
service requests are one of the following:





Internet Engineering Task Force (PINT WG) 		    Scott Petrack 
draft-ietf-pint-basics-00.txt				   petrack@vocaltec.com


4.4.1 Create a Call
	The Client requests the Server to create a Call.
4.4.2 Destroy a Call
	The Client requests the Server to tear down a Call.
4.4.3 Connect a Terminal to a Call
	The Client requests the Server to connect a specified Terminal to 
a specified Call.
4.4.4 Disconnect a Terminal to a Call
	The Client requests the Server to disconnect a specified Terminal 
from a specified Call.
4.4.5 Play some file data to a connected Terminal
	The Client requests the Server to play some file data of a given 
"type" into a Terminal that is connected to a particular Call. The file 
data might be included in the service request, or it might be merely 
identified (to be retrieved via some other means). Examples of types of 
file data might be type "fax" or type "text". Of course the precise 
meaning of "play" depends on the particular type of file data.
4.4.6 Check Status of a Request, Call, or Terminal
	The Client requests the Server to return information about the 
status of a particular Request, Call, or Terminal. The Check Status 
requests may ask for an immediate reply, or for the reply to be delayed 
until the relevant Request or Call is completed or an error occurs.
4.4.7 Send a Bill
	The Client requests the Server to send a bill to a Billable Party 
for one of the atomic or compound services.

Each service request may be for service at a specified later time. In 
every case the request must contain the information about where to send 
the reply, whether or not the request is to be executed immediately or 
in the future.

A compound service is built up by combining atomic services. There are 
three possibilities with respect to the time relations of the atomic 
services within the compound service: it may be that the atomic services 
are specified to run serially (so that one must complete before the next 
can begin), or it may be that only the start of each atomic service is 
specified to run serially (so that one must begin before the next can 
begin), or there may be no time relationship at all between the atomic 
services. 

Sending a Bill is one of the atomic services. This is how a PINT client 
asks the PINT Server to send a bill to a particular Billable Party. This 
may be the only service requested (in which case the request is one 
purely to send a bill to someone), or it may be one of several atomic 
services requested in the query (for example in a request to perform 
some service and send a bill for the service performed to a Billable 
Party). It is perfectly reasonable to send several requests for atomic 
billing services within a single service request.


5. Realisation of the Example Services of Section 2

It is not hard to define the particular example services of section 2 as 
compound services. For example, the point-to-point "request to call" 
service is simply a request to the PINT Server to create a Call, connect 
Terminals A and B to the Call, and send a bill to Billable Party C. But 
even in this simple case there is a point which requires comment:




Internet Engineering Task Force (PINT WG) 		    Scott Petrack 
draft-ietf-pint-basics-00.txt				   petrack@vocaltec.com


The original example service definition of section 2 had "phone A call 
phone B." The service that we define in the previous paragraph is 
symmetric between phone A and phone B - these two Terminals are 
"connected to a Call." It is not clear who is calling whom. Of course, 
the service required can be made more precise by specifying that the 
compound service is built up from the atomic elements by executing them 
serially: first the Call is created, then phone A is connected, then 
phone B is connected, then a bill is sent. (Perhaps various audio prompt 
file data are played into phones A and/or B at the appropriate times). 

During some previous PINT discussions, a distinction was drawn between 
"third party service control" and "sending an invitation to a proxy 
server acting on behalf of a Terminal." The architecture presented here 
is really an example of "third party service control" - the PINT Server 
is connecting the two Terminals A and B, rather than a request being 
sent to a proxy server for Terminal A to call Terminal B. It seems that 
in order to include all the example scenarios in a single framework, it 
is more natural to think in terms of third party service control. In 
practise, the difference is more pedantic than really important. 

Realising the other examples of section 2 as compound services is 
equally straightforward.


6. Security Considerations and Requirements

There are two or more different IP hosts involved in each invocation of 
a PINT request: a PINT client, a PINT Server, and zero or more Billable 
Parties. It is required that each of these hosts can authenticate itself 
to another, independently of the others. It is required that each 
message exchange can be private and/or non-repudiatable. The process by 
which two entities exchange keys or secrets in order to ensure 
authentication, privacy, and non-repudiation, are beyond the scope of 
the PINT service architecture or protocols.


7. Acknowledgements

The author would like to acknowledge input from the PINT mailing list as 
a major source of ideas which appear in this draft. The archive of the 
PINT mailing list can be found at the following URL: http://www.bell-
labs.com/mailing-lists/pint/. In particular, postings of Claudio 
Catania, Igor Faynberg, Dave Oran, Lawrence Conroy, Wilhelm Wimmreuter 
particularly informed parts of the discussion.

Internet Engineering Task Force					    PINT WG
INTERNET-DRAFT							    Scott Petrack
draft-ietf-pint-basics-00.txt		 	 VocalTec Communications Ltd.
21st Nov 1997				 	 	   petrack@vocaltec.com
Expires: 21st May 1997

