


Network Working Group                                   O. Kolkman (Ed.)
Internet-Draft                                                       IAB
Intended status: Informational                            April 22, 2009
Expires: October 24, 2009


                      RFC Editor Model (Version 1)
                     draft-iab-rfc-editor-model-05

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 24, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   The RFC Editor performs a number of functions that may be carried out
   by various persons or entities.  The RFC Editor model presented in
   this document divides the responsibilities for the RFC Series into



Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires October 24, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)            April 2009


   four functions: The RFC Series Editor, the Independent Submission
   Editor, RFC Production Center, and the RFC Publisher.  It also
   introduces the RFC Series Advicory group and an (optional)
   Independent Stream Editorial Board.  The model outlined here is
   intended to increase flexibility and operational support options,
   provide for the orderly succession of the RFC Editor, and ensure the
   continuity of the RFC series, while maintaining RFC quality,
   maintaining timely processing, ensuring document accessibility,
   reducing costs, and increasing cost transparency.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  IAOC Implementation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Expenses for the RFC Editor  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  RFC Editor Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  RFC Series Editor  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  Independent Submission Editor  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.3.  RFC Production Center  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.4.  RFC Publisher  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.  Committees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     4.1.  RFC Series Advisory Group (RSAG) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       4.1.1.  Charter  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       4.1.2.  membership . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       4.1.3.  The RSE, RSAG, IAB, and IAOC roles in case of
               disputes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.2.  Independent Stream Editorial Board . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   5.  IANA considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   7.  Acknowledgements Section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Appendix A.  IAB selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     A.1.  Ad-hoc advisory committee  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       A.1.1.  Ad-Hoc Advisory Committee Charter  . . . . . . . . . . 15
     A.2.  The IAB Selection Process of an RFC Series Editor
           and/or an Independent Stream Editor  . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       A.2.1.  Nominations and Eligibility  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       A.2.2.  Selection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       A.2.3.  Care of Personal Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       A.2.4.  Term of Office and Selection Time Frame  . . . . . . . 16
   Appendix B.  Internet Draft editing details  . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     B.1.  Section 00->01 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     B.2.  Section 01->02 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     B.3.  Section 02->03 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     B.4.  section 03->04 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     B.5.  section 04->05 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18



Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires October 24, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)            April 2009


1.  Introduction

   The IAB, on behalf of the Internet technical community, is concerned
   with ensuring the continuity of the RFC Series, orderly RFC Editor
   succession, maintaining RFC quality, and RFC document accessibility.
   The IAB is also sensitive to the concerns of the IAOC about providing
   the necessary services in a cost effective and efficient manner.

   The definition of the RFC series is described in RFC 4844 [1].
   Section 3.1 defines "RFC Editor":


 | 3.1. RFC Editor
 |
 |  Originally, there was a single person acting as editor of the RFC
 |  Series (the RFC Editor).  The task has grown, and the work now
 |  requires the organized activity of several experts, so there are RFC
 |  Editors, or an RFC Editor organization.  In time, there may be
 |  multiple organizations working together to undertake the work
 |  required by the RFC Series.  For simplicity's sake, and without
 |  attempting to predict how the role might be subdivided among them,
 |  this document refers to this collection of experts and organizations
 |  as the "RFC Editor".
 |
 |  The RFC Editor is an expert technical editor and series editor,
 |  acting to support the mission of the RFC Series.  As such, the RFC
 |  Editor is the implementer handling the editorial management of the
 |  RFC Series, in accordance with the defined processes.  In addition,
 |  the RFC Editor is expected to be the expert and prime mover in
 |  discussions about policies for editing, publishing, and archiving
 |  RFCs.

   RFC 4844 makes no attempt to explore the internal organization of the
   RFC Editor.  However, RFC 4844 envisions changes in the RFC Editor
   organizational structure.  In discussion with the Internet community,
   the IAB considered changes that increase flexibility and operational
   support options, provides for the orderly succession of the RFC
   Editor, and ensures the continuity of the RFC series, while
   maintaining RFC quality, maintaining timely processing, ensuring
   document accessibility, reducing costs, and increasing cost
   transparency.  The model set forth below is the result of those
   discussions, and examines the internal organization of the RFC
   Editor, while remaining consistent with RFC 4844.

   Note that RFC 4844 uses the term "RFC Editor function" or "RFC
   Editor" as the collective set of responsibilities for which this memo
   provides a model for internal organization.  This memo introduces the
   term "RFC Series Editor" or "Series Editor" for one of the



Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires October 24, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)            April 2009


   organizational components.

   The IAB approved the the initial version of this RFC Editor model on
   October 1, 2008, the model has received clarifications since.  It
   should be noted that the publication of the document as an RFC does
   not cast the model in stone, as the primary purpose of this document,
   throughout the publication procession, is to encourage normal
   community review in order to ascertain consensus to work to this
   model as a first step.  The document, and the resulting structures,
   will be modified as needed through normal procedures.  The IAB will
   continue to monitor discussions within the community about potential
   adjustments to the RFC Editor model and recognizes that the process
   described in this document, may need to be adjusted to align with any
   changes that result from such discussions, hence the version number
   in the title.

2.  IAOC Implementation

   The model is constructed in such a way that it allows for all these
   functions to be implemented jointly or under separate contractual
   arrangements.  In fact, a bidder could put together a proposal that
   includes one or more subcontractors.  The reporting structure will
   depend on the manner that the contracts are awarded, and they are
   subject to change over time.  As a result, the model describes only
   responsibilities, procedures, and process.  The exact implementation
   is a responsibility of the IAOC.

2.1.  Expenses for the RFC Editor

   The expenses discussed in this document are not new expenses.  They
   are part of the IASA budget.  Today, these expenses are part of the
   RFC Editor contract with ISI.

3.  RFC Editor Model

   The RFC Editor model divides the responsibilities for the RFC Series
   into the following components:

   o  RFC Series Editor

   o  Independent Submission Editor

   o  RFC Production Center

   o  RFC Publisher

   The RFC Series Production and Process under this structure is
   schematically represented by the figure below.



Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires October 24, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)            April 2009


              ------     -----     ------     ---------
   Stream    |      |   |     |   |      |   |Community|
   Pro-      | IETF |   | IAB |   | IRTF |   |   at    |
   ducers    |      |   |     |   |      |   |  Large  |
              --^---     --^--     ---^--     ----^----
                |          |          |           |
                |          |          |           |             -------
                |          |          |           |            | Indep.|
              --v---    ---v---    ---v--     ----v------      | Stream|
   Stream    |      |   |     |   |      |   |Independent|     | Edi-  |
   Appro-    | IESG |   | IAB |   | IRSG |   |  Stream   |.....| torial|
   vers      |      |   |     |   |      |   |  Editor   |     | Board |
              ----^-    ---^---   ----^---    ----^------       -------
                  |        |          |           |
                  |        |          |           |             -------
                  |        |          |           |            | RFC   |
    ------      --v--------v----------v-----------v-----       | Series|
   |      |    |                                        |      | Adv.  |
   | IANA | <->|        RFC Production Center           <---.  | Group |
   |      |    |                                        |   |   -------
    ------      -----------------^----------------------    |     |
                                 |                          |     |
                                 |                    ------v-------
                           ------v---------          |              |
                          |                |         |  RFC Series  |
                          |    Publisher   |<------->|    Editor    |
                          |                |         |              |
                           ----------------           --------------

   In this model the RFC Series Editor (RSE or Series Editor) will
   exercise executive-level management over many of the activities of
   the RFC Publisher and the RFC Production Center (which can be seen as
   back office functions) and will be the entity that:

   o  faces the community;

   o  works with the IAOC for contractual responsibilities;

   o  and in collaboration with the RFC Series Advisory Group,
      identifies and leads community discussion of important issues and
      opportunities facing the RFC Series;

   while the IAB and IAOC maintain their chartered responsibility.  More
   details about the collaboration with the RSAG and the IAB
   responsibilities can be found in Section 4.1.

   The RSE does not have the authority to hire or fire RFC Editor
   contractors or personnel.



Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires October 24, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)            April 2009


3.1.  RFC Series Editor

   The RFC Series Editor, is an individual who may have assistants and
   who will regularly be provided support from an advisory group (see
   Section 4.1).  The RSE is responsible for:

   1.  Identifying appropriate steps for RFC Series continuity

   2.  Exercising executive-level management over the implementation of
       policies, processes and procedures established to ensure the
       quality and consistency for the RFC Series.  The RFC Series
       Editor will work with the RSAG, and, where appropriate, the IAB
       and IAOC to develop, new policy and see that contractual
       agreements are met.

   3.  Taking proposed changes to the community, and working with the
       IAB so that the IAB can ensure that there is sufficient community
       review before significant policies or policy changes are adopted.

   4.  Coordinating with IAB and/or IAOC, and together with the IAB
       and/or IAOC participating in reviews of the RFC Publisher, RFC
       Publication Center, and Independent Stream Editor functions to
       ensure the above mentioned continuity

   5.  Developing, maintaining, and publishing the RFC Style Manual
       publication for use by authors, editors, and the RFC publisher

   6.  Managing the RFC errata process

   7.  Liaising with the IAB

   8.  Overseeing consistency of RFCs with the RFC Series and RFC Style
       Manual

   There are many potential issues with respect to RFC Series
   continuity.  To name a few: Look and feel of the series, indexing
   methodologies, accessibility of the publications, IPR and copyright
   issues, and formatting issues.  After identifying the appropriate
   steps to address such issues, the implementation of those steps
   resides mostly with the RFC production and publishing functions.
   Since the IAOC maintains oversight of the implementation, the Series
   Editor is expected to be invited and participate in reviews of that
   implementation.

   The RFC Series Editor is a senior technology professional with the
   following qualifications:





Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires October 24, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)            April 2009


   1.  Strong understanding of the IETF process

   2.  Good understanding of the English language and technical
       terminology related to the Internet

   3.  Good communication skills

   4.  Experience with editorial processes

   5.  Independent worker

   6.  Experience as an RFC author desired

   There are alternative selection methods for selecting the individual
   to serve as the RFC Series Editor:

   The first alternative involves a Request for Proposal (RFP) process
   run by the IAOC.  The IAOC would seek a person with the listed
   qualifications in a broadly distributed RFP.  The winner would be
   selected by the IAOC in consultation with the IAB, and then, the IAOC
   would contract for the services.  Contract terms, including length of
   contract, extensions and renewals, shall be as provided in the RFP.
   The opportunity to bid shall be broadly available.  Fees and expenses
   to support the administrative operation of the RFC Series Editor
   would be part of the awarded contract and be part of the IASA budget.

   The second alternative involves a nomination and confirmation
   process.  Candidates are nominated, and then an individual with the
   listed qualifications is selected by the Internet community and
   confirmed by the IAB.  An approach similar to the one used by the IAB
   to select an IAOC member every other year as described in Appendix A
   will be used.  A stipend and expenses to support the administrative
   operation of the RFC Series Editor selected in this manner would be
   part of the IASA budget.

   Based on an Request for Information (RFI) issued by the IAOC in
   December 2008 the IAOC recommended that the second alternative is
   choosen for the 2009-2010 selection cycle.

3.2.  Independent Submission Editor

   The Independent Submission Editor is an individual who may have
   assistants and who is responsible for:

   1.  Maintaining technical quality of the Independent stream

   2.  Independent Submissions approval and processing




Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires October 24, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)            April 2009


   3.  Forwarding RFCs in the Independent Stream to the RFC Production
       Center

   4.  Independent Submissions RFC errata review and approval

   The Independent Submission Editor is a senior position for which the
   following qualifications are desired:

   1.  Technical competence, i.e. broad technical experience and
       perspective across the whole range of Internet technologies and
       applications, and specifically, the ability to work effectively
       with portions of that spectrum in which no personal expertise
       exists.

   2.  Thorough familiarity with the RFC series

   3.  An ability to assess the technical competence of potential
       Editorial Board members

   4.  Good standing in the technical community, in and beyond the IETF

   5.  Demonstrated Editorial skills and good command of the English
       language

   The Independent Submission Editor may seek support from an advisory
   board (see Section 4.2) and may form a team to perform the activities
   needed to fulfill their responsibilities.

   The individual with the listed qualifications will be selected by the
   community and confirmed by the IAB.  An approach similar to the one
   used by the IAB to select an IAOC member every other year as
   described in Appendix A should be used.  A stipend and expenses to
   support the administrative operation of the Independent Submission
   Editor selected in this manner will be evaluated.  The IAB considers
   maintaining the Independent stream within the RFC Series part of the
   IAB's supported activities, and will include these expenses in its
   IASA-supported budget.

3.3.  RFC Production Center

   RFC Production is performed by a paid contractor, and the contractor
   responsibilities include:

   1.   Editing inputs from all RFC streams to comply with the RFC Style
        Manual

   2.   Creating records of edits performed on documents




Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires October 24, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)            April 2009


   3.   Identifying where editorial changes might have technical impact
        and seek necessary clarification.

   4.   Engaging in dialogue with authors, document shepherds, IANA,
        and/or stream dependent contacts when clarification is needed.

   5.   Creating records of dialogue with documents authors

   6.   Requesting advice from the RFC Series Editor as needed

   7.   Providing suggestions to the RFC Series Editor as needed

   8.   Coordinating with IANA to perform protocol parameter registry
        actions

   9.   Assigning of RFC number

   10.  Establishing publication readiness of each document through
        communication with the authors, document shepherds, IANA and/or
        stream dependent contacts, and if needed with the RFC Series
        Editor.

   11.  Forwarding ready-to-publish documents to the RFC Publisher

   12.  Forwarding records of edits and author dialogue to RFC Publisher
        so these can be preserved

   13.  Liaising with IESG and IAB

   The RFC Production Center contractor is to be selected by the IAOC
   through an RFP process, possibly as part of the same contract as the
   RFC Series Editor.  The IAOC would seek a bidder who, among other
   things, is able to provide a professional, quality, timely, and cost
   effective service against the established style and production
   guidelines.  Contract terms, including length of contract, extensions
   and renewals, shall be as defined in an RFP.  The opportunity to bid
   shall be broadly available.

3.4.  RFC Publisher

   The RFC Publisher responsibilities include:

   1.  Announce and provide on-line access to RFCs

   2.  Provide on-line system to submit RFC Errata

   3.  Provide on-line access to approved RFC Errata




Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires October 24, 2009                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)            April 2009


   4.  Provide backups

   5.  Provide storage and preservation of records

   6.  Authenticate RFCs for legal proceedings

   Implementation of the RFC Publisher function can be pursued in two
   different ways.  The choice between these alternatives will be based
   on an RFI issued by the IAOC in December 2009.

   The first alternative is to modify the IETF Secretariat contract to
   include these services.  Expenses to support these services would be
   part of the revised contract.

   The second alternative is a separate vendor selected by the IAOC
   through an RFP process, possibly as part of the same contract as the
   RFC Series Editor.  Expenses to support service would be part of the
   awarded contract.

4.  Committees

4.1.  RFC Series Advisory Group (RSAG)

4.1.1.  Charter

   The purpose of the RFC Series Advisory Group (RSAG) is to provide
   expert, informed guidance (chiefly, to the RSE) in matters affecting
   the RFC Series operation and development.  Such matters include, but
   are not limited to, issues in operation of the RFC model components,
   and consideration of additional RFC streams, to give a sense of the
   range of topics covered.

   The RSAG is chartered by the IAB.  As such, it operates independently
   of the IAB to fulfill that charter, and provides periodic reports to
   the IAB via the RSE.

   The group provides guidance to the RSE, who in turn addresses
   immediate operational issues or opportunities with the ISE,
   Production House, or Publisher.  In cases where these issues have
   contractual side-effects the RSE provides guidance to the IAD.  The
   RSAG also serves to provide advice to the RSE on longer-term, larger-
   scale developments for the RFC Series.  This informs the proposals
   the RSE takes to the community for discussion, and the IAD/IAOC as
   proposals for implementation.

   The RSAG will assist the RSE in identifying and leading community
   discussion of important issues and opportunities facing the RFC
   Series.  The IAB retains its oversight role and is responsible for



Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires October 24, 2009               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)            April 2009


   ensuring that adequate community discussion has been held on any such
   significant topics.

4.1.2.  membership

   The RSAG full members are all at large members, selected for their
   experience and interest in the RFC Series, to provide consistency and
   constancy of the RFC Series interpretation over time; the members do
   not represent a particular RFC stream or any organizations.  The RSAG
   members are proposed by the Series Editor in consultation with the
   sitting RSAG members, and then confirmed and formally appointed by
   the IAB.  In addition to these full members, each RFC stream will
   appoint a liaison to the RSAG to provide context specific to their
   stream.  Initially there will be no IAOC or IAB liaison for their
   oversight role, however as experience is gained the IAOC, IAB, or
   RSAG may request for such.  There is no requirement or expectation
   that RSAG members will be IAB members.

   The RSAG does not select or appoint the RSE, or any other component
   of the RFC Editor model, although it acts as an important resource
   for informing any selection process.

   It is envisioned that the RSAG will be composed of 6 appointed full
   members serving staggered 3 year terms, plus the RSE.  The full
   members will serve at the pleasure of the IAB -- appointed by the
   IAB, and if necessary, removed by the IAB.

   In order to provide continuity and to assist with a smooth transition
   of the RFC Editor function, the members of the existing RFC Editor
   Editorial Board who are willing to do so are asked to serve as an
   interim RSAG, effective as of the time of approval of this document.
   Within one year from the time the RFC Editor function transitions to
   the new model and after consideration of the operation of the new
   model in practice, the interim RSAG and RSE will formulate a
   recommendation to the IAB about the regular composition and selection
   process for the permanent RSAG.

4.1.3.  The RSE, RSAG, IAB, and IAOC roles in case of disputes

   If during the execution of their activities, a dispute arises over a
   policy implementation decision made by one of the four entities in
   the model, then the party having the conflict should first request a
   reconsideration of the decision.  If that reconsideration is not
   satisfactory to the party, then the matter can be brought to the
   Series Editor for a decision.  All parties should work in a good
   faith effort to resolve the situation to a mutually agreeable result.
   If the Series Editor decision is not satisfactory, then the the
   matter must be registered with the RFC Series Advisory Group.  The



Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires October 24, 2009               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)            April 2009


   RSAG may choose to offer advice to the RSE.  While the Series Editor
   may be requested to wait with a final decision until the RSAG's
   advice is formulated, the Series Editor's decision is final.

   Disputes registered with the RSAG and subsequent advice will need to
   be made available publicly and reported to the IAB in its oversight
   capacity.

   The discussion of these disputes may inform future changes to Series
   policies

   The RSE's decision is limited to evaluation of whether current
   policies are appropriately implemented in the decision.  In
   particular, it should be noted that decisions about the technical
   content of individual documents are not within the purview of the
   Series Editor, but are the exclusive domain of the stream approvers,
   such as the IESG and the Independent Submission Editor.

   In case a dispute has immediate or future contractual consequences,
   the Series Editor report to the IAOC and, when available, deliver the
   RSAG's advice.  The IAD, under IAOC's guidance has the responsibility
   to resolve contractual issues whereby the Series Editor's report
   should be leading.

   It should be noted that decisions about the technical content of
   individual documents are not within the purview of the Series Editor,
   but are the exclusive domain of the stream approvers, such as the
   IESG and the Independent Submission Editor.

4.2.  Independent Stream Editorial Board

   Today the RFC Editor is supported by an Editorial Board for the
   review of Independent stream documents.  This board is expected to
   evolve in what we will call the Independent Stream Editorial Board.
   This Editorial Board will exist at the pleasure of the ISE, and the
   members serve at the pleasure of the ISE.  The existence of this
   board is simply noted within this model, and additional discussion of
   such considered out of scope of this document.

5.  IANA considerations

   This document defines several functions within the overall RFC Editor
   structure, and it places the responsibility for coordination of
   registry value assignments with the RFC Production Center.  The IAOC
   will facilitate the establishment of the relationship between the RFC
   Production Center and IANA.

   This document does not create a new registry nor does it register any



Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires October 24, 2009               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)            April 2009


   values in existing registries, and no IANA action is required.

6.  Security considerations

   The same security considerations as those in RFC 4844 apply: The
   processes for the publication of documents must prevent the
   introduction of unapproved changes.  Since the RFC Editor maintains
   the index of publications, sufficient security must be in place to
   prevent these published documents from being changed by external
   parties.  The archive of RFC documents, any source documents needed
   to recreate the RFC documents, and any associated original documents
   (such as lists of errata, tools, and, for some early items, non-
   machine readable originals) need to be secured against failure of the
   storage medium and other similar disasters.

   The IAOC should take these security considerations into account
   during the implementation of this RFC Editor model.

7.  Acknowledgements Section

   The RFC Editor model was conceived and discussed in hallways and on
   mail lists.  The first iteration of the text on which this document
   is based was first drafted by Leslie Daigle, Russ Housley, and Ray
   Pelletier.  In addition to the members of the IAOC and IAB, major and
   minor contributions were made by (in alphabetical order): Bob Braden,
   Brian Carpenter, Sandy Ginoza, Alice Hagens, Joel M. Halpern, Paul
   Hoffman, John Klensin, Subramanian Moonesamy, and Jim Schaad.

   The IAOC members at the time the RFC Editor model was approved were
   (in alphabetical order): Fred Baker, Bob Hinden, Russ Housley, Ole
   Jacobsen, Ed Juskevicius, Olaf Kolkman, Ray Pelletier (non-voting),
   Lynn St.Amour, and Jonne Soininen.  In addition, Marshall Eubanks was
   serving as the IAOC Scribe.

   The IAB members at the time the initial RFC Editor model was approved
   were (in alphabetical order): Loa Andersson, Gonzalo Camarillo,
   Stuart Cheshire, Russ Housley, Olaf Kolkman, Gregory Lebovitz, Barry
   Leiba, Kurtis Lindqvist, Andrew Malis, Danny McPherson, David Oran,
   Dave Thaler, and Lixia Zhang.  In addition, the IAB included two ex-
   officio members: Dow Street, who was serving as the IAB Executive
   Director, and Aaron Falk, who was serving as the IRTF Chair.

   The IAB members at the time the this RFC was approved were (in
   alphabetical order): Marcelo Bagnulo, Gonzalo Camarillo, Stuart
   Cheshire, Vijay Gill, Russ Housley, John Klensin, Olaf Kolkman,
   Gregory Lebovitz, Andrew Malis, Danny McPherson, David Oran, Jon
   Peterson, and Dave Thaler.




Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires October 24, 2009               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)            April 2009


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Daigle, L. and Internet Architecture Board, "The RFC Series and
        RFC Editor", RFC 4844, July 2007.

8.2.  Informative References

   [2]  Huston, G. and B. Wijnen, "The IETF Administrative Oversight
        Committee (IAOC) Member Selection Guidelines and Process",
        BCP 113, RFC 4333, December 2005.

Appendix A.  IAB selection

   This process is used by the IAB for the selection of the RFC Series
   Editor (if that position is not covered by the RFC Production Center
   contract) and for the selection of the Independent Submission Editor.
   The IAOC selects the RFC Production Center and RFC Publisher from
   vendors that choose to submit a proposal.  The IAOC procurement
   process is not described in this document.

   The selection process herein is taken from [2] but modified to allow
   for subject matter experts to advise the IAB, to take into account
   that the community with interest in the RFC series extends beyond the
   IETF community, and to prefer the incumbent.

A.1.  Ad-hoc advisory committee

   It is expected that the IAB and IAOC will establish an ad-hoc
   advisory committee to assist them in the selection of the various
   functions.  The names of the members of this committee, who do not
   need to be IAB members or IETF participants, will be made public
   through the IAB and IAOC minutes or otherwise.

   The committee is expected to have an understanding of the RFC series
   and related processes, and of procedures and interests of the various
   streams.

   Members of the subcommittee will be privy to confidential material
   and are expected to honour confidentiality.

   The IAB and IAOC bear the responsibility for the selections of the
   candidates for defined functions, the committee provides advice only.







Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires October 24, 2009               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)            April 2009


A.1.1.  Ad-Hoc Advisory Committee Charter

   The charter for the ad-hoc advisory committee that was established
   for the first implementation of this model is reproduced below for
   purely informational purposes.

   RFC Services Selection Oversight Subcommittee.

   The subcommittee will:

   1.  Review the RFIs and RFPs involving all current RFC Editor
       services before their release

   2.  Review the RFI responses and make recommendations to the IAOC and
       IAB as to the model, process and RFP going forward

   3.  Review the RFP proposals; conduct interviews; conduct and analyze
       testing; if any, and make recommendations to the IAOC

   4.  Shepherd the IAB selection process for the relevant functions,
       based on RFC4333 and provide and motivated shortlist to the IAB.

   5.  The Subcommittee would terminate upon the completion of contract
       awards.

   6.  The goal is to appoint members that are expected to have an
       understanding of the RFC series, its processes and of procedures
       and interests of the various streams.

A.2.  The IAB Selection Process of an RFC Series Editor and/or an
      Independent Stream Editor

A.2.1.  Nominations and Eligibility

   The IAB will be making a broad public call for nominations.  The
   public call will specify the manner by which nominations will be
   accepted and the means by which the list of nominees will be
   published.  Self-nominations are permitted.  Along with the name and
   contact information for each candidate, details about the candidate's
   background and qualifications for the position should be attached to
   the nomination.

   Members of the ad-hoc advisory committee mentioned above are not
   eligible, but besides those there are no limitations with respect to
   the eligibility for nomination: Nominees do not have to be actively
   contributing to the IETF and active participation as being a working
   group chair, an IETF Nominating Committee member, or an IAB or IESG
   member is not a limitation.



Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires October 24, 2009               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)            April 2009


   IAB members who accept a nomination for an IAB-selected position will
   recuse themselves from IAB selection discussions.

A.2.2.  Selection

   The IAB will publish the list of nominated persons prior to making a
   decision, allowing time for the community to pass any relevant
   comments to the IAB.  When established, the advisory committee will
   be asked to provide a motivated shortlist.  The IAB will review the
   nomination material, any submitted comments, the shortlist from the
   advisory committee, and make its selection.

   It is noted that the community mentioned above is the community with
   an interest in RFCs and the RFC Editor's functioning, the IETF
   community is only a part of that community.

   The main intent is to select the incumbent or a superior candidate.

A.2.3.  Care of Personal Information

   The following procedures will be used by the IAB in managing
   candidates' personal information:

   o  The candidate's name will be published, with all other candidate
      names, at the close of the nominations period.

   o  Except as noted above, all information provided to the IAB during
      this process will be kept as confidential to the IAB and, when
      established, the advisory committee.

A.2.4.  Term of Office and Selection Time Frame

   The IAB will seat their selected member at the first IETF meeting of
   every third year, for a three-year term of office.  Basic time frame
   requirements for the selection process are as follows:

   o  3-4 weeks for solicitation of nominations.

   o  3-4 weeks for review of nominees, deliberation, and selection.

   About 3-4 weeks prior to the process, the IAB will announce the
   specific dates for the selection process for that year, following the
   guidelines above.

Appendix B.  Internet Draft editing details

   [This appendix is to be removed at publication]




Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires October 24, 2009               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)            April 2009


   $Id: draft-iab-rfc-editor-model.xml 43 2009-04-22 17:53:09Z olaf $

B.1.  Section 00->01

   Added Sandy and Alice to the acknowledgement section, they were
   accidentally omitted

   Added Appendix A so that the selection mechanism is explicitly
   documented.  The selection mechanism documents the use of an advisory
   committee and is explicit about the fact that the community expands
   beyond the IETF community.

   Modified the RFC Editor Function name to "RFC Series Editor" in order
   to minimize confusion between the collective of functions (RFC
   Editor) and the function (Series Editor).

   Added wording for specifying the technical competence needed by the
   indep.subm.editor as suggested by JCK

   Clarified the responsibilities of the production function in
   Section 3.3

   Enumerated qualifications of the RFC Editor

B.2.  Section 01->02

   Various nits corrected

   Inconsictency in the use of RFC Production house and RFC Production
   fixed: RFC Production Center used as term

   Oversight over RFC consistency with the style manual has been made
   explicit.

   Clarified that the Independent Stream Editors budget is independent
   from the IETF/IASA.

   Improved the language that clarified that the RFC Series editors and
   Independent Stream editor do not necessarilly need to work without
   assistants, while they bear the responsibility.

B.3.  Section 02->03

   Added Joel to the acknowledgements

   Added the Advisory comittee charter as a FYI

   Added editorial skill and command of English as a requirement for the



Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires October 24, 2009               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)            April 2009


   ISE

   In the responsibilities for the RFC series: Change "Participate in"
   to "Provide input in" for IAOC Review.  This makes the text more
   implementation neutral.

   Typo: Model is consistent with RFC4844 instead of 4884

   Added "Maintaining technical quality of the Independent stream" as an
   explicit responsibility for the ISE.

B.4.  section 03->04

   [ommitted by accident]

B.5.  section 04->05

   Introduced the concept of the RFC Series Advisory Group and reworked
   the text to take this into account.  This also caused the renaming of
   the advisory group to an explicit "Independent Stream Editorial
   Board".

   Rewrote the appeal process to take the RSAG into account

   In Appendix A.2.4: Prolongued the appointment period to 3 years

Authors' Addresses

   Olaf M. Kolkman

   EMail: olaf@nlnetlabs.nl


   Internet Architecture Board

   EMail: iab@iab.org















Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires October 24, 2009               [Page 18]

