


CCAMP working Group                                           W. Imajuku
Internet-Draft                                                       NTT
Expires: October 16, 2006                                        Y. Sone
                                                                     NTT



                                                         October 16 2006


               Requirements for Inter-Domain LSP Recovery
           draft-imajuku-ccamp-inter-domain-recovery-req-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 12, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   The Generalized MPLS(GMPLS) suite of protocols has been defined
   the protection and restoration mechanisms of Label Switched
   Paths (LSPs) to realize the highly resilient and reliable networks.

   The objective of this document is to extract additional requirements
   for the signaling mechanisms in order to extend the applicability of
   the protection and restoration mechanisms for inter-domain LSPs.


Imajuku, et al.        Expires April 16, 2007                    [Page 1]

draft-imajuku-ccamp-inter-domain-recovery-req-00.txt          October 2006






Table of Contents

   1.  Contributors   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Introduction   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.1.  Document Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.2.  Conventions used in this document. . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.3.  Terminology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  Note to Recovery Schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.1.  End-to-End Recovery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.2.  MPLS Fast Re-Route . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.3.  Segment Recovery   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.  Recovery Schemes for inter-domain LSP  . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.1.  Inter-domain End-to-End Recovery   . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.2.  Per-Domain Recovery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     4.3.  Inter-domain Link Failure Recovery . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.4.  Domain Border Node Failure Recovery  . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  Problem Statements and Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.1.  Per-domain Recovery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.2.  Inter-domain Link Failure Recovery . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.3.  Domain Border Node Failure Recovery  . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   6.  Security Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   7.  IANA Considerations . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     8.1.  Normative references   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     8.2.  Informative references . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   10.  Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 16



















Imajuku et al.        Expires April 16, 2007                    [Page 2]



draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-00.txt          October 2006


1.  Contributors

   Tomonori Takeda
   NTT Network Service System Laboratories
   3-9-11 Midori-cho, Musashino-shi, Tokyo, 180-8585
   Japan
   
   E-mail: takeda.tomonori@lab.ntt.co.jp

   Eiji Oki
   NTT Network Service System Laboratories
   3-9-11 Midori-cho, Musashino-shi, Tokyo, 180-8585
   Japan
   
   E-mail: oki.eiji@lab.ntt.co.jp

   Tomohiro Otani 
   KDDI R&D Laboratories, Inc. 
   2-1-15 Ohara, Fujimino, Saitama, 356-8502
   Japan
   National Institute of Information and Communications Technology
   2-5-5 Azuma, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0031
   Japan

   Email:  otani@kddilabs.jp

   Yasunori Sameshima
   NTT Network Innovation Laboratories
   1-1 Hikari-no-oka, Yokosuka, Kanagawa 239-0847
   Japan
   National Institute of Information and Communications Technology
   2-5-5 Azuma, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0031
   Japan

   E-mail: yasunori.sameshima@lab.ntt.co.jp

   Kenichi Ogaki 
   KDDI R&D Laboratories, Inc. 
   2-1-15 Ohara, Fujimino, Saitama, 356-8502
   Japan

   Email:  ogaki@kddilabs.jp








Imajuku et al.        Expires April 16, 2007                    [Page 3]


   Shuichi Okamoto 
   KDDI R&D Laboratories, Inc. 
   2-1-15 Ohara, Fujimino, Saitama, 356-8502
   Japan
   National Institute of Information and Communications Technology
   2-5-5 Azuma, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0031
   Japan

   Email:  okamoto@kddilabs.jp













































Imajuku et al.        Expires April 16, 2007                    [Page 4]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-00.txt          October 2006


2.  Introduction

   CCAMP WG has been so far proposed two kinds of GMPLS based recovery
   mechanisms, i.e. end-to-end recovery [e2e-recovery] and segment
   recovery [seg-recovery]. These proposals can provide promising
   solution to enhance the resiliency and the reliability of networks and
   one of key motivations to deploy the GMPLS controlled networks.

   The recent activities in many international R&E test-beds requires the
   standardization of inter-domain GMPLS frameworks, and these
   opportunities are expected to provide the promising cue to the 
   deployment of future commercialized inter-domain GMPLS networks as seen
   in the historical evolution of the Internet. In addition, the initiation
   of the standardization process in L1-VPN framework [L1VPN-FW] requires
   the inter-domain GMPLS signaling architecture for the special case of
   multi-domain networks.

   The objective of this document is to extract additional requirements
   for the signaling mechanisms in order to extend the applicability of
   the protection and restoration mechanisms for inter-domain TE Label 
   Switched Paths (LSPs).

2.1 Document Scope

   In particular, this document focuses on GMPLS signaling mechanism to
   simplify the problems, although the mixed strategy of routing and
   signaling is essential. Alternatively, this version of document
   extracts the requirements for GMPLS signaling functionality not only
   the end-to-end recovery strategy, but also the segment recovery.

   Therefore, the readers want to consider routing extension applicable
   for inter-domain framework should refer other documents such as
   [RFC4105], [RFC4216], [RFC PCE-Arch], [brpc], and [GMPLS-AS]. And, 
   note that there is a comprehensive study for inter-domain TE LSP
   recovery considering both existing GMPLS routing and signaling
   [inter-dom-recovery-anl].

   Also, this document does not include nested domain within the scope
   conforming to [inter-domain-frwk]. 

2.2 Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
   [RFC2119].





Imajuku et al.        Expires April 16, 2007                    [Page 5]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-00.txt          October 2006


2.3 Terminology

   Terminology frequently used in this document conforms to the definition
   made in [RFC4427], [inter-domain-frwk], [inter-domain-rsvp], and so on.
   However, terminology of MPLS FRR defined in [RFC4090] is updated to
   Terminology of GMPLS segment recovery [seg-recovery].

   Branch node: The head-end node of a recovery LSP

   Domain: A domain is considered to be any collection of network elements
     within a common sphere of address management or path computational
     responsibility. 

   Domain border node: Label Switching Routers at the domain boundary.
     Specifically, the domain border node is the border of an AS. The
     node terminates inter-domain link connected to peer AS border node.

   ERO: Explicit Route Object

   FA: Forwarding Adjacency

   FA-LSP:  Forwarding Adjacency LSP

   Inter-domain TE LSP:Å@LSP that established across multiple domains.

   LSP: Label Switched Path. Note that the term LSP and TE LSP will be used 
     interchangeably.

   LSP segment: Label Switched Path segment stitched to inter-domain LSPs
   See [LSP-stitch].

   Merge node: The tail-end of a recovery LSP

   NHOP recovery LSP: Next-Hop recovery LSP. A backup LSP, which
     bypasses a single link of the working LSP.

   NNHOP recovery LSP: Next-Next-Hop recovery Tunnel. A backup LSP,
     which bypasses a single node of the working LSP.

   Recovery LSP: See [RFC4427]. The recovery LSP transports normal 
     user traffic when the working LSP fails. The recovery LSP may 
     transport user traffic even when the working LSP is transporting 
     normal user traffic (e.g., 1+1 protection). In such a scenario, 
     the recovery LSP is sometimes referred to as a protecting LSP.

   RRO - Record Route Object

   TE: Traffic Engineering

   TE-link: Traffic Engineering link

Imajuku et al.        Expires April 16, 2007                    [Page 6]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-00.txt          October 2006


   Working LSP: See [RFC4427]. The working LSP transports normal user 
     traffic.


   One of main issue in this document focuses on the signaling method
   for inter-domain TE-LSP. Therefore, the reader should particularly 
   familiar with terminology defined in [inter-domain-frwk].


   Contiguous TE LSP: This is a single end-to-end TE LSP that is setup
     across multiple domains using RSVP-TE signaling procedures
     described in [RFC3473]. No additional TE LSPs are required to 
     signal a contiguous TE LSP and the same RSVP-TE information for
     the TE LSP is maintained along the entire LSP path.

   Nested TE LSP: Nesting one or more TE LSPs into another TE LSP is
     described in [RFC4206]. This technique can also be used to nest
     one or more inter-domain TE LSPs into an intra-domain FA-LSP.
     While similar to stitching in the control plane, in the data 
     plane, nesting allows for one or more inter-domain LSPs to be
     transported over a single intra-domain FA-LSP using the label
     stacking construct.

   Stitched TE LSP: The concept of LSP stitching as well as the
     required signaling procedures are described in [LSP-STITCH].
     This technique can be used to stitch an inter-domain TE LSP to
     an intra-domain LSP segment. A inter-domain stitched TE LSP is
     a TE LSP made up of different TE LSP segments within each domain
     which are "stitched" together in the data plane so that an
     end-to-end LSP is achieved in the data plane.
     In the control plane, however, the different LSP segments are
     signaled as distinct RSVP sessions which are independent from
     the RSVP session for the inter-domain LSP.

3.  Note to Recovery Schemes

3.1.  End-to-End Recovery 

   The end-to-end recovery scheme is described in [e2e-recovery].
   This scheme realizes end-to-end protection and restoration.
   This document extends Protection Object [RFC3471] and defines
   how to control S/P/N/O bit in this object.

   LSP Flags assign the recovery type such as 1+1/1:1 protection,
   1:n protection, Re-routing without Extra-Traffic
   (pre-planed rerouting), and Full re-routing. 

   Link Flags assign the desired link protection type used for 
   TE-LSP. The inter-domain TE LSP nested or stitched assign the 
   recovery type of the FA-LSP or LSP segment by using these flags. 

Imajuku et al.        Expires April 16, 2007                    [Page 7]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-00.txt          October 2006


3.2.  MPLS Fast Reroute (MPLS FRR)

   MPLS Fast Reroute (MPLS FRR) provides a form of segment recovery
   for packet MPLS-TE networks. Two methods of MPLS FRR are defined 
   in [RFC4090]. The one-to-one backup method creates detour LSPs for
   each protected LSP at each potential point of local repair.
   The facility backup method creates a bypass tunnel to protect a
   potential failure point which is shared by multiple LSPs and uses
   label stacking.

   Neither approach supports the full set of recovery types supported
   by the End-to-End recovery. Additionally, the facility backup method
   is not applicable to most non-PSC (packet) switching technologies.

3.3.  Segment Recovery

   The segment recovery scheme is described in [seg-recovery].
   The basic concept of the segment recovery is compatible with the
   MPLS FRR. This scheme realizes the protection and restoration over
   a portion of end-to-end TE LSP even for non-PSC switching
   technologies. In each portion of the segment recovery, the usage of
   S/P/N/O bit and LSP flags is same with the end-to-end recovery. 

   The segment recovery scheme provides both dynamic and static
   Assignment of branch and merge nodes to create recovery LSPs.
   The non-zero value of Segment Recovery Flag in the Protection Object
   indicates the dynamic assignment of the branch and merge nodes.
   On the other hand, an upstream node can identify the branch and merge
   nodes of recovery LSPs by using the Secondary ERO (SERO).

   Also, the segment recovery scheme further extends the new control bit,
   i.e. I/R bit in the Protection Object.
   
   I bit indicates that the desired segment recovery type indicated
   in the LSP Segment Recovery Flag is already in place for the 
   associated LSP.
 
   R bit indicates that failure to establish the indicated protection
   should result in a failure of the LSP being protected.

   Considering the confidentiality of the routing information within domains,
   segment recovery for inter-domain TE LSPs dynamically assigns branch and
   merge nodes of the recovery LSPs. In many case, the branch and merge nodes
   of the recovery LSPs are coincide with the domain border nodes.

   Here, note that the segment recovery does not means the recovery 
   for LSP segment.




Imajuku et al.        Expires April 16, 2007                    [Page 8]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-00.txt          October 2006


4.  Recovery Schemes for inter-domain TE LSPs

   This section categorizes the recovery schemes for inter-domain TE LSPs
   considering the failure scenarios. The failure scenarios for inter-
   domain TE LSPs are categorized as follows. The first one is the node
   or link failure within a domain. The second one is the failure of
   domain boundary link. And the last one is the failure of domain
   boundary node. This document considers the four recovery schemes,

   (1) Inter-domain End-to-End recovery:
        End-to-end recovery performed irrespective to failure scenarios.

   (2) Per-Domain Recovery:
        Sub-path recovery performed for failure scenarios within domain 
        except the failure of domain border node failure scenario.

   (3) Inter-Domain Link Failure Recovery:
        Sub-path recovery performed for failure scenarios at domain
        boundary links.

   (4) Domain Border Node Failure Recovery:
        Sub-path recovery performed for failure scenarios at domain
        boundary nodes.

    Here, the term of "sub-path recovery" is used so as not to limit the
    recovery scheme such as the segment recovery.
    This section explains the those recovery schemes by using the figure
    as follows. For the purpose of to keep consistency, this figure is
    copied from [inter-domain-rsvp].

      :<----- AS-1 ----->:<------ AS-2 ------->:<--- AS-3 ---->:
      :                  :                     :               :
  CE1-----R0----X1-ASBR1-----ASBR4--R3---ASBR7----ASBR9-----R6 :
      :   | |   |   |    :  /  |  / |   / |    :     |      |  :
      :   | |   +-ASBR2----/ ASBR5  |  /  |    :     |      |  :
      :   | |       |    :     |    | /   |    :     |      |  :
      : R1--R2----ASBR3------ASBR6--R4---ASBR8----ASBR10----R7---CE2
      :                  :                     :               :
      :  <================ Inter-AS TE LSP ================>   :

4.1 Inter-Domain End-to-End Recovery

    The inter-domain LSPs can be protected by the end-to-end recovery
    irrespective to failure scenarios. In this recovery mode, the
    working and protecting LSPs are created based on the results of
    diverse path route computation. For example, the working and
    protecting LSPs are created R0-X1-ASBR1-ASBR4-R3-ASBR7-ASBR9-R6-R7,
    and R0-R2-ASBR3-ASBR6-R4-ASBR8-ASBR10-R7, respectively. The 
    diversity may be nodal, SRLG, or AS diverse. The path computation
    strategy may be the per-domain hop calculation with the subsequent

Imajuku et al.        Expires April 16, 2007                  [Page 9]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-00.txt          October 2006


    use of stand-alone PCES or per-domain hop calculation
    [per-domain-calc] with the cooperation of multiple PCEs located
    in each domain.

    The important note within the scope of this document is the Link 
    Flags in the Protection Object. The Link Flags values except 0x01
    (Extra Traffic) or 0x02 (Unprotected) results in the assignment 
    of per-domain recovery in each domain.

4.2 Per-Domain Recovery

    This document defines the recovery scheme for the node and/or link
    failure within domain as Ågper-domain recoveryÅh.  For example,
    the working LSP is created R0-X1-ASBR1-ASBR4-R3-ASBR7-ASBR9-R6-R7.
    The recovery LSPs in AS1, AS2, and AS3 can be created R0-R2-ASBR3-
    ASBR2-ASBR1, ASBR4-ASBR5-ASBR6-R4-ASBR8-ASBR7, and ASBR9-ASBR10-R7,
    respectively. The per-domain recovery can employ mainly two kinds
    of techniques corresponding to the signaling methods in each domain. 

    If the domain employs the contiguous signaling method, the domain
    boundary nodes perform segment recovery. Namely, the domain boundary
    nodes may act as the branch/merge nodes which terminate the recovery
    LSPs in each domain. For this case, the Protection Object of the
    inter-domain LSP contains the non-zero Segment Recovery Flags. The
    non-zero value of the segment recovery flag means the dynamic
    identification of the branch and merge nodes per-domain basis. Thus,
    the branch or merge nodes are selected based on the local policy
    in each domain.

    To the contrary, the upstream node of the inter-domain LSPs may
    assign the recovery type by using the Protection Sub-Object in the
    SERO. In such case, the processing of the SERO in the domain
    boundary node becomes the issue to be discussed, if the network
    operator of the domain has the local policy which conflict with
    the Segment Recovery Flags in the Protection Sub-Object
    in the SERO.

    If the domain employs the Nesting or Stitching LSP method and 
    the Link Type Flag in the Protection Object of the inter-domain
    LSPs assigns the value except 0x01 (Extra Traffic) nor 0x02 
    (Unprotected), the domain boundary node may perform end-to-end
    recovery for the FA-LSP or the LSP segment which accommodates the
    inter-domain LSP. The selection of the FA-LSP and the LSP segment
    is performed based on the local policy with the consideration of
    the Link Type Flag.

    Although there is a minor issue resulting from the discrepancy
    of the defined value between the Link Flag and LSP Flag in the
    selection process of the LSP Flag value of the FA-LSP from
    the Link Flag value of the inter-domain LSP, it is obvious that 

Imajuku et al.        Expires April 16, 2007                  [Page 10]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-00.txt          October 2006


    each domain is required to select higher reliability class of 
    FA-LSPs to accommodate the inter-domain LSPs.

    Similarly, the LSP Flags in the Protection Object of the FA-LSP or
    segment LSP are dynamically set to higher value than the Link Type
    Flag in the Protection Object of the inter-domain LSP, if the FA-LSP
    or LSP segment are dynamically created following to the arrival of
    the PATH message of the inter-domain LSP.

    The advantage of ÅgNesting and StitchingÅh from the signaling aspect
    is easiness to achieve control confidentiality for the inter-domain
    TE LSP, since the switching operation of inter-domain TE LSP can be
    achieved by controlling the FA-LSP or LSP segment. 

4.3 Inter-Domain Link Failure Recovery

    This document defines the recovery scheme for the link failure
    between the pair of the domain boundary nodes as Åginter-domain link
    failure recoveryÅh. For example, the working LSP is created R0-X1-
    ASBR1-ASBR4-R3-ASBR7-ASBR9-R6-R7. The recovery LSPs between AS1 and 
    AS2, and between AS2 and AS3 can be created ASBR1-ASBR2-ASBR4 and
    ASBR7-ASBR8-ASBR10-ASBR9, respectively. Also, the creation of NHOP
    recovery LSP may be required if there are multiple links between
    pairs of domain border nodes. The inter-domain link recovery can
    possibly employ all of three signaling schemes as discussed in the
    section 4.2. However, the advantage of the stitching LSP pointed
    in the previous section diminishes in this case.

4.4 Domain Border Node Failure Recovery

    This document defines the recovery scheme for the nodal failure of
    the domain boundary nodes as ÅgDomain Border Node recoveryÅh. 
    For example, the working LSP is created R0-X1-ASBR1-ASBR4-R3-ASBR7-
    ASBR9-R6-R7. The recovery LSPs between AS1 and AS2, and between
    AS2 and AS3 can be created X1-ASBR1-ASBR2-ASBR3-ASBR6-ASBR5-R3 and
    R3-ASBR8-ASBR10-R7, respectively. The inter-domain link recovery
    can possibly employ all of three signaling schemes as discussed
    in the section 4.2. Likewise with the previous section, the 
    advantage of the stitching LSP diminishes in this case.

4.5 Comments on the described recovery

    The recovery of the Domain Border Link Failure recovery and the 
    Domain Border Node Failure recovery may be degenerated as the 
    result of topological constraint around the pair of border nodes.
    There is no guarantee to establish separate route of the recovery
    LSPs for the Domain Border Link Failure recovery and the Domain 
    Border Node failure recovery LSPs.



Imajuku et al.        Expires April 16, 2007                  [Page 11]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-00.txt          October 2006


5.  Problem Statements and Requirements

5.1 Problem Statements and Requirements for Per-Domain Recovery

    Problem statements:
    The signaling method is basically selected in domain-to-domain
    basis following to the policy of LSP and its management architecture
    in each domain. It seems trivial, but the difference of the LSP
    architecture results in the difference of functional design and
    database in network management system in each domain. Therefore,
    the inter-domain TE LSP should secure the independency of signaling
    method.

    The selection of contiguous, nesting, and stitching is determined
    by the domain border node at the upstream side of each domain. 
    The discussion regarding to the setting scheme of the signaling
    method is out of scope in this document. However, one consideration
    should be made in the case that the per-domain recovery is performed.

    As described in section 4.2, the creation of recovery LSP in each 
    domain is performed following to the Segment Recovery Flag or Link 
    Flag in the Protection Object of the inter-domain TE LSPs. Here,
    one problem arises when the inter-domain TE LSP traverses domains
    employing the contiguous and the nesting/stitching signaling methods. 
    For example, if both Segment Recovery Flags and Link Flags are
    Selected 0x10 (1+1 Bi-directional Protection/Dedicated 1+1), 
    some domain may try to create four LSP (two pair of LSP segments
    with 1+1 Bi-directional Protection) against the intension of the
    operator who tries to create the inter-domain TE LSP.
    
    Requirements:
    The extension of control bit can be one of solution for the problem,
    and which indicates selection to one Flags out of Segment Recovery
    Flags and Link Flags. This indication enables successful selection
    of proper recovery type for the inter-domain LSP without any
    constraint in selecting signaling method in each domain.

5.2 Problem Statements and Requirements for Inter-Domain Link
 Failure Recovery

    Problem statements:
    The probability of link failure becomes trivial, when a pair of
    Border nodes are co-located in the same housing space or building
    as in many cases. In such case, it is useful to secure
    arbitrariness in establishing the recovery LSPs for the inter-
    domain links, because it will help to avoid excess consumption of
    network resources within both domains.

    Also, the introduction of new procedure helps to reduce network
    resources. For example, consider the case of network AS1, AS2,
    and AS3 comprises Lambda Switch Capable (LSC) and the inter-domain

Imajuku et al.        Expires April 16, 2007                  [Page 12]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-00.txt          October 2006


    links such as link ASBR7-ASBR9 and link ASBR8-ASBR10 are bundled
    TE links. In such case, a lambda inter-domain TE LSP can be recovered
    within each bundled domain border TE link for the scenario of one
    component link failure, if these TE links contains shared back-up 
    component links. The introduction of such recovery technique greatly
    reduces the complexity of network design issue for network operators.

    Requirements:
    For the first problem statement, one of possible solution is the
    addition of new control bit in the Protection Object which indicates
    the necessity of the inter-domain link failure recovery similar to
    R bit defined section in [seg-recovery].

    For the second problem statement, Sub-Network Connection Protection
    (SNCP) can be one of solution. However, the introduction of the SNCP
    into GMPLS signaling mechanism provides more generic solution to 
    realize SNCP switchover. The GMPLS based solution can achieve
    equivalent operation to the SNCP even if the domain border nodes
    have different switching capability. 

5.3 Problem Statements and Requirements for Domain Border Node Failure
 Recovery

    Problem statements:
    The problem arises in the domain border node failure recovery is 
    similar to the first problem statement of the inter-domain link
    failure recovery. It is useful to secure arbitrariness in
    establishing the recovery LSPs for the domain border node failure 
    recovery, because it will help to avoid excess consumption of
    network resources within both domains.

    The second problem is the functionality of I bit which helps to
    understand the status whether the recovery LSP is in-placed or
    not at the downstream side of the inter-domain TE LSPs. However,
    the use of I bit can not provide enough information to the
    downstream side of the inter-domain TE LSPs whether the recovery
    LSP for the domain border node failure is in-placed or not. 
    Consider the case of a working inter-domain TE LSP is created
    R0-R1-R2-ASBR3-ASBR6-R4-ASBR8-ASBR10-R7, and the recovery LSP for
    the node or link failure within AS-1 is created R0-X1-ASBR2-ASBR3
    based on segment recovery procedure. The in-place bit is set for
    the working inter-domain TE LSP. This may result in no action, 
    nevertheless R1 or R2 is required to create a NNHOP recovery LSP
    for ASBR3 and/or ASBR4 failure scenarios.

    Requirements:
    For the first problem statement, possible solution is the same with 
    described in section 5.2.


Imajuku et al.        Expires April 16, 2007                  [Page 13]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-00.txt          October 2006


    For the second problem statement, one of possible solution is the
    addition of new control bit in the Protection Object which indicates
    the necessity of the inter-domain link failure recovery similar to
    I bit defined section in [seg-recovery]. The I bit to understand the
    status of the recovery LSPs for the border node failure is
    necessary in order to discriminate the status of I bit representibg
    the status of the recovery LSPs for the per-domain failure recovery.

    The above requirements does not requires further extension to the
    GMPLS signaling mechanism such as ERO/RRO processing, and so on. 

6. Security considerations

   TBD

7.  IANA considerations

This document requires no further IANA considerations.

8.  References

8.1 Normative References 

   [e2e-recovery]      Lang, J., Rekhter, Y., and Papadimitriou, D.  
                       (Eds.), "RSVP-TE Extensions in support of End-to- 
                       End Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
                       (GMPLS)-based Recovery", 
                       draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-e2e-signaling, 
                       work in progress. 
   
   [seg-recovery]      Berger, L., Bryskin, I., Papadimitriou, D., and 
                       Farrel, A., "GMPLS Based Segment Recovery", 
                       draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-segment-recovery, work in 
                       progress. 
   
   [L1VPN-FW]          Takeda, T., Editor "Framework and Requirements  
                       for Layer 1 Virtual Private Networks", draft- 
                       ietf-l1vpn-framework, work in progress. 
   
   [inter-domain-fw]   Farrel, A., et al., "A Framework for Inter-Domain 
                       MPLS Traffic Engineering", draft-ietf-ccamp- 
                       inter-domain-framework, work in progress. 
    
   [inter-domain-rsvp] Ayyangar, A., Vasseur, JP. "Inter-domain MPLS  
                       Traffic Engineering - RSVP extensions", draft- 
                       ietf-ccamp-inter-domain-rsvp-te, work in 
                       progress. 
 



Imajuku et al.        Expires April 16, 2007                  [Page 14]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-00.txt          October 2006


   [RFC4427]           Mannie, E., Ed. and D. Papadimitriou, Ed.,  
                       "Recovery (Protection and Restoration)  
                       Terminology for Generalized Multi-Protocol Label  
                       Switching (GMPLS)", RFC 4427, March 2006. 

   [RFC4090]           Pan, P., Swallow, G., and A. Atlas, "Fast Reroute 
                       Extensions to RSVP-TE for LSP Tunnels", RFC 4090,  
                       May 2005. 
    
   [RFC3473]           Berger, L., et al, "Generalized Multi-Protocol
                       Label Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Resource 
                       ReserVation Protocol-Traffic Engineering (RSVP-TE)
                       Extensions", RFC 3473, January 2003.

   [RFC4206]           Kompella, K. and Y. Rekhter, "Label Switched  
                       Paths (LSP) Hierarchy with Generalized Multi- 
                       Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) Traffic  
                       Engineering (TE)", RFC 4206, October 2005. 

   [RFC3471]           Berger, L., et al, "Generalized Multi-Protocol
                       Label Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Functional
                       Description", RFC 3471, January 2003.

   [per-domain-calc]   Vasseur, J. P., Ayyanger, A., Zhang, R., "A Per-
                       domain path computation method for establishing
                       Inter-domain Traffic Engineering (TE) Label
                       Switched Paths (LSPs)", RFC 3471, January 2003.

8.2 Informative References 
    
   [RFC2119]           Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to
                       Indicate Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
                       March 1997 
    
   [LSP-stitch]        Ayyangar, A., and Vasseur, JP., "LSP Stitching  
                       with Generalized MPLS TE", draft-ietf-ccamp-lsp- 
                       stitching, work in progress.
    
   [RFC4105]           Le Roux, J.-L. , Vasseur, J.-P., and J. Boyle, 
                       "Requirements for Inter-Area MPLS Traffic  
                       Engineering", RFC 4105, June 2005. 
    
   [RFC4216]           Zhang, R., and Vasseur, J.-P., "MPLS Inter- 
                       Autonomous System (AS) Traffic Engineering (TE)  
                       Requirements", RFC 4216, November 2005 

   [PCE-Arch]          A. Farrel, JP. Vasseur and J. Ash, "Path  
                       Computation Element (PCE) Architecture", draft- 
                       ietf-pce-architecture, work in progress. 
    

Imajuku et al.        Expires April 16, 2007                  [Page 15]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-00.txt          October 2006


   [brpc]              Vasseur, JP., Zhang, R., and Bitar, N., "A  
                       Backward Recursive PCE-based Computation (BRPC)  
                       procedure to compute shortest inter-domain  
                       Traffic Engineering Label Switched Path", draft- 
                       vasseur-ccamp-brpc, work in progress. 

   [GMPLS-AS]          Otani, T., Kumaki, K., and Okamoto, S.,
                       "GMPLS Inter-AS Traffic Engineering Requirements",
                       draft-otani-ccamp-interas-GMPLS-TE,
                       work in progress.
   
   [id-recovery-anl]   Takeda, T., Ikejiri, Y., Farrel, A., and Vasseur,
                       J. P., "Analysis of Inter-domain Label Switched
                       Path (LSP) Recovery", draft-takeda-ccamp-inter-
                       domain-recovery-analysis, work in progress.

10.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Dr. Tatsuzo Koga, representative of
   NICT Tsukuba RC for the support of this study.

11. Authors' Addresses

   Wataru Imajuku
   NTT Network Innovation Laboratories
   1-1 Hikari-no-oka, Yokosuka, Kanagawa 239-0847
   Japan

   Phone: +81 46 859 4315
   Email: imajuku.wataru@lab.ntt.co. jp

   Yoshiaki Sone
   NTT Network Innovation Laboratories
   1-1 Hikari-no-oka, Yokosuka, Kanagawa 239-0847
   Japan

   Phone: +81 46 859 2456
   Email: sone.yoshiaki@lab.ntt.co.jp


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

Imajuku et al.        Expires April 16, 2007                  [Page 16]


draft-imajuku-ccamp-interdomain-recovery-req-00.txt          October 2006


   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.
















Imajuku et al.        Expires April 16, 2007                  [Page 17]

