
					       		   D. Hetzer
Internet Draft		    			           T-Systems
Expires: December 22, 2005				   June 20, 2005  
							 
							 

             Internet service for Resource Reservation in Advance
                        draft-hetzer-adv-res-00.txt

Status of this Memo 


   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 10, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).      

Abstract 

   Internet service aimed at advance resource reservation for QoS based
   applications using QoS managers interacting with IntServ/RSVP and
   Differentiated Service architectures is proposed. 

   Different issues such as resource reservation, timing of 
   requests and dependency of reservations are considered in the advance
   resource reservation interface. Abstract interface describing the
   advance resource reservation requests is specified. 
   Mechanisms for advance resource reservation are discussed.
   

Hetzer                  Expires December 10, 2005                  [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT      Service for resource reservation in advance   June 2005

  
   Optimisation strategies based on resource reservation in advance are 
   overviewed.
 
Table of Contents

   1.   Introduction ....................................................  2
   2.   Terminology used in this document ...............................  3
   3.   Issues for Resource reservation in advance ......................  4
   4.   Mechanisms for Resource Reservation in advance ..................  5
     4.1 Specification of advance resource reservation request ..........  5
     4.2 Operational considerations for resource reservation in advance..  6
   5.   Optimisation strategies for resource reservation in advance .....  6
   6.   Conclusions .....................................................  7
   References ...........................................................  8
   Author's Address .....................................................  9

1. Introduction 

   With the deployment and integration of different kinds of QoS 
   based Internet applications, such as VoIP, multimedia, streaming, 
   Grid, real time, mission critical, and embedded systems, 
   there is an increasing demand for efficient strategies  
   aimed at optimisation of the resource scheduling for the applications
   considering user requirements.    

   Especially, in the area of management of broadband Internet 
   infrastructures including mobile and satellite communication, 
   optimisation of bandwidth allocation for different kind of applications
   and users at access networks is important challenge in order to keep
   the QoS parameter stable and provide efficient usage of scare
   resources [9].

   Currently, the main standardisation effort in IETF on QoS provisioning
   and resource reservation for QoS based applications is based on 
   IntServ/RSVP (Integrated Service/Resource Reservation Protocol) 
   [1], [2], [4] and Differentiated Services (DiffServ)[3] mechanisms.
   Applications using these protocols for resource allocation could 
   require dynamically resources using immediate resource reservation
   requests.  Immediate resource reservation requests specify resource
   reservations starting directly after accepting the request by the system.

   Resource allocation in advance is another kind of reservation-based
   communication services, which is used, when certain users are willing
   to allocate resources in advance in order to overcome the blocking
   probability of a communication network.
   Advance reservations for QoS based applications were proposed in the 
   research and practical experiments for applications, which want to pay 
   more in order to be sure to get resources in the time intervals and QoS 
   levels, which they need [7], [8], [9], [14]. 


Hetzer                   Expires December 10, 2005                 [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT     Service for resource reservation in advance    June 2005 

  
   Especially, concepts based on alternative resource reservations [13] are
   attractive as policies for the network provider, users and applications. 
   Advance reservation is important for QoS based applications, which know
   in advance their timing, dependency and  resource specific requirements. 

   For the network provider, they increase the flexibility and the potential 
   for optimising of resources for different users and applications. For the 
   user, advance reservations provide efficient mechanisms for QoS guarantee. 

   Specifying resource requests in advance could support the optimised 
   resource usage based on application of suitable scheduling strategies.   

   Currently, the advance reservation is integrated in some experimental 
   systems, such as IconoNet [11] for optimised routing and resource 
   reservation, GARA aimed at optimisation of resources for Grid 
   applications [12] and the experimental advance resource reservation 
   interface on top of RSVP [9]. In these systems, appropriate optimisation
   technologies and scheduling algorithms based on advance resource requests
   are used prior to reservation in order to obtain optimal scheduling. 
   Other work [5] considers resource scheduling in advance adaptable to QoS
   and resource requirements of operational traffic.
  
   Advance reservation as Internet service is still not standardised. 
   This document proposes an interface for such a service aimed to optimise
   QoS and resources in Internet by reducing the blocking probability.  
    

2. Terminology used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in [10].
   Terms describing resource reservations in IntServ/RSVP architecture
   are defined in [1], [2], [4] and in DiffServ are specified in [3].

   Following specific terms are used in this document:
   
   Resource request
   Specification for resource reservation 

   Immediate reservation request
   Resource request which specify reservation starting immediately.

   Advance reservation request
   The resource requests specifies reservations ahead of time in order to
   support resource planning and scheduling in future.

   Blocking probability
   The probability to reject reservation requests.


Hetzer                   Expires December 10, 2005                 [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT     Service for resource reservation in advance    June 2005


3. Issues for resource reservation in advance  

   There are different issues, which could be considered in the advance 
   resource reservation specifications and their parameterisation.

   Resource reservation in advance could be characterised with options, 
   defining parameters for resource renegotiations, time, priority, cost, 
   adaptation, duration and dependency of reserved resources. 
   
   Options for renegotiation of resources are aimed to specify requests
   with  alternative bandwidth requirements or requests with changing 
   bandwidths. 
   The options defining changing bandwidths could describe possible 
   increment sizes, when additional resources are required in order 
   to multiplex operational traffic with the issued advance resource 
   reservation request.
   In scenarios for multiplexing of resource reservations, additional
   bandwidth could be specified for increase of the initially required
   resources, which is used to minimise the signalling overhead for new
   requests by aggregating advance and immediate reservations.

   Time constraints, used to specify reservations, depend on the kind of 
   application and user requirements. 
   Usually, the fixed start time for advance allocation is assumed [13],
   which let small possibility for optimisation.
   There are also scenarios, in which some users could 
   consider flexible times for resource allocation. 
   
   Reservations, which could be allocated based on time intervals are for 
   instance considered for Grid applications [15]. 

   Interval oriented reservations defined by flexible start and end time.
   allows flexibility on allocation in specific interval(s), in order to
   optimise costs and provide better resource utilisation and QoS 
   provision in Internet. 
 
   The priority issue could be considered in advance resource reservation
   requests for bandwidth allocation of mission critical and real-time 
   applications. 
   
   Another point is the dependent reservation for distributed multimedia
   applications, embedded systems and mission critical applications, 
   which require usage of resources in co-ordinated manner to provide QoS 
   guarantee for distributed applications. 

   In the case of Grid applications [18], dependent resource reservation
   could be aimed at the time restricted allocation of resources for 
   each of the Grid sub-task submitted by users in order to optimise
   the QoS of the composed Grid application. 


Hetzer                   Expires December 10, 2005                 [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT     Service for resource reservation in advance    June 2005


4. Mechanisms for resource reservation in advance

4.1. Specification of advance resource reservation request

   Specification of abstract resource reservation request in advance is 
   proposed. It could be mapped to specific protocol mechanisms and 
   socket interface for advance reservation as discussed in section 4.2.
    
   The abstract resource reservation request R is defined as a tuple 

       R := (conn, d, b, incr, cost, dep, T)
   
   where
       conn represents a sequence of source and destination node (cs,cd)
       
       d is the duration of the request,

       b is a function describing the alternative bandwidth reservations,
         which could be requested by the call, 

       incr (optionally) is the bandwidth increment function, 

       cost (optionally) describes the priority of the request,

       dep (optionally) is a dependency function specifying dependent 
          reservations of applications,  

       T denoting timing constraints. 

   Based on selection of appropriate parameter values using this interface,
   optimisation considering specific criteria (such as QoS of best effort 
   traffic) is possible.

   In this specification, a bandwidth function b is defined by the set
   b = {b1,àbi,à. bm} of alternative bandwidth requests bi , 0 <= i <= m, 
   for advance reservation. Alternative bandwidths express different QoS
   levels for the application and are used for optimisation considering
   the network and application criteria. 
   
   The requested bandwidth b could be incremented by the additional 
   bandwidth incr based on the formula b + k*incr,  where 0 <= k <= n .
   Parameter incr specifies change of requested bandwidth during the
   resource usage. Incr depends on application and could be used for 
   multiplexing in operational networks. Positive and negative values 
   of incr are aimed to define increasing or decreasing amount of 
   resources concerning the resource reservation request R.
 
   The increments are set dependent on multiplexing strategies for 
   reducing of the signalling overhead for resource reservation requests.
   

Hetzer                   Expires December 10, 2005                 [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT     Service for resource reservation in advance    June 2005


   Cost is a parameter, defined with 0 <= cost <= 1, describing the relative
   priority of resource reservation request, which is useful when there
   are more requests than available resources.

   A dependency function dep related to request R is defined by the set  
   dep = {R1,àRi,à.Rn} , describing resource requests R1, àRià Rn, 
   which must be finished, before R starts.

   The time constraint T is given by the sequence T= (start, end), 
   which could  be defined to specify allocations in a given interval
   (start, end), with given deadline (end) or fixed start time (start). 
   On this way, a wide range of applications including real-time and 
   embedded, but also VoIP and video, could be supported.

4.2 Operational considerations for resource reservation in advance

   The abstract resource reservation interface could be integrated 
   in advance resource reservation architecture based on a resource 
   manager interacting with IntServ/RSVP and DiffServ QoS provisioning 
   technologies (figure 1). 
   The advance resource reservation set-up protocol includes mechanisms for 
   - requesting of resources according to the abstract resource reservation
   options
   - acknowledgement of resource reservation requests based on the abstract 
   resource reservation requests.

      +---------------------------------------------------------+
      |               Application                               | 
      | Abstract resource reservation in advance as Socket API  |
      +---------------------------------------------------------+
                       |              ^
               advance |              |acknowledgement
               request |              |
                       |              |
                       v              |
          +------------------------------------------------+
          |                 QoS Manager                    |
          |        advance resource reservation            |
          +------------------------------------------------+
                              ^
                              |
                              v
               +--------------------------------+
               |  QoS provisioning technologies |
               |                                |
               |  IntServ/RSVP        DiffServ  |
               +--------------------------------+

       Figure 1: Architecture for resource reservation in advance


Hetzer                   Expires December 10, 2005                 [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT     Service for resource reservation in advance    June 2005


   The interface to the abstract resource reservation requests could be
   implemented based on extensions of the socket interface. 
   A socket is an abstraction that represents an endpoint of communication.
   Most applications that consciously use TCP and UDP do so by creating a 
   socket of the appropriate type and then performing a series of 
   operations on that socket.
   The socket interface for IPv6 is described in [16], [17].

5. Optimisation strategies based on resource reservation in advance

   The proposed advance resource reservation interface and service could 
   be integrated based on different policies for management and 
   optimisation of the QoS and resource usage in Internet.
  
   From operational point of view, it is not efficient enough to 
   optimise bandwidth allocation in advance without to consider the 
   dynamics of the remaining operational network traffic in Internet 
   and the QoS experienced by this traffic.
  
   [5] describes an architecture for adaptable QoS oriented bandwidth 
   planning using the proposed advance resource reservation interface. 
   Its aim is to learn automatically optimal policies for resource 
   allocation in advance of QoS based applications, considering QoS 
   feedback (delay, packet loss) of remaining operational traffic.     
   The optimisation of resource allocation in advance considers possible
   allocation intervals for QoS based application specified by resource
   requests, as well as QoS parameter thresholds and patterns of traffic. 
   The architecture includes user interfaces, optimisation and learning 
   algorithms, and integrated data base for derived bandwidth schedules,
   resource usage and QoS monitoring data (i.e. patterns describing QoS
   behaviour) of the traffic, which should be considered to adapt and 
   optimise the advance reservation allocations. 
  
   Different optimisation strategies could be used based on advance 
   resource reservation interfaces. 
   They are aimed to support:

   	 o   Proactive bandwidth planning based on predictions of QoS 
             parameter behaviour patterns and adaptation of the advance 
             resource reservation to these patterns

  	 o   Reactive bandwidth planning aimed to consider the dynamic 
             of QoS parameters (events, congestion and anomalies) in 
             operational networks and to change operationally the 
             advance resource reservation schedules.

   For the implementation of the optimisations, scheduling algorithms
   interacting with reinforcement learning strategies for optimal
   allocation decisions are used.
   

Hetzer                   Expires December 10, 2005                 [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT     Service for resource reservation in advance    June 2005
 

   The final aim is to adapt the reservation strategies in advance 
   considering the needs of the remaining operational traffic, for 
   which no resources in advance are reserved.

   This allows in overloaded scenarios ("rush hour" in operational networks)
   to suspend the reservation for advance requests if it is possible 
   (i.e. allocations allows reservations in given intervals) and to allocate
   it at other time considering the specifications. 


7. Conclusions

   The Internet service for advance resource reservation of QoS based 
   applications was specified in this draft considering different 
   kinds of application traffic (VoIP, Grid, embedded) and user requirements. 
   The Draft is first step of informational description of such service.
   Further work is aimed to enhance the IPv6 basic socket interface [16] 
   and API [17] based on the abstract specification of advance requests and 
   mechanisms for advance resource reservation as proposed in this Draft. 

       

References 


  [1]   R. Braden Ed., L. Zhang, S. Berson, S. Herzog, S. Jamin, ôResource
        ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) {Version 1 Functional  Specicationö, 
        IETF Request for Comments 2205, September 1997

  [2]   A. Mankin, Ed., F. Baker, B. Braden, S. Bradner, M. OæDell, A. 
        Romanow, A. Weinrib, L. Zhang. ôResource ReSerVation Protocol 
        (RSVP) -- Version 1, Applicability Statement Some Guidelines on
        Deploymentö, September 1997

  [3]   S. Blake et al., ôAn Architecture for Differentiated Servicesö, 
        RFC 2475, December 1998
  
  [4]   R. Braden et al., ôIntegrated Services in the Internet Architecture:
        An Overviewö, RFC 1633, June 1994

  [5]	D. Hetzer, Reinforcement learning for adaptable bandwidth planning, 
        Information Technology and Cybernetics Conference , CITSA 2005, 
        Orlando, July, 2005

  [6]   D. Hetzer, I.Miloucheva, P.A. Guitierres, Performance Management
        for Efficient QoS Provision and Resource Utilisation in Broadband
        Internet Infrastructure, Broadband Society Workshop, ICETE 2004,
        Setubal, Portugal, August 2004



Hetzer                   Expires December 10, 2005                 [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT     Service for resource reservation in advance    June 2005


  [7]   W. Reinhardt, ôAdvance resource Reservation and its Impact on 
        Reservation Protocolsö, in Proceedings of Broadband Island 95,
        Dublin, Ireland, September 1995                                      

  [8]   L. C. Wolf and R. Steinmetz, ôConcepts for Resource Reservation in
        Advanceö,  in Special Issue of Journal of Multimedia Tools and
        Applications, The State of the  Art in Multimedia Computing, 
        May 1997

  [9]   A. Schill, S. K’hn, F. Breiter, ôDesign and Evaluation of an 
        Advance Reservation Protocol on top of RSVPö, in Broadband, 1998

  [10]  S.Bradner,"Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
        Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

  [11]	C. Frei, B. Faltings, G. Melissagris, P.Pu, ôIconoNET: a Tool for
        Automated Bandwidth Allocation Planningö, in IEEE/IFIP Network
        Operations and Management Symposium (NOMS), Hawaii, April 2000

  [12] 	I. Foster, A. Roy, V. Sander, ôA Quality of Service Architecture 
        that Combines Resource Reservation and Application Adaptationö, 
        in Proceedings of the Eight International Workshop on Quality of
        Service (IWQOS 2000), page 181û188, June 2000

  [13] 	T. Erlebach, ôCall Admission Control for Advance Reservation 
        Requests with Alternativesö,  Eidgen÷ssische Technische Hochschule
        Z’rich, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich, TIK-Report Nr.
        142, July 2002

  [14]  L. Yuan, C. Tham, A.Ananada, ôA Probing Approach for effective 
        distributed resource reservationö, in QoSIP,  2003

  [15]  A. Roy, V. Sander, ôAdvance Reservation APIö, Scheduling Working 
        Group, Scheduling Working Document: 9.2, Draft for First Global 
        Grid Forum, 3. March 2001

  [16]  Gilligan, R., Thomson, S., Bound, J., McCann, J. and W.
        Stevens, "Basic Socket Interface Extensions for IPv6", RFC 3493,
        February 2003

  [17]  Stevens, W. and M. Thomas, "Advanced socket API for IPv6", RFC 2292,
        February 1998   
   
Author's Addresse 
    
Dirk Hetzer
T-Systems
Goslauer Ufer 38				Phone: +49-30-3497-3116
Berlin, Germany     			    email: hetzer@t-systems.com


Hetzer                   Expires December 10, 2005                 [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT     Service for resource reservation in advance    June 2005



Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



Hetzer                   Expires December 10, 2005                [Page 10]

