


SIP                                                              D. York
Internet-Draft                                                     Voxeo
Intended status: Informational                          November 3, 2008
Expires: May 7, 2009


       The Importance of a Visual Identifier of Trusted Identity
          draft-york-sip-visual-identifier-trusted-identity-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 7, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   This document discusses the need for a visual identifier in Session
   Initiation Protocol (SIP) endpoints to indicate to the end user that
   they are speaking with someone whose identity is trusted.








York                       Expires May 7, 2009                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Visual Identifier of Trusted Identity    November 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Author's Note  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Recommendation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Visual Identifier States . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     5.1.  Non-visual Endpoints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     5.2.  Many Vendors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.3.  Limited Display Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.4.  Fonts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.5.  Multiple Callers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.6.  Trusted Identity does not mean a 'secure call' . . . . . .  7
     5.7.  Single Security Visual Identifier  . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   10. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 11






























York                       Expires May 7, 2009                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Visual Identifier of Trusted Identity    November 2008


1.  Introduction

   As discussed at some length on the SIP and SIPPING mailing lists and
   recently summarized by John Elwell in
   [I-D.elwell-sip-e2e-identity-important] there are significant
   challenges in identifying and authenticating the source of a SIP
   request outside of a single administrative domain.  If an end user
   cannot trust the identity of the caller, there is the potential for
   all sorts of fraud and abuse.  Imagine, for instance, if a home user
   thought that the call was coming from their bank or credit card
   company.  Or if a business user thought that a call they received was
   from one of their suppliers.  In both cases, confidential information
   could be divulged that could lead to identity theft or other forms of
   fraud.

   The capability to forge/spoof Caller ID certainly exists on the
   Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN) and there are numerous web
   sites making this an easy task.  However, regular phones connected to
   the PSTN do not have any way to indicate that the caller's identity
   can be trusted and in informal questioning the author has found that
   most people (outside the telecommunications industry) still put a
   high degree of trust in "Caller ID".  This trust may undoubtedly
   continue for some time until sufficient abuse occurs.

   Unfortunately, in the world of SIP it is even easier than the PSTN to
   "spoof" what is normally presented as "Caller ID" through simple
   modification of the From or P-Asserted-Identity [RFC3325] headers.
   This modification could occur conceivably at any point in the chain
   of transmission between the SIP source and destination.  SIP Identity
   defined in [RFC4474] attempts to address this issue but for reasons
   outlined in both [I-D.elwell-sip-e2e-identity-important] and
   [I-D.kaplan-sip-uris-change] this mechanism often fails.

   The danger here is that if "identity" within the world of SIP rapidly
   becomes abused we will find ourselves in a situation where SIP
   identity is given the same amount of credibility as email sender
   addresses are given, which is to say almost none.  The volume of
   email spam has reached a point where sender email addresses are very
   often viewed as suspicious.  As we move to an increasingly
   interconnected SIP infrastructure, there exists the potential for SIP
   caller addresses to be viewed in a similar fashion.

   As efforts are underway to address this issue through either
   modification of RFC4474 SIP Identity or through the development of
   other identity mechanisms, it is suggested that consideration be
   given to how the "trusted identity" will be indicated to the end user
   when the end-to-end identity can in fact be authenticated.




York                       Expires May 7, 2009                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Visual Identifier of Trusted Identity    November 2008


2.  Author's Note

   As this deals with the "user interface" presented to the end user, it
   is not at all clear that the IETF is the correct place to be
   discussing this matter.  For "trusted identity" to be successful in
   the SIP marketplace, it would seem that some type of visual
   identifier would be necessary for users to know when the caller's
   identity can be trusted.  For maximum acceptance, it would be ideal
   if this visual identifier was a common identifier used by the
   majority of manufacturers of SIP endpoints, rather than each
   manufacturer developing such a visual identifier on their own.  For
   such a common identifier to be developed, it would seem to require
   the coordination of some industry-wide and industry-neutral entity.

   However, this is not really a technical issue or a protocol issue but
   rather one of user interface design.  Is this appropriate work for
   the IETF?  Or should this perhaps be done by an industry organization
   such as the SIP Forum whose aim is more to coordinate activities
   between vendors?  Is there a more appropriate home for this work?

   Regardless of whether or not this document proceeds as IETF work, the
   point is that discussions around protocols and systems developed
   within the IETF for establishing trusted identity should take into
   account the fact that such a visual identifier may be desired by end
   users and implemented by vendors.  Work done within the IETF should
   not preclude the development of such a visual identifier.

   Note also that John Elwell has recently (Oct 2008) come out with a
   new draft, [I-D.elwell-sip-identity-handling-ua], that summarizes the
   overall issues and incorporates many of the ideas/issues raised here.


3.  Recommendation

   It is recommended that a common visual identifier be developed that
   would be recommended for usage across SIP endpoints to indicated that
   a user is communicating with someone whose identity is "trusted".

   As an example, consider the "lock" icon used by most web browsers to
   indicate that a user is communicating using HTTPS and that the
   communication between the browser and web server is encrypted using
   SSL/TLS.  Browsers may display the lock icon in different locations
   but if the user is consistently using that browser, he or she will
   become accustomed to where the lock is located.  While it is not
   clear that users do in fact look for this lock icon before divulging
   confidential information, the fact remains that this icon is there on
   most browsers should the user choose to look for it.




York                       Expires May 7, 2009                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Visual Identifier of Trusted Identity    November 2008


   In the SIP world, it is not immediately clear what form this visual
   identifier should take.  A lock icon is certainly one possibility,
   but it is used within web browsers to indicate the use of encrypted
   media and as discussed below, a call can have a trusted identity but
   not necessarily use encryption for media.  Different colors could be
   used, but not all displays may allow the display of colors.  Should
   this work move forward, more investigation needs to be done into what
   is the appropriate form of the visual identifier.


4.  Visual Identifier States

   In the review of the initial version of this document, it was
   identified that there are really three different states this
   identifier could have:

   o  TRUSTED - The identity of the caller can be securely identified
      from the initiating SIP endpoint.

   o  UNTRUSTED - The identity of the caller can NOT be securely
      identified.

   o  TRUSTED FROM THE PSTN GATEWAY - The identity of the caller can be
      securely identified from a PSTN-to-SIP gateway to the recipient's
      SIP endpoint, but because the call originated on the PSTN, there
      can be no guarantee that the identity of the PSTN number can be
      trusted.

   There was a good discussion about whether this third case of PSTN
   interconnectivity merited an actual display status.  All agreed that
   while we could not trust the identity of the PSTN Caller ID, we could
   securely assert the identity of the PSTN gateway.  Is there value in
   passing this information along to the end user?  If we eliminated the
   third case and simply treated all calls from the PSTN as "untrusted"
   would this distress end users?  Or is that the appropriate path to
   take?


5.  Challenges

   There are a number of challenges to both the development and
   deployment of such a visual identifier.

5.1.  Non-visual Endpoints

   While many SIP endpoints may "IP phones" or "softphones" where the
   use of a visual identifier makes sense, there are certainly other SIP
   endpoints where a visual identifier may not be useful or even



York                       Expires May 7, 2009                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Visual Identifier of Trusted Identity    November 2008


   possible.  For instance, interfaces developed for the visually-
   impaired would not have a visual display unit for the user.
   Similarly, command-line-based SIP endpoints may have no way of
   displaying visual indicators.

   It may be that the initial path forward is to standardize a common
   visual identifier for SIP endpoints where such an identifier can be
   displayed and then look separately at how to address the issue of
   indicating trust for endpoints where such an indicator does not make
   sense.

5.2.  Many Vendors

   It goes without saying that for a common visual identifier to
   actually be useful to end users, it will need to ultimately be
   adopted by a significant number of SIP endpoint vendors.  Development
   of such a visual identifier will need to be done in consultation with
   a wide range of vendors.

5.3.  Limited Display Size

   For some SIP endpoints, such as softphones, there may be no issue at
   all with adding additional icons or other symbols to the user
   interface.  However, with some SIP endpoints, such as lower-end
   "hard" phones, the display space may be limited to only a few lines
   of text, much of which may be taken up by the Caller ID, time of the
   call and other information.  There may not be space in the display to
   accomodate another visual identifier.

5.4.  Fonts

   Similar to the limited display size, some SIP endpoints may be
   limited in the available fonts for display.  Some endpoints may allow
   the display of any image or character, while others may only allow
   the use of very specific fonts.  A visual identifier would need to be
   from those fonts - or it would not be visible on these SIP endpoints.

   One path may be that there is a visual identifier that is more of an
   image for use in softphones and other SIP endpoints that can use such
   an identifier and a different identifier, perhaps text-based, that is
   used by SIP endpoints that cannot display the image identifier.

5.5.  Multiple Callers

   While a visual indicator may work well in a call between two parties,
   it is not clear how the identifier should work in a situation where
   the call involves multiple parties and the call legs are being
   connected in the SIP endpoint itself, i.e. not in a conference



York                       Expires May 7, 2009                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Visual Identifier of Trusted Identity    November 2008


   bridge.  If there are three parties in the call and both of the
   external parties have trusted identies, the visual identifier could
   still be used.  But what if one party has a trusted identity but the
   other one does not?  Some SIP endpoints such as softphones may be
   able to display a visual indicator on a per-user basis.  Other
   endpoints may not be able to do so.  It is not immediately clear what
   the best policy is in this situation.

5.6.  Trusted Identity does not mean a 'secure call'

   As mentioned above, the lock icon might be a logical choice based on
   current browser usage, but in the browser world it is used to
   indicated an encrypted connection and that it is not necessarily true
   with trusted identity.  With RFC4474, the identity of the caller is
   authenticated through the signing of portions of the SIP header.
   This in no way requires the encryption of the media stream but yet
   most users would probably think of an "encrypted phone call" as one
   in which the media stream is encrypted.  In many cases, particularly
   those with the use of DTLS-SRTP, the media stream would be encrypted,
   but this encryption cannot be assumed for all connections.  For that
   reason, the lock icon is not the best choice.  [The author also
   believes that at least one vendor may already be using the lock icon
   to indicate media encryption is present.]

   Within web browsers, there is a similar issue going on where
   primarily due to concerns related to phishing and Internet fraud,
   some companies have moved to using Extended Validation SSL (EV SSL)
   certicates where the Certificate Authority issuing the SSL
   certificate conducts a more rigorous process to authenticate the
   identity of the entity to whom the certificate is issued.  Browsers
   then indicate to the user in some fashion that the identity of the
   server site has been certified to a higher standard.  To the author's
   knowledge, there is no common icon used but instead the major
   browsers seem to be changing the browsers address bar to be green and
   potentially providing server information on the bar as well.
   Obviously this exact mechanism would not work well in a SIP
   environment where many endpoints may have only black-and-white
   displays.

5.7.  Single Security Visual Identifier

   In the review of the initial version of this document, there was
   discussion around whether there should be a *single* visual
   identifier that includes both the "secure media" status and the
   "trusted identity".  The argument was made that users are going to
   want to know both, may not care about the difference and may only
   want to see one visual identifier.  The argument was also made that
   in some user interfaces there may be limited display space and only



York                       Expires May 7, 2009                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Visual Identifier of Trusted Identity    November 2008


   room for a single identifier.

   The counter-argument is that given the reality of the small amount of
   deployed secure media it will be far easier to provide people with a
   designation of "trusted identity" than it will be to provide a
   designation of both.  Waiting for deployment of "secure media" would
   significantly delay the availability of "trusted identity"
   information which could be used far sooner.


6.  Conclusions

   As we work on improving mechanisms to develop end-to-end
   authenticated identification of parties involved in communication
   using SIP, it is worth considering that for widespread acceptance of
   the "trusted identity" by end users there exists the need for some
   common visual identifier (where appropriate) that end users can
   understand indicates the level of trust they should put in the caller
   identification.  If such a common identifier can be developed and
   adopted by major manufacturers of SIP endpoints, this may help speed
   the user adoption and acceptance of trusted identity mechanisms
   developed by the IETF.


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document requires no IANA actions.


8.  Security Considerations

   The key security issue with any system such as this is in ensuring
   that the visual identifier cannot be spoofed by an attacker.  If end
   users grow to accept and trust the visual identifier to indicate that
   the other party has a "trusted identity", then it becomes worthwhile
   for an attacker to try to spoof this identifier in some fashion to
   trick the end user into believing that they are speaking with a
   caller whose identity they can trust.  However this identifier is
   implemented by vendors, analysis will need to be done around how to
   protect against such attacks.

   Any such visual identifier is also subject to the inherent weakness
   of all SIP identity mechanisms that the identity of the SIP endpoint
   can be ascertained but not necessarily the person speaking into that
   endpoint.  The identifier can indicate that the trusted identity of
   the SIP endpoint calling is "Dan York" but cannot indicate that Dan
   York is in fact the person speaking into the phone.




York                       Expires May 7, 2009                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Visual Identifier of Trusted Identity    November 2008


9.  Acknowledgements

   The author acknowledges that the decision to create this draft was
   made after reading a posting to the SIP mailing list by Paul Kyzivat.

   The author thanks the following people for their review of the
   initial draft and participation in discussion: Vijay Gurbani, John
   Elwell, Paul Kyzivat, Spencer Dawkins, David Oran and Adam Roach.


10.  Informative References

   [I-D.elwell-sip-e2e-identity-important]
              Elwell, J., "End-to-End Identity Important in the Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP)",
              draft-elwell-sip-e2e-identity-important-01 (work in
              progress), October 2008.

   [I-D.elwell-sip-identity-handling-ua]
              Elwell, J., "Identity Handling at a Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP) User Agent",
              draft-elwell-sip-identity-handling-ua-00 (work in
              progress), October 2008.

   [I-D.kaplan-sip-uris-change]
              Kaplan, H., "Why URIs Are Changed Crossing Domains",
              draft-kaplan-sip-uris-change-00 (work in progress),
              February 2008.

   [RFC3325]  Jennings, C., Peterson, J., and M. Watson, "Private
              Extensions to the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) for
              Asserted Identity within Trusted Networks", RFC 3325,
              November 2002.

   [RFC4474]  Peterson, J. and C. Jennings, "Enhancements for
              Authenticated Identity Management in the Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 4474, August 2006.














York                       Expires May 7, 2009                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Visual Identifier of Trusted Identity    November 2008


Author's Address

   Dan York
   Voxeo Corporation
   Keene, NH
   USA

   Phone: +1-407-455-5859
   Email: dyork@voxeo.com
   URI:   http://www.voxeo.com/









































York                       Expires May 7, 2009                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Visual Identifier of Trusted Identity    November 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





York                       Expires May 7, 2009                 [Page 11]

