

Network Working Group                                        M. Mealling
Internet-Draft                                                  VeriSign
Expires: October 31, 2002                                    L. Masinter
                                              Adobe Systems Incorporated
                                                               T. Hardie
                                                                 Nominum
                                                                G. Klyne
                                                              Clearswift
                                                             May 2, 2002


      An IETF URN Sub-namespace for Registered Protocol Parameters
                     draft-mealling-iana-urn-03.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 31, 2002.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document describes a new sub-delegation for the 'ietf' URN
   namespace for registered protocol items.  The 'ietf' URN namespace is
   defined in RFC 2648 as a root for persistent URIs that refer to IETF-
   defined resources.





Mealling, et. al.       Expires October 31, 2002                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             IANA URN Namespace                   May 2002


1. Introduction

   From time to time IETF standards require the registration of various
   protocol elements in well known central repository.  The Internet
   Assigned Numbers Authority maintains this central repository and
   takes direction from the IETF on what, how and when to add items to
   it.  The IANA maintains lists of items such as all assigned port
   numbers, MIME media types, enterprise numbers, etc.

   Over time there has developed a need to be able to reference these
   elements as URIs in various schema.  In the past this was done in a
   very ad hoc way that easily led to interoperability problems.  This
   document creates a new sub-delegation below the "ietf" [2]URN
   namespace [1] called 'params' which acts as a standardized mechanism
   for naming the items registered for IETF standards.  Any assignments
   below that are specified in an RFC according to the IETF concensus
   process and which include the template found in Section 3.

2. IETF Sub-namespace Specifics

   Sub-namespace name:

      "params"


   Declared registrant of the namespace:



       The Internet Engineering Task Force


   Declaration of structure:

      The namespace is primarily opaque.  The IANA, as operator of the
      registry, may take suggestions for names to assign but they
      reserve the right to assign whatever name they desire, within
      guidelines set by the IESG.  The colon character (":") is used to
      denote a very limited concept of hierarchy.  If a colon is present
      then the items on both sides of it are valid names.  In general,
      if a name has a colon then the item on the left hand side
      represents a class of those items that would contain other items
      of that class.  For example, a name can be assigned to the entire
      list of DNS resource record type codes as well as for each
      individual code.  The URN for the list might look like this:






Mealling, et. al.       Expires October 31, 2002                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             IANA URN Namespace                   May 2002


       urn:ietf:params:dns:rr-type-codes



      while the URN for the SOA records type code might look like this:



       urn:ietf:params:dns:rr-type-codes:soa




   Relevant ancillary documentation:

      [3], [2], [1]


   Identifier uniqueness considerations:

      The IESG uses the IETF concensus process to ensure that sub-
      namespaces generate unique names within that sub-namespace.  The
      IESG delegates to the IANA the task of ensuring that the sub-
      namespace names themselves are unique.  Until and unless the IESG
      specifies differently, the IANA is directed to ensure uniqueness
      by comparing the name to be assigned with the list of previously
      assigned names.  In the case of a conflict the IANA is to request
      a new string from the registrant until the conflict is resolved.


   Identifier persistence considerations:

      Once a name has been allocated it MUST NOT be re-allocated for a
      different purpose.  The rules provided for assignments of values
      within a sub-namespace MUST be constructed so that the meaning of
      values cannot change.  This registration mechanism is not
      appropriate for naming values whose meaning may change over time.
      If a value that changes over time the assignment MUST name the
      container or concept that contains the value, not the value
      itself.  For example, if a parameter called 'foo' has a value that
      changes over time, it is valid to create the name
      'urn:ietf:params:foo-params:foo' that identifies that 'slot'.  It
      is not valid to actually create a name that contains that value
      unless it is a persistent and unique value such as a version
      number.


   Process of identifier assignment:



Mealling, et. al.       Expires October 31, 2002                [Page 3]


      Identifiers are assigned only after a particular protocol element
      or number has been registered with the IANA using standard
      policies and procedures, or documented in an RFC describing a
      standards track protocol.  This means that the 'gating' function
      for assignment is the "IETF Concensus" process documented in RFC
      2434 [4].


   Process of identifier resolution:

      At this time no resolution mechanism is defined.


   Rules for Lexical Equivalence:

      Lexical equivalence is achieved by exact string match.


   Conformance with URN Syntax:

      There are no additional characters reserved.


   Validation mechanism:

      None.


   Scope:

      Global



3. Assigning Names

   The creation of a new registry name will be simple for most flat
   registries.  The only required elements will be the registry name , a
   reference to relevant documents, a statement about which
   current/proposed document repositories contains the authoritative
   data for the registry, and a statement specifying which element in
   the registry is the value to be used in the URN.  In most cases this
   last element will be the index value assigned by the IANA.

   More complex registries (DNS Parameters for example) will need to
   repeat that information for any sub-namespaces.  It should also be
   clear as to whether or not a name is assigned to the sub-namespace
   itself (i.e.  is 'urn:ietf:params:dns:rr-types' valid by itself and
   if so, what does it name?).




Mealling, et. al.       Expires October 31, 2002                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             IANA URN Namespace                   May 2002


   The template:

   Registry name: -- The name of the sub-namespace.  In many cases this
      should be the same name that the IANA calls the registry itself.

   Specification: -- Relevant IETF published documents that define the
      registry and the items in it.

   Repository: -- A pointer to the 'current' location of the registry in
      the protocol parameters repository or the relevant RFCs that
      document the items being named.  This value will change over time
      as the entity that maintains the repository moves files and or
      fileservers.  It is not meant as a permanent binding to the
      filename but as a hint to the IANA for what the initial mapping
      would be.

   Index value: -- Description of how a registered value is to be
      embedded in the URI form.  This MUST include details of any
      transformations that may be needed for the resulting string to
      conform to URN syntax rules and and any canonicalization needed so
      that the case-sensitive string comparison yields the expected
      equivalences.

   The process for requesting that a URN be assigned is currently to put
   the above template or a reference to it in the IANA considerations
   section of the specifying document.  Other more automated processes
   may be proposed at a latter time if demand requires it.

4. Security Considerations

   None not already inherent to using URNs.

5. IANA Considerations

   This document puts a new and significant burden on the IANA since it
   may require a additional assignment process to happen for each new
   IANA registry.  To minimize the administrative burden on IANA, any
   parameter namespace registration is very clear about the criteria for
   inclusion in that namespace.

   Defining a registry that fits the constraints of a URN namespace will
   impose extra discipline that should take some of the guess-work about
   creating and maintaining that registry.

References

   [1]  Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997.




Mealling, et. al.       Expires October 31, 2002                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             IANA URN Namespace                   May 2002


   [2]  Moats, R., "A URN Namespace for IETF Documents", RFC 2648,
        August 1999.

   [3]  Daigle, L., van Gulik, D., Iannella, R. and P. Faltstrom, "URN
        Namespace Definition Mechanisms", BCP 33, RFC 2611, June 1999.

   [4]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an IANA
        Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 2434, October 1998.


Authors' Addresses

   Michael Mealling
   VeriSign
   21345 Ridgetop Circle
   Sterling, VA  20166
   US

   EMail: michael@verisignlabs.com, michael@neonym.net
   URI:   http://www.verisign.com


   Larry Masinter
   Adobe Systems Incorporated
   345 Park Ave
   San Jose, CA  95110
   US

   Phone: +1 408 536-3024
   EMail: LMM@acm.org
   URI:   http://larry.masinter.net


   Ted Hardie
   Nominum

   EMail: Ted.Hardie@nominum.com














Mealling, et. al.       Expires October 31, 2002                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             IANA URN Namespace                   May 2002


   Graham Klyne
   Clearswift Corporation
   MIMEsweeper Group
   1310 Waterside
   Arlington Business Park
   Theale, Reading  RG7 4SA
   UK

   Phone: +44 11 8903 8903
   EMail: Graham.Klyne@MIMEsweeper.com









































Mealling, et. al.       Expires October 31, 2002                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             IANA URN Namespace                   May 2002


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Mealling, et. al.       Expires October 31, 2002                [Page 8]

