

Network Working Group                                          L. Daigle
Internet-Draft                                                    Editor
Expires: April 7, 2004                       Internet Architecture Board
                                                                     IAB
                                                         October 8, 2003


           IETF ISOC Board of Trustee Appointment Procedures
                        draft-iab-isocbot-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 7, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This memo outlines the process by which the IETF makes a selection of
   an Internet Society (ISOC) Board of Trustees appointment.

1. Introduction

   The Internet Society (ISOC) provides organizational and financial
   support for the IETF.  As stipulated in ISOC's by-laws the IETF is
   called upon to name 3 Trustees to its Board (BoT), with staggered 3
   year terms.  This requires that the IETF name one Trustee each year.




Daigle & Internet Architecture Board    Expires April 7, 2004    [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            draft-iab-isocbot-01              October 2003


   This memo outlines the process by which the IETF makes that
   selection.  This process will also be used in the event of mid-term
   vacancies that may arise with IETF nominated Board positions.

1.1 Overview of Selection Process

   In brief, this document describes the timeframe and procedures for
   the IAB to solicit public input and make a selection for the open
   position each year.

1.2 Rationale

   An alternative approach to making a selection for these positions
   would be to use the IETF's NomCom (RFC 2727 [1] and its revisions).
   However, that NomCom is chartered and defined specifically to the
   task of making selections for IETF organization tasks, and the ISOC
   BoT appointment process does not fit that in 2 ways:

   1.  the timeframe of the appointment does not mesh with the IETF
       appointment cycle

   2.  the nature of the deliberations and the type of information
       solicited would be significantly different for an external
       appointment, such as this appointment to the ISOC BoT

   The first issue (timing) could be resolved fairly easily for this
   specific appointment.  The second issue is more general, and not
   reasonably reconciled with the IETF NomCom task as currently
   specified.

   The process described in RFC 2727 oriented toward soliciting feedback
   from the IETF community with respect to individuals and technical
   positions with which they have personal experience.  To make a good
   decision on external appointments, in general, the NomCom would have
   to understand the requirements for those positions, and attempt to
   evaluate candidates for a very different set of skills than is
   required of IAB/IESG members.  It might also require soliciting
   feedback from outside the IETF community.   There is no question that
   the individuals that constitute the IETF NomCom each year have the
   competence to carry out such a search; the issue is that it is a very
   different task, would require additional time and resources, and
   therefore is a side effort that could very well undermine the
   effectiveness of the NomCom in carrying out its primary task for the
   IETF.

   By contrast, the IAB is chartered to be responsible for IETF external
   liaisons, is a standing body that works with ISOC (and the ISOC
   Board), and therefore has a working knowledge of the requirements of



Daigle & Internet Architecture Board    Expires April 7, 2004    [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            draft-iab-isocbot-01              October 2003


   the specific position discussed here.

   At some future point, if there is a more general need to make
   external appointments, the IETF may consider broadening the scope of
   the IETF NomCom role, or create a separate nominating committee for
   such external non-liaison appointments.  This document proposes that
   is not necessary or desirable for the purposes of this one annual
   appointment.

2. Desirable Qualifications and Selection Criteria for an IETF-Nominated
   ISOC Trustee

   Candidates for an ISOC Trustee should have a demonstrable involvement
   in the IETF with a particular focus on active participation in IETF
   Working Groups.

   The candidate is expected to possess clearly demonstrated technical
   competence in Internet technology, and be able to articulate
   technology issues such that the ISOC Board can be provided with sound
   technical perspectives.  The candidate is also expected to be able to
   understand the respective roles and responsibilities of the IETF and
   ISOC and be able to articulate these roles within both organizational
   communities.

   The candidate will also be expected to exercise all the duties of an
   ISOC Board member, including fiduciary responsibility, setting of
   policies, oversight of the operation of the Society,  representing
   the interests of the members and stakeholders of the Society and
   participation in all Board meetings and Board activity programs.

   The candidate is not a representative or a delegate of the IETF and
   is not chartered to represent the IETF or the IETF Standards Process
   within the ISOC Board or the broader ISOC community.  However it is
   expected that the candidate would be able to call on experts in the
   IETF community as required, to ensure that the ISOC Board receives
   the highest quality technical advice available.

3. IETF ISOC Board of Trustees Selection Process

3.1 Nominations and eligibility

   Each year, the IAB will make a public call for nominations on the
   ietf-announce@ietf.org mailing list.  The public call will specify
   the manner by which nominations will be accepted and the means by
   which the list of nominees will be published.

   Self-nominations are permitted.  Along with the name and contact
   information for each candidate, details about the candidate's



Daigle & Internet Architecture Board    Expires April 7, 2004    [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            draft-iab-isocbot-01              October 2003


   background and qualifications for the position should be attached to
   the nomination.  All IETF participants, including working group
   chairs, IETF NomCom members, IAB and IESG members are eligible for
   nomination.

   IAB and IESG members who accept nomination will recuse themselves
   from selection and confirmation discussions respectively.

3.2 Selection

   The IAB will publish the list of nominated persons, review the
   nomination material, and make a selection.

   The selection criteria will include additional consideration of any
   nominated candidates who are concurrently members of the IAB or IESG
   members such that at the time of selection no more than two of the
   three IETF-appointed ISOC Trustees are IAB and IESG members.

3.3 Confirmation

   The IESG will act as the confirming body for the selection.  In the
   event that the IESG determines not to confirm the nominated
   candidate, the IESG will provide the IAB with the basis for this
   determination and the IAB will nominate another candidate.

3.4 Timeframe

   ISOC expects to seat new Board members at its annual general meeting
   in June of each year.  Basic timeframe requirements for the IETF
   process are as follows:

   o  4-6 weeks for solicitation of nominations

   o  4-6 weeks for review of nominees, deliberation and selection

   o  4-6 weeks for confirmation (and re-selection as necessary) and
      delivery to ISOC

   In January of each year, the IAB will announce the specific dates for
   the IETF ISOC Trustee selection process for that year (taking into
   account the particular dates of the first IETF meeting of the year,
   etc), following the guidelines above.

3.5 Mid-term Vacancies

   This document describes the process for the general, annual
   appointment of ISOC Trustees to fill the seats of Trustees whose
   terms are ending.  However, if an IETF-appointed Trustee is unable to



Daigle & Internet Architecture Board    Expires April 7, 2004    [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            draft-iab-isocbot-01              October 2003


   serve his or her full term, the IAB may, at its discretion,
   immediately select a replacement to serve the remainder of the term
   using the interim process defined in Section 3.5.1.  If the IAB does
   not invoke the interim process, the next annual selection process
   will fill the vacancy (if the vacant term does not end at that point)
   as well as the regular appointment for that selection cycle.

3.5.1 Interim Appointment Process

   If the IAB elects to fill the mid-term vacancy before the next annual
   selection, a separate timeline will be announced and the rest of the
   process described in this document will be followed.

4. Security Considerations

   This document does not describe any technical protocols and has no
   implications for network security.

References

   [1]  Galvin, J., "IAB and IESG Selection, Confirmation, and Recall
        Process: Operation of the Nominating and Recall Committees", BCP
        10, RFC 2727, February 2000.


Authors' Addresses

   Leslie Daigle
   Editor


   Internet Architecture Board
   IAB

   EMail: iab@iab.org

Appendix A. IAB Members at the time of this writing

      Bernard Aboba

      Harald Alvestrand

      Rob Austein

      Leslie Daigle

      Patrik Faltstrom




Daigle & Internet Architecture Board    Expires April 7, 2004    [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            draft-iab-isocbot-01              October 2003


      Sally Floyd

      Mark Handley

      Geoff Huston

      Jun-ichiro (Itojun) Hagino

      Charlie Kaufman

      James Kempf

      Eric Rescorla

      Mike St.Johns




































Daigle & Internet Architecture Board    Expires April 7, 2004    [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            draft-iab-isocbot-01              October 2003


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Daigle & Internet Architecture Board    Expires April 7, 2004    [Page 7]

