


SASL WG                                                      N. Williams
Internet-Draft                                                       Sun
Updates: rfc4422                                          April 15, 2009
(if approved)
Intended status: Standards Track
Expires: October 17, 2009


                        SASL And Channel Binding
                draft-ietf-sasl-channel-bindings-02.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 17, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.







Williams                Expires October 17, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            SASL Channel Binding                April 2009


Abstract

   This document specifies the semantics of channel binding for the
   Simple Authentication and Security Layers (SASL) framework,
   mechanisms and applications.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     1.1.  Conventions used in this document . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Channel Binding Semantics and Negotiation for SASL  . . . . . . 4
   3.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
     5.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
     5.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

































Williams                Expires October 17, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            SASL Channel Binding                April 2009


1.  Introduction

   The introduction of the Salted Challenge Response (SCRAM) SASL
   mechanism [I-D.newman-auth-scram] and GS2 family of SASL mechanisms
   [I-D.ietf-sasl-gs2] requires that we define the semantics of channel
   binding [RFC5056] in the context of SASL [RFC4422].

   In SASL channel bindings are all-or-nothing, and the use or non-use
   of channel binding is negotiated via mechanism negotiation, with
   downgrade protection built into mechanisms that support channel
   binding.  See Section 2.

1.1.  Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


































Williams                Expires October 17, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            SASL Channel Binding                April 2009


2.  Channel Binding Semantics and Negotiation for SASL

   In order to use SASL [RFC4422] with channel binding [RFC5056] the
   client and server applications MUST provide the SASL mechanism with
   channel bindings data and channel binding type names for all
   available channel binding types for the channel to be bound.  These
   channel bindings data MUST be provided to the mechanism before the
   first authentication message is produced or consumed by the
   mechanism.  The mechanism MUST use at least one, and MAY use more
   than one of the provided channel binding types.

   Channel binding is OPTIONAL, but when used, channel binding failure
   MUST cause authentication failure.

   Use of channel binding must be negotiable.  Either or both of the
   client and server might not support channel binding in any given
   exchange.  But because channel binding is all or nothing we need a
   method for negotiating its use.  We accomplish this by using a
   convention by which the server can indicate whether it supports
   channel binding in its mechanism list.  That is, we overload the
   mechanism negotiation to obtain channel binding negotiation.

   The convention is that the specification for any SASL mechanism that
   supports optional channel binding MUST specify two mechanism names:
   one that indicates server support for channel binding, and one that
   indicates the opposite.  Otherwise these two names MUST be
   equivalent.  Mechanisms that require the use of channel bindings
   SHOULD have a single mechanism name.  We RECOMMEND the use of a
   mechanism name suffix, specifically "-PLUS" to indicate server
   support for channel binding.

   The server MUST NOT advertise mechanism names indicating support for
   channel binding if the server application or the mechanism
   implementations do not support channel binding.  Conversely, the
   server MUST advertise mechanism names indicating support for channel
   binding if the server application and the mechanism implementations
   do support channel binding.

   The client MUST NOT use channel binding if it lists the server's
   mechanisms and does not find a suitable mechanism that supports
   channel binding in that list.

   To prevent downgrade attacks each mechanism that supports channel
   binding MUST provide downgrade attack detection.  To do this the
   client application MUST provide the name of the selected mechanism,
   or the server's entire mechanism list, as an input to the mechanism
   prior to producing the mechanism's first authentication message.  The
   mechanism MUST securely indicate to the server whether the client a)



Williams                Expires October 17, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            SASL Channel Binding                April 2009


   chose to use channel binding, b) would have chosen to use channel
   binding if the server had supported it, c) cannot do channel binding.
   In the case of (c) the server MUST fail authentication if the server
   does actually support channel binding.















































Williams                Expires October 17, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            SASL Channel Binding                April 2009


3.  IANA Considerations

   This document changes the procedures for registration of SASL
   mechanism names in the IANA SASL mechanism name registry.  Henceforth
   any SASL mechanism registration MUST indicate a) whether the
   mechanism supports channel binding, b) whether it requires channel
   binding, and, if the mechanism supports optional channel binding then
   c) two mechanism names and an indication of which name indicates
   server support for channel binding.










































Williams                Expires October 17, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            SASL Channel Binding                April 2009


4.  Security Considerations

   For general security considerations relating to channel bindings see
   [RFC5056].  For general security considerations relating to SASL see
   [RFC4422].

   This document specifies how channel binding fits into SASL and,
   specifically, the semantics of channel binding for SASL and how
   channel binding is negotiated.  The negotiation of channel binding is
   subject to downgrade attacks by active attackers, therefore we
   include a requirement that SASL mechanisms provide protection against
   downgrade attacks.  Protection against downgrade attacks requires
   that the application provide certain information to the SASL
   mechanism.  See Section 2.





































Williams                Expires October 17, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            SASL Channel Binding                April 2009


5.  References

5.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4422]  Melnikov, A. and K. Zeilenga, "Simple Authentication and
              Security Layer (SASL)", RFC 4422, June 2006.

   [RFC5056]  Williams, N., "On the Use of Channel Bindings to Secure
              Channels", RFC 5056, November 2007.

5.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-sasl-gs2]
              Josefsson, S. and N. Williams, "Using GSS-API Mechanisms
              in SASL: The GS2 Mechanism Family", draft-ietf-sasl-gs2-11
              (work in progress), March 2009.

   [I-D.newman-auth-scram]
              Menon-Sen, A., Melnikov, A., Newman, C., and N. Williams,
              "Salted Challenge Response (SCRAM) SASL Mechanism",
              draft-newman-auth-scram-12 (work in progress), March 2009.



























Williams                Expires October 17, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            SASL Channel Binding                April 2009


Author's Address

   Nicolas Williams
   Sun Microsystems
   5300 Riata Trace Ct
   Austin, TX  78727
   US

   Email: Nicolas.Williams@sun.com










































Williams                Expires October 17, 2009                [Page 9]

