Internet Engineering Task Force                       S. Harris
INTERNET-DRAFT                                        Merit Network
                                                      June 20, 2001

                      IETF Guidelines for Conduct
                    <draft-ietf-poisson-code-03.txt>

Status of this Memo

     This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
     of Section 10 of RFC2026.

     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
     other groups may also distribute working documents as
     Internet-Drafts.

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
     documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
     Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
     "work in progress."

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

This document provides a set of guidelines for personal interaction in
the Internet Engineering Task Force. The Guidelines recognize the
diversity of IETF participants, emphasize the value of mutual respect,
and stress the broad applicability of our work.

Introduction

The work of the IETF relies on cooperation among a broad cultural
diversity of peoples, ideas, and communication styles.  The Guidelines
for Conduct inform our interaction as we work together to develop
multiple, interoperable technologies for the Internet.  All IETF
participants aim to abide by these Guidelines as we build consensus in
person, at IETF meetings, and in e-mail. If conflicts arise, we resolve
them according to the procedures outlined in BCP 25.



Harris                                                          [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT        IETF Guidelines for Conduct              June 2001


Principles of Conduct

1.   IETF participants extend respect and courtesy to their colleagues
     at all times.

     IETF participants come from diverse origins and backgrounds and
     are equipped with multiple capabilities and ideals.  Regardless
     of these individual differences, participants treat their
     colleagues with respect as persons--especially when it is
     difficult to agree with them.  Seeing from another's point of
     view is often revealing, even when it fails to be compelling.

     English is the de facto language of the IETF, but it is not the
     native language of many IETF participants.  Native English
     speakers attempt to speak clearly and a bit slowly and to limit
     the use of slang in order to accommodate the needs of all
     listeners.

2.   IETF participants develop and test ideas impartially, without
     finding fault with the colleague proposing the idea.

     We dispute ideas by using reasoned argument, rather than through
     intimidation or ad hominem attack. Or, said in a somewhat more
     IETF-like way:

          "Reduce the heat and increase the light"

3.   IETF participants think globally, devising solutions that meet the
     needs of diverse technical and operational environments.

     The goal of the IETF is to maintain and enhance a working,
     viable, scalable, global Internet, and the concomitant problems
     are genuinely very difficult.  We understand that "scaling is the
     ultimate problem" and that many ideas quite workable in the small
     fail this crucial test. IETF participants use their best
     engineering judgement to find the best solution for the whole
     Internet, not just the best solution for any particular network,
     technology, vendor, or user.

4.   Individuals who attend Working Group meetings are prepared to
     contribute to the ongoing work of the group.

     IETF participants who attend Working Group meetings read the
     relevant Internet-Drafts, RFCs, and e-mail archives beforehand,
     in order to familiarize themselves with the technology under
     discussion.  This may represent a challenge for newcomers, as
     e-mail archives can be difficult to locate and search, and it
     may not be easy to trace the history of longstanding Working
     Group debates.  With that in mind, newcomers who attend Working
     Group meetings are encouraged to observe and absorb whatever



Harris                                                          [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT        IETF Guidelines for Conduct              June 2001


     material they can, but should not interfere with the ongoing
     process of the group. Working Group meetings run on a very
     limited time schedule, and are not intended for the education
     of individuals. The work of the group will continue on the
     mailing list, and many questions would be better expressed on
     the list in the months that follow.

Acknowledgements

Mike O'Dell wrote the first draft of the Principles for Conduct, and
many of his thoughts, statements, and observations are included in this
version.  Many useful editorial comments were supplied by Dave Crocker.
Members of the POISSON Working Group provided many significant additions
to the text.

Author's Address

Susan Harris
srh@merit.edu
Merit Network, Inc.
4251 Plymouth Rd., Suite C
Ann Arbor, MI 48105-2785
Phone: (734) 936-2100
Fax:   (734) 647-3185



























Harris                                                          [Page 3]



