

 
Network Working Group                                                    
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                   A. Lior 
Category: Informational                              Bridgewater Systems 
draft-lior-radius-reliable-accounting-00.txt                             
                                                                         
Expires:  December 23rd 2003                                             
                                                                         
    
    
       Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service (RADIUS) Reliable 
                                 Transport 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of [RFC2026]. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved. 
    
Abstract 
    
   Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service (RADIUS) Request For 
   Comments (RFCs) do not address RADIUS reliability with respect to 
   transport of RADIUS messages.  This Informational Internet Draft 
   describes procedures for Retransmission, Failover and Failback. 
    
    
 
 
Lior, et al.                                                  [Page 1] 
                      RADIUS Reliable Transport         February 2003 
 
 
    
    
    
    
    
Table of Contents 
 
   1. Introduction...................................................3 
      1.1 Reliable Transport of Authentication and Authorization 
      messages.......................................................3 
      1.2 Reliable Transport of Accounting messages..................3 
      1.3 Terminology................................................4 
      1.4 Requirements language......................................4 
   2. RADIUS Transport Today.........................................4 
      2.1 RADIUS Transport of Authentication and Authorization.......4 
      2.2 RADIUS Transport of Accounting.............................5 
      2.3 RADIUS Transportation of Dynamic Authorization messages....6 
   3. Model..........................................................7 
   4. General Requirements...........................................9 
   5. General Algorithm..............................................9 
      5.1 Retransmit Algorithm......................................10 
      5.2 Offline Algorithm.........................................10 
      5.3 Online Algorithm..........................................12 
   6. Special Consideration.........................................13 
      6.1 Consideration for Accounting Messages.....................13 
      6.2 Consideration for Dynamic Authorization Messages..........13 
   7. Security Considerations.......................................14 
   8. Normative References..........................................14 
   9. Informative References........................................15 
   10. Acknowledgments..............................................15 
   11. Author's Addresses...........................................15 
   12. Intellectual Property Statement..............................15 
   13. Full Copyright Statement.....................................16 
   14. Expiration Date..............................................16 
    








 
 
Lior, et al.                Informational                    [Page 2] 
                      RADIUS Reliable Transport         February 2003 
 
 
    
1. Introduction 
   
   
   In the context of this document, transport reliability includes the 
   ability to detect failures in communication between two RADIUS 
   entities (client and server), retransmission of messages, failover 
   procedures, and failback procedures. 
    
   Transport reliability is not part of the RADIUS specification and 
   has been left up to implementers resulting in an inconsistent 
   approaches that make it difficult to engineer reliable RADIUS based 
   deployments. 
    
   This document recommends an approach to provide a reliable transport 
   for RADIUS messages.  There have been other discussions covering AAA 
   Reliable Transport [AAATransport], and implementation of these, for 
   example Diameter [Diameter].  However, these discussions covered AAA 
   protocols that use connection oriented protocols (TCP and SCTP) 
   where as RADIUS uses a connectionless based protocol (UDP) as the 
   transport mechanism.  Where applicable, this document adopts some of 
   the principles covered by these other sources. 
    
1.1 Reliable Transport of Authentication and Authorization messages. 
    
    
   TODO: Motivation for reliable transport during Authentication and 
   Authorization is needed. 
    
1.2 Reliable Transport of Accounting messages 
    
    
   Usage based billing, requires accuracy in billing presentment.  
   Customers should be presented with a bill that is consistent with 
   their usage and contains no errors.   
    
   When errors in accounting occur, operators often err on the side of 
   the customer.  This results in loss of revenue for the operator.  
   Worse, if a customer gets an inconsistent bill, or an inaccurate 
   bill, they may call customer support.  Support calls are expensive, 
   and customer dissatisfaction must be avoided as well. 
    
   The RADIUS protocol does not have a reliable mechanism for 
   delivering of accounting messages.  Historically RADIUS has been 
   used to service dialup subscribers that are generally billed in very 
   coarse grain fashion that range from monthly or yearly contracts to 
 
 
Lior, et al.                Informational                    [Page 3] 
                      RADIUS Reliable Transport         February 2003 
 
 
   block of time contracts measured in hours.  Precision from the 
   accounting records was not required.  For example, if the subscriber 
   is using a hourly plan and an accounting records for a particular 
   session are lost, then the operator may lose a few hours of revenue 
   billed at pennies per hour.  This coarse granularity meant that 
   accounting records did not have to be reliable. 
    
   Systems such as Voice over IP (VoIP), WiFi LANs, where usage based 
   billing is used, loss of accounting records could reflect a 
   significant loss of revenue.  For example, assuming RADIUS 
   Accounting Interim generated every 60-600 seconds (60 is the 
   minimum, 600 is the recommended minium) and if we lose the RADIUS 
   Accounting Stop record; this loss would represent a loss of 60 to 
   600 seconds of revenue. 
    
   This draft describes a best practice for increasing the reliability 
   of RADIUS Accounting messages. 
    
    
1.3 Terminology 
    
    
                               
                               
                               
                               
                               
                               
                               
                               
 
1.4 Requirements language 
    
    
   In this document, several words are used to signify the requirements 
   of the specification.  These words are often capitalized.  The key 
   words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119]. 
    
2. RADIUS Transport Today 
   
   
2.1 RADIUS Transport of Authentication and Authorization 
    
    

 
 
Lior, et al.                Informational                    [Page 4] 
                      RADIUS Reliable Transport         February 2003 
 
 
   RADIUS Authentication and Authorization procedures are described in 
   [RFC2865] and [RFC2869].  In the process of authenticating a user, 
   the RADIUS Client (e.g. NAS) will send one or more Access-Request 
   messages to Proxy server, that may be forwarding the requests to a 
   Remote server.  Under normal conditions, each Access-Request should 
   result in one of the following responses: Access-Accept,Access-
   Reject or Access-Challenge.  Under certain conditions, such as 
   network errors, the RADIUS Client may not get a response back. 
    
   If a response is not received after some unspecified time, the NAS 
   or Proxy RADIUS, will retry and eventually failover to another 
   RADIUS server.  As time progresses, servers that failed need to be 
   retried. 
    
   How long to wait, how many times to retry, how to fail over, how and 
   when to failback, is not covered by the RADIUS specification. 
    
2.2 RADIUS Transport of Accounting 
    
    
   RADIUS accounting messages are described in [RFC2866] and [RFC2869].  
   A RADIUS client sends Accounting-Request (start) messages at the 
   start of a session-segments, Accounting-Request (stop) messages at 
   the end of session-segments and optionally, Accounting-Request 
   (Interim) messages periodically during the session at a rate 
   controlled by Accounting Interim Interval. 
    
   The RADIUS client receives an Accounting-Response message once a 
   RADIUS Accounting Server has received the Accounting packet and took 
   responsibility for it. 
    
   The Accounting messages may traverse through zero or more proxy 
   RADIUS Accounting Server before reaching their destination.  As 
   described in [RFC2866], the proxy RADIUS Accounting Servers may pass 
   the Accounting messages immediately to the next RADIUS Accounting 
   Server in the proxy chain or it may store the accounting messages 
   and send them at a later time.  If the proxy RADIUS Accounting 
   Server stores the accounting message it responds back to the client 
   with an Accounting Response message. 
    
   The RADIUS specification only provides for an Accounting-Response to 
   acknowledge the successful reception of Accounting Packets.  There 
   isnÆt an Accounting NAK message.  A receiver of an accounting 
   message will silently discard a bad message.  The sender of the 
 
 
Lior, et al.                Informational                    [Page 5] 
                      RADIUS Reliable Transport         February 2003 
 
 
   message may not know why an acknowledgement was not received.  Is it 
   because the access request message was lost, was the response lost, 
   or was there an error.  The sender has no option but to retry. 
    
   From RFC2866, "It is recommended that the client continue attempting 
   to send the Accounting-Request packet until it receives an 
   acknowledgement, using some form of backoff.  If no response is 
   returned within a length of time, the request is re-sent a number of 
   times.  The client can also forward requests to an alternate server 
   or servers in the event that the primary server is down or 
   unreachable.  An alternate server can be used either after a number 
   of tries to the primary server fail, or in a round-robin fashion.  
   Retry and fallback algorithms are the topic of current research and 
   are not specified in detail in this document." 
    
   Furthermore failure issues are made more complex due to the presence 
   of proxy servers.  The failures can occur at each proxy.  The 
   specification is not clear about how failures should be handled at 
   the proxy.  Should they silently discard and let the originator try? 
   Or should they retry?  How long do we wait. 
    
   The specification is also not clear on the issue of whether or not 
   we treat the three types of accounting messages equally when 
   failures are detected. 
    
   In this Internet draft we recommend strategies for dealing with the 
   above shortcomings.  We believe that application of these 
   recommendations will go along way to make RADIUS accounting reliable 
   enough to be used in application that demand stringent accounting, 
   such as usage based billing. 
    
2.3 RADIUS Transportation of Dynamic Authorization messages 
    
    
   Dynamic authorization messages described in [CHIBA] include 
   Disconnect-Messages and Change-of-Authorization messages.  These 
   messages are sent by RADIUS server to the NAS directly or via 
   intermediaries. 
    
   A sender of a Disconnect Message or a Change of Authorization 
   message expects a NAK or ACK response to his message.  If the sender 
   does not receive a NAK or ACK it should retry sending the message.  
   The retransmission and failover procedures are not specified. 
    
 
 
Lior, et al.                Informational                    [Page 6] 
                      RADIUS Reliable Transport         February 2003 
 
 
   In case of CHIBA, when the sender receives a NAK message, the sender 
   should examine the Error-Code and based on the value it may choose 
   to retransmit the message.  See further details below. 
    
3. Model 
   
   
   In this section we present a general set of recommendations to 
   address the above issues. 
    
   The general model used for these discussions is represented in 
   figure 1. 
    
   In figure 1, a RADIUS client can be a NAS, or another RADIUS server 
   (an Intermediary).  The RADIUS server can be an intermediary or the 
   end RADIUS server.  As well, in consideration for [CHIBA], where 
   messages flow is reversed, that is, from the end RADIUS server to 
   the NAS, the RADIUS Client can be the end RADIUS server and the 
   RADIUS server can represent either an intermediary or the NAS. 
    
   In most robust deployments, as is assumed here, a RADIUS Client has 
   two or more RADIUS Server that it can use to send a message destined 
   to a particular location.  We call a collection of zero or more 
   RADIUS Servers that proxy to a given location a Proxy Group.  A 
   RADIUS Client can have more then one Proxy Group.  Specifically, a 
   RADIUS Client knows which Proxy Group to route a message to (the 
   routing decision can be based on the type of messages (e.g. Access 
   Request, Accounting) and/or attributes contained in the message (e.g 
   the NAI, a calling number).  The client also keeps state about each 
   of the RADIUS Servers in the Proxy Group.  It knows for example, 
   which RADIUS Servers are available.  It may use only one of the 
   available RADIUS Servers all the time, or all of available RADIUS 
   Servers in the Proxy Group(round robin fashion).  In figure 1, the 
   Proxy Group A is used to send messages based on NAI = x, the RADIUS 
   client is using only one RADIUS server. Proxy Group B is used to 
   route messages based on NAI = y, the RADIUS client is using both 
   RADIUS servers in a round robin fashion. 
    
   A RADIUS Server can exist in more then one Proxy Group.  The RADIUS 
   Client keeps a separate state for that RADIUS Server in the group.  
   Therefore, from the clients point of view, a RADIUS Server that 
   appears in two Proxy Groups (services two realms) will appear as two 
   distinct RADIUS Servers.  Unless otherwise specified, the term 

 
 
Lior, et al.                Informational                    [Page 7] 
                      RADIUS Reliable Transport         February 2003 
 
 
   RADIUS Server refers to the logical RADIUS Server in a particular 
   Proxy Group. 
    
                                              Proxy Group A 
                                              +------------+ 
                                              |            | 
                                              |  +------+  | 
                                              |  |      |  | 
                       NAI x                  |  |RADIUS|  | 
                     +------------------------|->|Server|  | 
                     |                        |  |      |  | 
                     |                        |  +------+  | 
                     |                        |            | 
                     |                        |  +------+  | 
                     |                        |  |      |  | 
                     |                        |  |RADIUS|  | 
                     |                        |  |Server|  | 
                     |                        |  |      |  | 
                +--------+                    |  +------+  | 
                |        |                    |            | 
                | RADIUS |                    +------------+ 
                |        |                    Proxy Group B 
                | Client |                    +------------+ 
                |        |                    |            | 
                +--------+                    |  +------+  | 
                     |                        |  |      |  | 
                     |                        |  |RADIUS|  | 
                     |                +-------|->|Server|  | 
                     |                |       |  |      |  | 
                     |                |       |  +------+  | 
                     +----------------+       |            | 
                      NAI y           |       |  +------+  | 
                                      |       |  |      |  | 
                                      |       |  |RADIUS|  | 
                                      +-------|->|Server|  | 
                                              |  |      |  | 
                                              |  +------+  | 
                                              |            | 
                                              +------------+ 
    
   Figure 1: Basic Architecture. 
    
    
 
 
Lior, et al.                Informational                    [Page 8] 
                      RADIUS Reliable Transport         February 2003 
 
 
   Note that when discussing these failover, we can choose to perform 
   the procedures at the origination of the messages only and not at 
   the intermediaries; or we can perform the algorithms at the 
   originating server and at the intermediaries.  To minimize traffic 
   in the network, and to minimize time delays, it is highly desirable 
   that we detect failure conditions and act on them at the 
   intermediaries. 
    
4. General Requirements 
   
   
   Given the above model the following are the general capabilities 
   that form a reliable transport. 
    
     -  A RADIUS Client MUST be able to determine when a RADIUS Server 
        is not available.  A RADIUS Server is not available either 
        because its not reachable due to a network failure, the machine 
        is not working, or the application is not responding.  The 
        RADIUS Client will put a RADIUS Server that is not available in 
        the offline state.  A RADIUS Server in an offline state will 
        not be used to send messages. 
      
     -  RADIUS Server that has been previously declared as offline 
        SHOULD automatically be reinstated into the online state as 
        soon as possible.  This is particularly important when load-
        balancing is used.  The algorithm used to bring a RADIUS server 
        online should be conservative.  The cost of bringing a RADIUS 
        server online falsely is added traffic and added delays.
      
     -  A RADIUS Client that does not receive and acknowledgement will 
        attempt to retransmit.  In order to keep the network traffic 
        down, and to reduce the number of duplicate requests, and to 
        give a potentially overload RADIUS Server a chance to clear its 
        queues, the retransmission algorithm should be conservative. 
    
5. General Algorithm 
   
   
   When a RADIUS Client sends a message it expects a response.  If that 
   response is not received in a given amount of time, the RADIUS 
   client will retry to transmit the message to the same RADIUS Server. 
   The algorithm for retransmission is described below.  If the 
   retransmission algorithm fails, the RADIUS Server will attempt to 
   send the message to another RADIUS Server in the Proxy Group.  Note, 
   the RADIUS Server, is not necessarily brought offline.  The Offline 
 
 
Lior, et al.                Informational                    [Page 9] 
                      RADIUS Reliable Transport         February 2003 
 
 
   Algorithm determines when a RADIUS Server is brought offline.  When 
   the failure rate reaches a certain threshold, for a number of time 
   periods, the Offline Algorithm places the RADIUS Server in the Proxy 
   Group into the offline state for a period of time. 
    
   The Online Algorithm is used to automatically bring RADIUS Server 
   that are in an Offline state back to the Online state.  Normally an 
   offline RADIUS Server is brought out of the Offline state when the 
   Offline-Period time expires.  However, under certain conditions an 
   offline RADIUS Server will be brought out of that state earlier. 
    
   These algorithms are explained in detail in the following sections. 
    
5.1 Retransmit Algorithm 
    
    
   This algorithm describes how a message gets retransmitted if a 
   response is not received in a specified amount of time, T-retry. 
    
      1) Set T-retry to minimum value. 
      2) Send a message and start timer. 
      3) If a response is not received and T-retry is reached, double 
   T-retry up to a maximum value, and resend the message. 
      4) Repeat steps 2 and 3 N times.  Where N is configurable. 
    
   T-retry is associated with each message, not the RADIUS Server. 
    
   Once a message has been retried N times we fail the message to the 
   next available RADIUS Server in the Proxy Group.  Note, we do not 
   place the RADIUS Server in the offline state.  The RADIUS Server is 
   placed in an Offline state by using the Offline Algorithm described 
   below. 
    
    
5.2 Offline Algorithm 
    
    
   A RADIUS Client places a RADIUS Server in an Offline state when the 
   RADIUS Client perceives that the RADIUS Server is not responsive.  
   There are many reasons why a RADIUS Client may not receive a 
   response: 
    
      - The network dropped the packet; 
      - The server has silently discarded the packet due to errors; 
      - The server is busy. 
 
 
Lior, et al.                Informational                   [Page 10] 
                      RADIUS Reliable Transport         February 2003 
 
 
      - The server is dead. 
    
   Note that in proxy situation the failure may have occurred anywhere 
   in the proxy chain.  As well, the RADIUS Client may timeout while a 
   RADIUS Server down the proxy chain is performing a retry algorithm.  
   Therefore, using responses to determine whether the immediate RADIUS 
   Server is operational is difficult. 
    
   In the cases where the RADIUS Server exists in more then one Proxy-
   Group (it is servicing multiple realms), it may be possible to 
   determine whether that RADIUS Server is dead.  However, generally, 
   the only way to determine whether the immediate server is alive is 
   to send it out of band message.  This approach is outside the scope 
   of the RADIUS protocol and will not be considered here.  See 
   [AAATransport] 
    
   The process for determining non-responsive must also be very 
   carefully considered.  A single failure of the retransmit algorithm 
   is not sufficient.  A better approach is to use a number of such 
   failures determine whether or not a RADIUS Server should be placed 
   in the Offline state.  This will allow us to handle the case where 
   messages maybe silently discarded, or lost due to other reasons such 
   as maybe the case for UDP packets. 
    
   The Offline algorithm is used to determine when a server in the 
   Proxy Group is placed in an Offline state.  The algorithm takes into 
   account consecutive failures caused when the RADIUS server has 
   completely failed; and also intermittent failures that may occur 
   when a server is overloaded. 
    
   The algorithm uses a number of buckets.  Each bucket represents a 
   uniform period of time (for example one minute of time).  Each 
   bucket consists of two counters: number-of-requests, which count the 
   total number of requests sent during the time period of the bucket; 
   and number-of-failures which counts the total number of failure 
   (timeouts) experienced during the time period of the bucket.  These 
   counter are used to determine whether there were significant 
   failures during the bucket period. 
    
   As messages are sent the number-of-requests is incremented.  If the 
   message fails (times-out), then we increment the number-of-failures. 
    
   The algorithm requires three threshold parameters:  
 
 
Lior, et al.                Informational                   [Page 11] 
                      RADIUS Reliable Transport         February 2003 
 
 
    
   a) minimum-request-threshold.  The minimum-request-threshold is used 
      to make sure that we have sufficient number of messages in the 
      buffer to make a sound decision; 
    
   b) failure-rate-threshold determines at what error-rate do we 
      declare that the bucket has failed; 
    
   c) N which represents the number of consecutive buckets that need to 
      fail before we put the RADIUS server in the offline state. 
    
   d) Offline-Period which is the length of time that the RADIUS Server 
      should be kept in the offline state. 
    
   A RADIUS server is placed in offline state under the following 
   condition: 
    
   1) For a given bucket, providing the number of requests processed is 
      greater then the minimum-request-threshold and during the bucket 
      period there were 100% failures; or 
    
   2) If N consecutive buckets experienced significant intermittent 
      failures. 
    
   Note: a bucket that has not contain sufficient number of request is 
   simply skipped or ignored.  It does not break the continuity of the 
   sample buckets. 
    
   We say that a bucket has experienced significant intermittent 
   failures if the number of requests processed is greater than the 
   minimum-request-threshold and the error rate exceeds the failure-
   rate-threshold.  That is: 
    
        number-of-failures/number-of-requests > failure-rate-threshold 
    
   Once a RADIUS server has been placed in the Offline state it will 
   remain in that state for the amount of time specified by the 
   Offline-Period parameter. 
    
5.3 Online Algorithm 
    
    
   The Online Algorithm is the procedure used to bring a RADIUS Server 
   in the Offline state back online. 
 
 
Lior, et al.                Informational                   [Page 12] 
                      RADIUS Reliable Transport         February 2003 
 
 
    
   Normally, a RADIUS Server will be placed to in an Offline state for 
   a period of time known as the Offline-Period. 
    
   However, there could be situations where the number of available 
   RADIUS servers in a Proxy Group is too low.  If all the RADIUS 
   Servers in a Proxy Group are offline, we would have a service outage 
   for the realm that that Proxy Group is servicing.  Therefore we have 
   to make sure that we never run out of RADIUS Servers.  Furthermore, 
   if we are using load balancing in a Proxy Group, it may be highly 
   desirable to try to maintain a certain number of RADIUS Servers even 
   if we have to bring some of them out of the Offline state earlier. 
    
   The Online Algorithm brings the RADIUS Servers out of the Offline 
   state when the Offline-Period has expired.  As well, if the number 
   of available RADIUS Servers in a Proxy Group falls below a 
   threshold, the Online Algorithm will bring the RADIUS Server(s) that 
   are closest to approaching their Offline Period. 
    
   Alternatively, the Online Algorithm may also take into account the 
   RADIUS Server's state in other Proxy Groups. 
    
6. Special Consideration 
   
   
   The following section describes special considerations for the 
   different types of messages. 
    
6.1 Consideration for Accounting Messages 
    
    
   Accounting messages are critical but with respect to retransmission, 
   we recommend that the retransmission algorithm should not be applied 
   to Accounting-Request (Interim) messages. 
    
   Note failures should be reported as Accounting-Accept messages are 
   not received for the Accounting-Request (Interim) messages. 
    
6.2 Consideration for Dynamic Authorization Messages 
    
    
   When the sender of a Disconnect message or a Change-of-Authorization 
   message receives a NAK it should examine the Error-codes to 
   determine whether it should retransmit or not. 
    

 
 
Lior, et al.                Informational                   [Page 13] 
                      RADIUS Reliable Transport         February 2003 
 
 
   If the Error-code is set to "Request Not Routable"(502) the sender 
   should retry to send the message to another RADIUS Server in the 
   Proxy Group. 
    
   If the Error-code is set to "Other Proxy Processing Error"(505) the 
   sender should treat this as a non-response, wait as it normally 
   would, and retry to transmit the message. 
    
   If the RADIUS Server is sending the Disconnect Message or Change-of-
   Authorization message directly to the NAS where the session resides 
   then failing over does not make any sense. 
    
7. Security Considerations 
   
   
   This document enhances existing RADIUS specification by recommending 
   strategies for failure detection, retransmission procedures, 
   failover procedures, and failback procedures. 
    
   The document does not modify the base protocols and therefore the 
   security considerations are the same as those discussed in the 
   appropriate documents. 
    
   However, in this section addresses the security concerns that are 
   introduced by the procedures that are discussed in this document. 
    
   -Effects due to Denial of Service attacks 
    
8. Normative References 
   
   [RFC2026]       
   [RFC2119]       
   [RFC2865]      Rigney, C., Rubens, A., Simpson, W. and S. Willens, 
                  ôRemote Authentication Dial In User Server (RADIUS)ö, 
                  RFC 2865, June 2000. 
                   
   [RFC2866]      Rigney, C., ôRADIUS Accounting ö, RFC 2866, June 
                  2000. 
                   
   [RFC2869]      Rigney, C., Willats, W., Calhoun, P., ôRADIUS 
                  Extensionsö, RFC 2869, June 2000. 
                   
   [RFC2868]       
   [CHIBA]        Chiba, M., Dommety, G., Eklund, M., Mitton, D., 
                  Aboba, B., " Dynamic Authorization Extensions to 
 
 
Lior, et al.                Informational                   [Page 14] 
                      RADIUS Reliable Transport         February 2003 
 
 
                  Remote Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)", 
                  draft-chiba-radius-dynamic-authorization-20.txt, 
                  Internet draft (work in progress), 15 May, 2003. 
   [RFC2988]      Paxson, V., Allman, M., "Computing TCP's 
                  Retransmission Timer", RFC 2988, November 2000. 
                   
    
    
9. Informative References 

   [RFC3127]          Mitton, D.," Authentication, Authorization, and 
                      Accounting: Protocol Evaluation", RFC 3127, June 
                      2001 
                       
   [AAATransport]     Aboba,  B. and J. Wood, "Authentication, 
                      Authorization and Accounting Transport Profile", 
                      draft-ietf-aaa-transport-12.txt, Internet draft 
                      (work in progress), January 2003. 
    
10. Acknowledgments 
    
    
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 
    
   The author would like to thank the following people:  Yong Li and 
   Helena Mancini from Bridgewater Systems. 
    
    
11. Author's Addresses 
    
    
   Avi Lior                            
   Bridgewater Systems                 
   303 Terry Fox Drive                 
   Suite 100                           
   Ottawa Ontario                      
   Canada                              
   avi@bridgewatersystems.com          
    
12. Intellectual Property Statement 
    
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it 
 
 
Lior, et al.                Informational                   [Page 15] 
                      RADIUS Reliable Transport         February 2003 
 
 
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the 
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and 
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of 
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances 
   of licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made 
   to obtain a general license or permission for the use of such 
   proprietary rights by implementers or users of this specification 
   can be obtained from the IETF Secretariat. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
   Director. 
    
13. Full Copyright Statement 
    
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved. 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English.  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and 
   will not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or 
   assigns.  This document and the information contained herein is 
   provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE 
   INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE." 
    
14. Expiration Date 
    
    
   This memo is filed as <draft-lior-radius-reliable-transport-00.txt>, 
   and  expires December 23, 2003. 
 
 
Lior, et al.                Informational                   [Page 16] 
