


Network Working Group                                        F. Bourdais
Internet-Draft                                        France Telecom R&D
Expires: April 20, 2006                                 October 17, 2005


                              DHCP cluster
                     draft-bourdais-dhcp-cluster-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 20, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This document describes a design of DHCP server that relies upon the
   use of an external storage entity.  Such solution provides an
   alternative solution to the DHCP failover protocol for the deployment
   of multiple DHCP servers.

Conventions used in this document

   RFC2119 [1] provides the interpretations for the key words "MUST",
   "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",



Bourdais                 Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                DHCP cluster                  October 2005


   "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" found in this document.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Overview of the DHCP Cluster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Considerations on DHCP cluster designs . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.1   DHCP load balancing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.2   Hardware load-balancing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.3   Anycast  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Client-cluster interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.1   Cluster with DHC load balancing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.2   Cluster with load-balancing appliance  . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.3   Anycast  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  IANA considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   10.   Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 14





























Bourdais                 Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                DHCP cluster                  October 2005


1.  Introduction

   The document is possibly applicable to both DHCP for IPv4 and IPv6
   networks.  The main comparison is held with DHCPv4 since there are
   numerous known implementations and operational applications, and also
   because RFC3315 [3] is less specific about the information storage
   environment than RFC2131 [2] is.

   DHCP is widely used in networks of multiple sizes and eases the pain
   of terminal configuration.  Within operator network environments, the
   main DHCP deployments are cable-modem, mobile and wireless networks.

   In xDSL networks, operators traditionally prefer PPP to DHCP because
   of its capability to provide user authentication and accounting.
   However, the introduction of new IP services, such as video and
   video-conferencing, and the capabilities of the related terminals,
   push DHCP as a key protocol to configure terminals in a plug and play
   fashion.

   In this context, the operators have to define an operational
   framework in which the DHCP server takes a critical role.  Compared
   to traditional corporate networks, the level of requirements is
   higher in terms of availability, scalability and security
   capabilities.  Other requirements are also of primary importance,
   such as the capability of the DHCP server to interface smoothly with
   external entities which would require DHCP service-related
   information.

   From the operator's viewpoint, IPv4 addresses are precious resources,
   and the DHCP server is therefore expected to assist him for
   controlling and monitoring their allocation.

   This document describes a DHCP server that complies with the design
   goals described in section 1.6 of RFC2131, based upon  the use of an
   external centralized storage entity.  Its design is a potential
   alternative to DHCP Failover protocol for the deployment of multiple
   DHCP servers.

2.  Terminology

   This document uses the same terminology as of  RFC2131, with the
   following additional terms :

   o  DHCP repository : An host working as a centralized storage entity
      for one or several DHCP nodes.  It contains the binding
      information related to DHCP clients.





Bourdais                 Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                DHCP cluster                  October 2005


   o  DHCP node : A host processing DHCP messages which is connected to
      an externalized repository.
   o  DHCP cluster : A platform gathering one or several DHCP nodes
      connected to a centralized DHCP repository.

3.  Requirements

   The aim is to meet the following list of requirements :

   o  Compliancy with  RFC2131.
   o  Flexibility regarding the address allocation mechanisms : static
      and dynamic allocation mechanisms, possible interrogation of a
      third party entity during the DHCP message processing.
   o  Reliability : reduce downtime while ensuring high service
      availability even when provisioning, troubleshooting and
      maintenance operations occur.
   o  OSS integration : the DHCP server should easily interface with
      external entities, in order to fulfill operational tasks such as
      automated provisioning,  monitoring and reporting of the usage of
      IP addresses.  The information stored by the DHCP server should be
      available for external entities within the OSS.
   o  Scalability : the DHCP server should provide an efficient and
      scalable service, in front of multiple entities embedding DHCP
      agent relays.
   o  Serving multiple purposes :  the same DHCP server should allow the
      allocation of IP addresses for a wide range of applications, e.g.
      TV over xDSL, IP telephony or video-conferencing.  It involves a
      necessary support for the provisioning of different kinds of
      terminals, either mono or multi-service capable, and a support for
      interpretation of DHCP message content, e.g.  MAC address, GIADDR,
      options 60/77/82 and others.
   o  Inter-working within a DHCP environment : the DHCP server should
      deal with the implementation and behavior of DHCP relay agents.
      For example, the lack of an encoding formalism in RFC3046 [4] for
      the circuit-id sub-option, which is a fundamental information for
      an operator, results in various encoding schemes by the network
      entities that are entitled to add information in the DHCP option
      #82.
   o  Security : without DHCP authentication as described in RFC3118
      [5], a DHCP server remains subject to many  attacks, such as DoS,
      lease attacks to exhaust free leases, spoofing of any DHCP message
      sent by terminals, etc.  However, the DHCP server should provide
      some mechanism to report and detect potential attacks or
      malfunctions, and to filter DHCP messages based on part of the
      content, e.g.  GIADDR or MAC address prefix.






Bourdais                 Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                DHCP cluster                  October 2005


4.  Overview of the DHCP Cluster

   The cluster design follows RFC2131 as the main reference.  It takes a
   specific direction on the information storage aspect compared to many
   existing DHCP server implementations.

   Section 4 of RFC2131 assumes that the DHCP server offers a local
   storage capability.  The storage environment is also mentioned in
   sections 2.1 and 3.

   RFC3315 does not discuss the way the storage of DHCP-related
   information should be implemented.  The term 'database' is not even
   mentioned.

   The choice of performing DHCP message processing and storage on the
   same entity is an interpretation of RFC2131.  This choice has many
   advantages, including to avoid creating data persistence issues and
   to optimize the speed of the DHCP service.  However, there is a main
   drawback when several DHCP servers are deployed and used on the same
   network.  The RFC2131 mentions these situations, but does not specify
   how DHCP servers would cooperate to ensure the consistency of
   information between multiple DHCP services.

   The DHCP cluster is a DHCP server implementation that relies upon an
   externalized storage database which is shared locally among several
   DHCP nodes.  These nodes process DHCP messages and have limited
   configuration information.  They do not deal with lease consistency,
   which is a task achieved through the externalized database.

   The resulting platform may be described as a group of one or several
   DHCP message processing nodes, and a centralized repository to which
   the nodes are connected.  This DHCP repository stores both
   configuration and lease information related to the DHCP service.

   Physically, each DHCP node is embedded in a host, while the database
   may consist in several hosts, e.g. with replication or database grid.

           -----------         -----------         -----------
          | DHCP node |       | DHCP node |       | DHCP node |
           -----+-----         -----+-----         -----+-----
                |                   |                   |
                +-------------------+-------------------+
                                    |
                                ----+-----
                               |Repository|
                                ----------

   Figure 1 - Description of a DHCP cluster



Bourdais                 Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                DHCP cluster                  October 2005


   There is no need for an inter-node communication protocol such as the
   DHCP failover protocol [7] with this design.

   The DHC load balancing algorithm [6] may be used as solution to share
   the processing task on the DHCP nodes.

   The inter-working of DHCP nodes with an externalized entity naturally
   slows down the service by comparison with a server embedding its
   database.  However, there are many operational  examples of such DHCP
   servers interfaced with external databases or LDAP repositories
   showing that a tradeoff between service performance and functional
   requirements may be acceptable for an operator.

5.  Considerations on DHCP cluster designs

   Given the roles of DHCP nodes and database entities, there are
   several possible designs.  The following ones offer different options
   in terms of entities' deployment and software/hardware load sharing.

   These designs may have potential impacts on the functional behavior
   of the DHCP nodes which are part of the cluster.

   For all designs, the repository represents a point of failure.  Its
   redundancy may be enforced either through grid or replication
   mechanisms.

5.1  DHCP load balancing

   This design consists in using DHC load balancing algorithm, as
   defined in RFC3074, on the DHCP nodes connected to the centralized
   repository.

   All nodes are interconnected to the rest of the relay agents, and
   must maintain load balancing parameters that are required for
   efficient DHCP service cooperation.

   From the viewpoint of the DHCP clients and relay agents, the DHCP
   nodes of the cluster are concurrent.  The relay agents must point
   towards all the DHCP nodes that are part of the cluster.  Thus, all
   incoming DHCP messages are unicast to all DHCP nodes.











Bourdais                 Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                DHCP cluster                  October 2005


                |                   |                   |
                |                   |                   |
           -----+-----         -----+-----         -----+-----
          | DHCP node |       | DHCP node |       | DHCP node |
          |   HBA-1   |       |   HBA-2   |       |   HBA-3   |
           -----+-----         -----+-----         -----+-----
                |                   |                   |
                +-------------------+-------------------+
                                    |
                                ----+-----
                               |Repository|
                                ----------

   Figure 2 - DHCP cluster with DHCP Load balancing

   Operations, e.g. add or remove a new node, requires to modify the
   configuration on the relay agents with an updated list of active DHCP
   nodes accordingly.  Also, the load balancing Hashing Bucket
   Assignments (HBA) of each node must be updated when an operation or a
   failure occurs to maintain a complementary behavior, and optionnaly
   use the Delayed Service behavior described in RFC3074.

   Upon receipt of an unicast request forwarded by a relay agent, each
   DHCP node follows the following behavior :

   1.  Check the integrity of the DHCP message
   2.  Apply the load balancing algorithm to find out the node that has
       will be responsible for processing this request
   3.  Process the DHCP message

   The DHCP message processing step may include the enforcement of
   access control and policy rules based on the content of each DHCP
   message.

   A rule is defined as a regular expression which contains one or
   several elements among the information available in a DHCP message.
   Upon verification of this rule, the DHCP message is dropped or not.
   As an example, a rule may be defined based upon the MAC address
   prefix to filter the terminal from a given vendor.

   Then, the DHCP nodes interrogates the repository in order to find an
   adequate configuration for the terminal.  This question may be simple
   or complex, e.g. involving one or several parameters among all the
   information available in a DHCP message.

   During a connection attempt between a node and the repository, there
   are three cases:




Bourdais                 Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                DHCP cluster                  October 2005


   o  No connection : if the DHCP node cannot reach the main repository
      within a given timeframe, it must address the same interrogation
      to a backup repository, if any.
   o  Failure : the repository does not find any configuration matching
      the interrogation.  It must reply to the DHCP node so that the
      latter with either drop the request or send a NACK message.
   o  Success : The repository finds a matching configuration including
      a valid lease.  It must mark the selected lease and reply to the
      DHCP node with the information related to the binding.

   Upon receipt of the response of the repository, the DHCP node
   constructs the DHCP message and sends it to the requesting device
   that will be assigned an IP address.

5.2  Hardware load-balancing

   The introduction of a specific hardware appliance to ensure load
   balancing, e.g.  Layer-four switch, is an alternative to the use of
   the DHCP load balancing algorithm to distribute the load among the
   DHCP nodes.

   Since this choice is technology specific, it is considered here only
   because of its functional impact on the cluster behavior.

   In such design, the DHCP nodes and repository are interconnected to
   the rest of the network through one or several hardware load
   balancing appliances.

   The DHCP platform may be hidden from the terminals and relay agents,
   by making them point to these appliances.  The advantage is that any
   operation on a node, e.g. insertion/removal of a DHCP node, is
   transparent for the clients and relay agents.

   The appliance should be configured to forward only packets using DHCP
   destination and source ports.

   Since the node may be completely stateless, it may process DHCP
   messages at any step of a DHCP transaction.

   In order to orientate the DHCP clients and relay agents towards the
   appropriate appliance, the field 'server identifier' provisioned by
   the DHCP nodes constructing the DHCP messages MUST contain the IP
   address of the appliance's WAN interface.








Bourdais                 Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                DHCP cluster                  October 2005


                                    |
             -----------------------+-----------------------
            |          Load balancing appliance(s)          |
             ---+-------------------+-------------------+---
                |                   |                   |
                |                   |                   |
           -----+-----         -----+-----         -----+-----
          | DHCP node |       | DHCP node |       | DHCP node |
           -----+-----         -----+-----         -----+-----
                |                   |                   |
                +-------------------+-------------------+
                                    |
                                ----+-----
                               |Repository|
                                ----------

   Figure 3 - DHCP cluster with load balancing appliance

   The advantage of such a design is that each DHCP entity is
   specialized in performing a specific task :

   o  The DHCP nodes are dedicated to DHCP message processing and
      process all the received DHCP messages
   o  The DHCP repository is the centralized source for provisioning IP
      addresses and managing lease information

5.3  Anycast

   The Anycast design of the DHCP cluster is an approach where DHCP
   nodes may be located in different areas while maintaining a
   relationship with a common DHCP repository.  The connection between
   DHCP nodes and the repository may not be persistent.

   The DHC load balancing algorithm is not applicable.

   All DHCP nodes are configured with an anycast address.  The access
   network router forwards the DHCP messages towards the nearest DHCP
   node from an IP routing standpoint.













Bourdais                 Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                DHCP cluster                  October 2005


                |                   |                   |
                |                   |                   |
           -----+-----         -----+-----         -----+-----
          | DHCP node |       | DHCP node |       | DHCP node |
           -----+-----         -----+-----         -----+-----
                |                   |                   |
                +-------------------+-------------------+
                                    |
                                ----+-----
                               |Repository|
                                ----------


   Figure 4 - DHCP cluster with anycast

6.  Client-cluster interaction

   This section describes the protocol exchanges between clients and
   cluster for the three designs, considering the DHCP message
   chronology (DISCOVER, OFFER, REQUEST, ACK).

   Section 3 of RFC2131 is the reference for the description of the
   exchanges.

6.1  Cluster with DHC load balancing

   1.  The client broadcasts a DHCP DISCOVER message on its local
       physical subnet.  The DHCP DISCOVER message MAY include options
       that suggest values for the network address and lease duration.
       A DHCP relay agent may pass the message on to all DHCP nodes,
       assuming the clients and nodes are not on the same physical
       subnet.  It may insert additional information through the relay
       agent information option following RFC3046.
   2.  Each node should use the load balancing algorithm to find out if
       it must process this request.  When processing the request, the
       node must analyze the DHCP message by comparing its content to
       configured rules.  If this comparison match a rule, the node
       interrogates the repository to find a binding that corresponds to
       the DHCP DISCOVER along with parameters among those present in
       the DHCP message.
   3.  The repository receives the question and checks if there is a
       binding corresponding to the request.  If not, the request should
       be discarded.  Otherwise, the repository marks the corresponding
       IP address as "reserved" and sends the information towards the
       DHCP node that initiated the question.  This mark may involve
       several parameters including the reserved IP address, the MAC
       address, the client-identifier and other information available in
       the DHCP request.  If several nodes send the same question, the



Bourdais                 Expires April 20, 2006                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                DHCP cluster                  October 2005


       repository should answer to all the nodes with the exact same
       response.
   4.  Based on the repository response, a node responds with a DHCP
       OFFER message that includes the IP address in the 'yiaddr' field,
       its own address in the 'server identifier' option, and other
       configuration parameters in DHCP options.  When allocating a new
       IP address, nodes should check that the offered network address
       is not already in use, e.g. with an ICMP Echo Request.  Such
       feature MAY be disabled.

6.2  Cluster with load-balancing appliance

   1.  The client broadcasts a DHCP DISCOVER message on its local
       physical subnet.  The DHCP DISCOVER message MAY include options
       that suggest values for the network address and lease duration.
       A DHCP relay agent may pass the message on to the cluster by
       targeting the IP address of the load-balancing appliance in case
       it is not on the same physical subnet.  It may insert additional
       information through the relay agent information option following
       RFC3046.
   2.  The appliance receives packets identified as DHCP messages
       through port identification or a complete packet analysis.  Any
       packet that are not with DHCP ports should be filtered by the
       appliance.  According  to a configured distribution algorithm,
       the appliance forwards the message to one of the DHCP nodes of
       the cluster.
   3.  The selected DHCP node receives the request and must analyze the
       DHCP message by comparing its content to configured rules.  If
       this comparison match a rule, the node interrogates the
       repository to find a binding that corresponds to the DHCP
       DISCOVER along with the parameters sent by the client and other
       potential parameters inserted by a relay agent.
   4.  The repository checks if there is a binding corresponding to the
       request.  If not, the request should be discarded.  Otherwise,
       the repository marks the corresponding IP address as "reserved"
       and sends the information to the DHCP node which initiated the
       question.  This mark may involve several parameters including the
       reserved IP address, the MAC address, the client-identifier and
       other information available in the DHCP request.  If the terminal
       resends the request and that the same question is sent by another
       node, the repository must answer with the same response.
   5.  Based on the repository response, the node responds with a DHCP
       OFFER message that includes the IP address in the 'yiaddr' field,
       the IP address of the load-balancing appliance in the 'server
       identifier' option, and other configuration parameters in DHCP
       options.  The response does not need to transit through the
       appliance.  When allocating a new IP address, nodes should check
       that the offered network address is not already in use, e.g. with



Bourdais                 Expires April 20, 2006                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                DHCP cluster                  October 2005


       an ICMP Echo Request.  Such feature MAY be disabled.

6.3  Anycast

   1.  The client broadcasts a DHCP DISCOVER message on its local
       physical subnet.  The DHCP DISCOVER message MAY include options
       that suggest values for the network address and lease duration.
       A DHCP relay agent may pass the message on to the cluster by
       targeting the Anycast IP address of the DHCP cluster, in case a
       DHCP node is not on the same physical subnet.  It may insert
       additional information through the relay agent information option
       following RFC3046.
   2.  According to anycast routing, one DHCP node receives the request,
       and must analyze the DHCP message by comparing its content to
       configured rules.  If this comparison match a rule, the node
       interrogates the repository to find a binding that corresponds to
       the DHCP DISCOVER message along with parameters sent by the
       client and other potential parameters inserted by a relay agent.
   3.  The repository receives the question and check if there is a
       binding corresponding to the request.  If not, the request should
       be discarded.  Otherwise, the repository marks the corresponding
       IP address as reserved and sends the information to the DHCP node
       that initiated the question.  This mark may involve several
       parameters including the reserved IP address, the MAC address,
       the client-identifier and other information available in the DHCP
       request.  If the terminal resends the request and that the same
       question is sent by another node, the repository should answer
       with the same response.
   4.  Based on the repository's response, the node responds with a
       DHCPOFFER message that includes the IP address in the 'yiaddr'
       field, the anycast IP address of the DHCP cluster in the 'server
       identifier' option, and other configuration parameters in DHCP
       options.  When allocating a new IP address, nodes should check
       that the offered network address is not already in use, e.g. with
       an ICMP Echo Request.  Such feature MAY be disabled.

7.  Security Considerations

   This document does not raise any further issue as far as the security
   related to the use of DHCP is concerned.

   The use of rules based on DHCP information as access control and/or
   policies to enforce IP address allocation corresponds to a classic
   feature.

   RFC3118 is the reference to achieve authentication of DHCP messages,
   and could be implemented with the DHCP cluster in the same way it
   could be implemented with any implementation following RFC2131



Bourdais                 Expires April 20, 2006                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                DHCP cluster                  October 2005


   guideline.

8.  IANA considerations

   None.

9.  Acknowledgments

   Many thanks to Frederic Le Garrec, Christian Jacquenet and Hidega
   Tiku for their inputs.

10.  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Droms, R., "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol", RFC 2131,
        March 1997.

   [3]  Droms, R., "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6",
        RFC 3315, July 2003.

   [4]  Patrick, M., "DHCP relay agent Information Option", RFC 3046,
        January 2001.

   [5]  Droms, R., "Authentication for DHCP Messages", RFC 3118,
        June 2001.

   [6]  Volz, B., "DHC Load Balancing Algorithm", RFC 3074,
        February 2001.

   [7]  Droms, R., "DHCP Failover Protocol", draft version 10 failover,
        February 2002.


Author's Address

   Francois Bourdais
   France Telecom R&D
   905 rue albert einstein
   Sophia Antipolis  06921
   France

   Email: francois.bourdais@francetelecom.com







Bourdais                 Expires April 20, 2006                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                DHCP cluster                  October 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Bourdais                 Expires April 20, 2006                [Page 14]

