

Network Working Group                                          A. Barbir
Internet-Draft                                           Nortel Networks
Expires: April 25, 2005                                        S. Murphy
                                                            Sparta, Inc.
                                                                 Y. Yang
                                                           Cisco Systems
                                                        October 25, 2004


                  Generic Threats to Routing Protocols
                  draft-ietf-rpsec-routing-threats-07

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 25, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).

Abstract

   Routing protocols are subject to attacks that can harm individual
   users or network operations as a whole.  This document provides a
   description and a summary of generic threats that affect routing
   protocols in general.  This work describes threats, including threat



Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols      October 2004


   sources and capabilities, threat actions, and threat consequences as
   well as a breakdown of routing functions that might be separately
   attacked.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Routing Functions Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Generic Routing Protocol Threat Model  . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1   Threat Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       3.1.1   Threat Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       3.1.2   Threat Consequences  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.  Generally Identifiable Routing Threat Actions  . . . . . . . . 12
     4.1   Deliberate Exposure  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     4.2   Sniffing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     4.3   Traffic Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     4.4   Spoofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     4.5   Falsification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       4.5.1   Falsifications by Originators  . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       4.5.2   Falsifications by Forwarders . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     4.6   Interference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     4.7   Overload . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   7.1   Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   7.2   Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   A.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   B.  Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 25




















Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols      October 2004


1.  Introduction

   Routing protocols are subject to threats and attacks that can harm
   individual users or the network operations as a whole.  The document
   provides a summary of generic threats that affect routing protocols.
   In particular, this work identifies generic threats to routing
   protocols that include threat sources, threat actions, and threat
   consequences.  A breakdown of routing functions that might be
   separately attacked is provided.

   This work should be considered as a precursor to developing a common
   set of security requirements for routing protocols.  While it is well
   known that bad, incomplete, or poor implementations of routing
   protocols may, in themselves, lead to routing problems or failures,
   or may increase the risk of a network being attacked successfully,
   these issues are not considered here.  This document only considers
   attacks against robust, well considered implementations of routing
   protocols, such as are specified in OSPF [4], IS-IS [5], RIP [6] and
   BGP [7].  Attacks against implementation specific weaknesses and
   vulnerabilities are out of scope for this document.

   The document is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a review of
   routing functions.  Section 3 defines threats.  In section 4, a
   discussion on generally identifiable routing threat actions is
   provided.  Section 5 addresses security considerations.  Section 6
   addresses IANA considerations.

























Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols      October 2004


2.  Routing Functions Overview

   This section provides an overview of common functions that are shared
   among various routing protocols.  In general, routing protocols share
   the following functions:
   o  Transport Subsystem: The routing protocol transmits messages to
      its neighbors using some underlying protocol.  For example, OSPF
      uses IP, while other protocols may run over TCP.
   o  Neighbor State Maintenance: Neighboring relationship formation is
      the first step for topology determination.  For this reason,
      routing protocols may need to maintain state information.  Each
      routing protocol may use a different mechanism for determining its
      neighbors in the routing topology.  Some protocols have distinct
      exchanges through which they establish neighboring relationships,
      e.g., Hello exchanges in OSPF.
   o  Database Maintenance: Routing protocols exchange network topology
      and reachability information.  The routers collect this
      information in routing databases with varying detail.  The
      maintenance of these databases is a significant portion of the
      function of a routing protocol.

   In a routing protocol there are message exchanges that are intended
   for the control of the state of the protocol.  For example, neighbor
   maintenance messages carry such information.  On the other hand,
   there are messages that are used to exchange information that is
   intended to be used in the forwarding function, for example, messages
   that are used to maintain the database..  These messages affect the
   data (information) part of the routing protocol.























Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols      October 2004


3.  Generic Routing Protocol Threat Model

   The model developed in this section can be used to identify threats
   to any routing protocol.

   Routing protocols are subject to threats at various levels.  For
   example, threats can affect the transport subsystem, where the
   routing protocol can be subject to attacks on its underlying
   protocol.  An attacker may also attack messages that carry control
   information in a routing protocol to break a neighboring (e.g.,
   peering, adjacency) relationship.  This type of attack can impact the
   network routing behavior in the affected routers and likely the
   surrounding neighborhood as well.  For example, in BGP, if a router
   receives a CEASE message, it will break its neighboring relationship
   to its peer and potentially send new routing information to any
   remaining peers.

   An attacker may also attack messages that carry data information in
   order to break a database exchange between two routers or to affect
   the database maintenance functionality.  For example, the information
   in the database must be authentic and authorized.  An attacker who is
   able to introduce bogus data can have a strong effect on the behavior
   of routing in the neighborhood.  For example, if an OSPF router sends
   LSAs with the wrong Advertising Router, the receivers will compute an
   SPF tree that is incorrect and might not forward the traffic.  If a
   BGP router advertises a NLRI that it is not authorized to advertise,
   then receivers might forward that NLRI's traffic toward that router
   and the traffic would not be deliverable.  A PIM router might
   transmit a JOIN message to receive multicast data it would otherwise
   not receive.

3.1  Threat Definitions

   In [1], a threat is defined as a potential for violation of security,
   which exists when there is a circumstance, capability, action, or
   event that could breach security and cause harm.  Threats can be
   categorized as threat sources, threat actions, threat consequences,
   threat consequence zones, and threat consequence periods.

3.1.1  Threat Sources

   In the context of deliberate attack, a threat source is defined as a
   motivated, capable adversary.  By modeling the motivations (attack
   goals) and capabilities of the adversaries who are threat sources,
   one can better understand what classes of attacks these threats may
   mount and thus what types of countermeasures will be required to deal
   with these attacks.




Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols      October 2004


3.1.1.1   Adversary Motivations

   We assume that the most common goal of an adversary deliberately
   attacking routing is to cause inter-domain routing to malfunction.  A
   routing malfunction affects data transmission to result in traffic
   following a path (sequence of autonomous systems in the case of BGP)
   other than one that would have been computed by the routing protocol
   if it were operating properly (i.e., if it were not under attack).
   As a result of an attack, a route may terminate at a router other
   than the one that legitimately represents the destination address of
   the traffic, or it may traverse routers other than those that it
   would otherwise have traversed.  In either case, a routing
   malfunction may allow an adversary to passively wiretap traffic, or
   to engage in man-in-the-middle (MITM) active attacks, including
   discarding traffic (denial of service).

   A routing malfunction might be effected for financial gain related to
   traffic volume (vs.  related to the content of the routed traffic),
   e.g., to affect settlements among ISPs.

   Another possible goal for attacks against routing can be damage to
   the network infrastructure itself, on a targeted or on a wide scale
   basis.  Thus, for example, attacks that cause excessive transmission
   of UPDATE or other management messages, and attendant router
   processing, could be motivated by these goals.

   Irrespective of the goals noted above, an adversary may or may not be
   averse to detection and identification.  This characteristic of an
   adversary influences some of the ways in which attacks may be
   accomplished.

3.1.1.2   Adversary Capabilities

   Different adversaries possess varied capabilities.
   o  All adversaries are presumed to be capable of directing packets to
      routers from remote locations, and can assert a false IP source
      address with each packet (IP address spoofing) in an effort to
      cause the targeted router to accept and process the packet as
      though it emanated from the indicated source.  Spoofing attacks
      may be employed to trick routers into acting on bogus messages to
      effect misrouting, or these messages may be used to overwhelm the
      management processor in a router, to effect DoS.  Protection from
      such adversaries must not rely on the claimed identity in routing
      packets that the protocol receives.
   o  Some adversaries can monitor links over which routing traffic is
      carried and thus can emit packets that mimic data contained in
      legitimate routing traffic carried over these links and can
      actively participate in message exchanges with the legitimate



Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols      October 2004


      routers.  This increases the opportunities for an adversary to
      generate bogus routing traffic that may be accepted by a router,
      to effect misrouting or DoS.  Retransmission of previously
      delivered management traffic (replay attacks) exemplify this
      capability.  As a result, protection from such adversaries ought
      not rely on the secrecy of unencrypted data in packet headers or
      payloads.
   o  Some adversaries can effect MITM attacks against routing traffic,
      e.g., as a result of active wiretapping on a link between two
      routers.  This represents the ultimate wiretapping capability for
      an adversary.  Protection from such adversaries must not rely on
      the integrity of inter-router links to authenticate traffic,
      unless cryptographic measures are employed to detect unauthorized
      modification.
   o  Some adversaries can subvert routers, or the management
      workstations used to control these routers.  These Byzantine
      failures represent the most serious form of attack capability in
      that they result in bogus traffic being emitted by legitimate
      routers.  As a result, protection from such adversaries must not
      rely on the correct operation of neighbor routers.  Protection
      measures should adopt the principle of least privilege, to
      minimize the impact of attacks of this sort.  To counter Byzantine
      attacks, routers ought not Ÿtrust÷ management traffic (e.g., based
      on its source) but rather each router should independently
      authenticate management traffic before acting upon it.

   We will assume that any cryptographic countermeasures employed to
   secure BGP will employ algorithms and modes that are resistant to
   attack, even by sophisticated adversaries, thus we will ignore
   cryptanalytic attacks.

   Deliberate attacks are mimicked by failures that are random and
   unintentional.  In particular, a Byzantine failure in a router may
   occur because the router is faulty in hardware or software or is
   misconfigured.  As described in [3], "A node with a Byzantine failure
   may corrupt messages, forge messages, delay messages, or send
   conflicting messages to different nodes".  Byzantine routers, whether
   faulty, misconfigured or subverted have the context to provide
   believable and very damaging bogus routing information.  Byzantine
   routers may also claim another legitimate peer's identity.  Given
   their status as peers, they may even elude the authentication
   protections, if those protections can only detect that a source is
   one of the legitimate peers (e.g., the router uses the same
   cryptographic key to authenticate all peers)

   We therefore characterize threat sources into two groups:





Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols      October 2004


   outsiders: These attackers may reside anywhere in the Internet, have
      the ability to send IP traffic to the router, may be able to
      observe the router's replies and may even control the path for a
      legitimate peer's traffic.  These are not legitimate participants
      in the routing protocol.
   Byzantine: These attackers are faulty, misconfigured or subverted
      routers, i.e., legitimate participants in the routing protocol.

3.1.2  Threat Consequences

   A threat consequence is a security violation that results from a
   threat action [1].  To a routing protocol, a security violation is a
   compromise of some aspect of the correct behavior of the routing
   system.  The compromise can damage the data traffic intended for a
   particular network or host or can damage the operation of the routing
   infrastructure of the network as a whole.

   There are four types of general threat consequences: disclosure,
   deception, disruption, and usurpation [1].
   o  Disclosure: Disclosure of routing information happens when an
      attacker successfully accesses the information without being
      authorized.  Outsiders who can observe or monitor a link may cause
      disclosure, if routing exchanges lack confidentiality.  Byzantine
      routers can cause disclosure, as long as they are successfully
      involved in the routing exchanges.  Although inappropriate
      disclosure of routing information can pose a security threat or be
      part of a later, larger, or higher layer attack, confidentiality
      is not generally a design goal of routing protocols.
   o  Deception: This consequence happens when a legitimate router
      receives a forged routing message and believes it to be authentic.
      Both outsiders and Byzantine routers can cause this consequence if
      the receiving router lacks the ability to check routing message
      integrity or origin authentication.
   o  Disruption: This consequence occurs when a legitimate router's
      operation is being interrupted or prevented.  Outsiders can cause
      this by inserting, corrupting, replaying, delaying, or dropping
      routing messages, or breaking routing sessions between legitimate
      routers.  Byzantine routers can cause this consequence by sending
      false routing messages, interfering with normal routing exchanges,
      or flooding unnecessary routing protocol messages.  (DoS is a
      common threat action causing disruption.)
   o  Usurpation: This consequence happens when an attacker gains
      control over the services/functions a legitimate router is
      providing to others.  Outsiders can cause this by delaying or
      dropping routing exchanges, fabricating or replaying routing
      information.  Byzantine routers can cause this consequence by
      sending false routing information or interfering with routing
      exchanges.



Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols      October 2004


   Note: an attacker does not have to directly control a router to
   control its services.  For example, in Figure 1, Network 1 is
   dual-homed through Router A and Router B, and Router A is preferred.
   However, Router B is compromised and advertises a better metric.
   Consequently, devices on the Internet choose the path through Router
   B to reach Network 1.  In this way, Router B steals the data traffic
   and Router A loses its control of the services to Router B.  This is
   depicted in Figure 1.


      +-------------+   +-------+
      |  Internet   |---| Rtr A |
      +------+------+   +---+---+
             |              |
             |              |
             |              |
             |            *-+-*
      +-------+           /     \
      | Rtr B |----------*  N 1  *
      +-------+           \     /
                           *---*



                      Figure 1: Dual-homed Network

   Several threat consequences might be caused by a single threat
   action.  In Figure 1, there exist at least two consequences: routers
   using Router B to reach Network 1 are deceived, while Router A is
   usurped.

3.1.2.1  Threat Consequence Scope

   As mentioned above, an attack might damage the data traffic intended
   for a particular network or host or damage the operation of the
   routing infrastructure of the network as a whole.  Damage that might
   result from attacks against the network as a whole may include:
   o  Network congestion: more data traffic is forwarded through some
      portion of the network than would otherwise need to carry the
      traffic,
   o  Blackhole: large amounts of traffic are unnecessarily re-directed
      to be forwarded through one router and that router drops
      many/most/all packets,
   o  Looping: data traffic is forwarded along a route that loops, so
      that the data is never delivered (resulting in network
      congestion),
   o  Partition: some portion of the network believes that it is
      partitioned from the rest of the network when it is not,



Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols      October 2004


   o  Churn: the forwarding in the network changes (unnecessarily) at a
      rapid pace, resulting in large variations in the data delivery
      patterns (and adversely affecting congestion control techniques),
   o  Instability: the protocol becomes unstable so that convergence on
      a global forwarding state is not achieved,
   o  Overcontrol: the routing protocol messages themselves become a
      significant portion of the traffic the network carries, and
   o  Clog: a router receives an excessive number of routing protocol
      messages, causing it to exhaust some resource (e.g., memory, CPU,
      battery).

   The damage that might result from attacks against a particular host
   or network address may include:
   o  Starvation: data traffic destined for the network or host is
      forwarded to a part of the network that cannot deliver it,
   o  Eavesdrop: data traffic is forwarded through some router or
      network that would otherwise not see the traffic, affording an
      opportunity to see the data or at least the data delivery pattern,
   o  Cut: some portion of the network believes that it has no route to
      the host or network when it is in fact connected,
   o  Delay: data traffic destined for the network or host is forwarded
      along a route that is in some way inferior to the route it would
      otherwise take,
   o  Looping: data traffic for the network or host is forwarded along a
      route that loops, so that the data is never delivered

   It is important to consider all consequences, because some security
   solutions can protect against one consequence but not against others.
   It might be possible to design a security solution that protects
   against eavesdropping on one destination's traffic without protecting
   against churn in the network.  Similarly, it is possible to design a
   security solution that prevents a starvation attack against one host,
   but not a clogging attack against a router.  The security
   requirements must be clear as to which consequences are being avoided
   and which consequences must be addressed by  other means (e.g., by
   administrative means outside the protocol).

3.1.2.2  Threat Consequence Zone

   A threat consequence zone covers the area within which the network
   operations have been affected by threat actions.  Possible threat
   consequence zones can be classified as: a single link or router,
   multiple routers (within a single routing domain), a single routing
   domain, multiple routing domains, or the global Internet.  The threat
   consequence zone varies based on the threat action and the position
   of the target of the attack.  Similar threat actions that happen at
   different locations may result in totally different threat
   consequence zones.  For example, when an outsider breaks the routing



Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols      October 2004


   session between a distribution router and a stub router, only
   reachability to and from the network devices attached to the stub
   router will be impaired.  In other words, the threat consequence zone
   is a single router.  In another case, if the outsider is located
   between a customer edge router and its corresponding provider edge
   router, such an action might cause the whole customer site to lose
   its connection.  In this case, the threat consequence zone might be a
   single routing domain.

3.1.2.3  Threat Consequence Periods

   A threat consequence period is defined as the portion of time during
   which the network operations are impacted by the threat consequences.
   The threat consequence period is influenced by, but not totally
   dependent on the duration of the threat action.  In some cases, the
   network operations will get back to normal as soon as the threat
   action has been stopped.  In other cases, however, threat
   consequences may persist longer than the threat action.  For example,
   in the original ARPANET link-state algorithm, some errors in a router
   introduced three instances of an LSA.  All of them flooded throughout
   the network continuously, until the entire network was power cycled
   [2].





























Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols      October 2004


4.  Generally Identifiable Routing Threat Actions

   This section addresses generally identifiable and recognized threat
   actions against routing protocols.  The threat actions are not
   necessarily specific to individual protocols but may be present in
   one or more of the common routing protocols in use today.

4.1  Deliberate Exposure

   Deliberate Exposure occurs when an attacker takes control of a router
   and intentionally releases routing information to other entities
   (e.g., the attacker, a web page, mail posting, other routers etc.  )
   that, otherwise, should not receive the exposed information.

   The consequence of deliberate exposure is the disclosure of routing
   information.

   The threat consequence zone of deliberate exposure depends on the
   routing information that the attackers have exposed.  The more
   knowledge they have exposed, the bigger the threat consequence zone.

   The threat consequence period of deliberate exposure might be longer
   than the duration of the action itself.  The routing information
   exposed will not be out-dated until there is a topology change of the
   exposed network.

4.2  Sniffing

   Sniffing is an action whereby attackers monitor and/or record the
   routing exchanges between authorized routers to sniff for routing
   information.  Attackers can also sniff data traffic information
   (however, this is out of scope of the current work).

   The consequence of sniffing is disclosure of routing information.

   The threat consequence zone of sniffing depends on the attacker's
   location, the routing protocol type, and the routing information that
   has been recorded.  For example, if the outsider is sniffing a link
   that is in an OSPF totally stubby area, the threat consequence zone
   should be limited to the whole area.  An attacker that is sniffing a
   link in an EBGP session can gain knowledge of multiple routing
   domains.

   The threat consequence period might be longer than the duration of
   the action.  If an attacker stops sniffing a link, their acquired
   knowledge will not be out-dated until there is a topology change of
   the affected network.




Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols      October 2004


4.3  Traffic Analysis

   Traffic analysis is an action whereby attackers gain routing
   information by analyzing the characteristics of the data traffic on a
   subverted link.  Traffic analysis threats can affect any data that is
   sent over a communication link.  This threat is not peculiar to
   routing protocols and is included here for completeness.

   The consequence of data traffic analysis is the disclosure of routing
   information.  For example, the source and destination IP addresses of
   the data traffic, and the type, magnitude, and volume of traffic can
   be disclosed.

   The threat consequence zone of the traffic analysis depends on the
   attacker's location and what data traffic has passed through.  An
   attacker at the network core should be able to gather more
   information than its counterpart at the edge and would therefore have
   be able to analyze traffic patterns in a wider area.

   The threat consequence period might be longer than the duration of
   the traffic analysis.  After the attacker stops traffic analysis, its
   knowledge will not be out-dated until there is a topology change of
   the disclosed network.

4.4  Spoofing

   Spoofing occurs when an illegitimate device assumes the identity of a
   legitimate one.  Spoofing in and of itself is often not the true
   attack.  Spoofing is special in that it can be used to carry out
   other threat actions causing other threat consequences.  An attacker
   can use spoofing as a means for launching other types of attacks.
   For example, if an attacker succeeds in spoofing the identity of a
   router, the attacker can send out unrealistic routing information
   that might cause the disruption of network services.

   There are a few cases where spoofing can be an attack in and of
   itself.  For example, messages from an attacker which spoof the
   identity of a legitimate router may cause a neighbor relationship to
   form and deny the formation of the relationship with the legitimate
   router.

   The consequences of spoofing are:
   o  The disclosure of routing information: The spoofing router will be
      able to gain access to the routing information.
   o  The deception of peer relationship: The authorized routers, which
      exchange routing messages with the spoofing router, do not realize
      they are neighboring with a router that is faking another router's
      identity.



Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols      October 2004


   The threat consequence zone covers:
   o  The consequence zone of the fake peer relationship will be limited
      to those routers trusting the attacker's claimed identity.
   o  The consequence zone of the disclosed routing information depends
      on the attacker's location, the routing protocol type, and the
      routing information that has been exchanged between the attacker
      and its deceived neighbors.

   Note: This section focuses on addressing spoofing as a threat on its
   own.  However, spoofing creates conditions for other threats.  Other
   consequences are considered falsifications and are treated in the
   next section.

4.5  Falsification

   Falsification is an action whereby a router sends false routing
   information.  To falsify the routing information, an attacker has to
   be either the originator or a forwarder of the routing information.
   It cannot be a receiver-only.  False routing information describes
   the network in an unrealistic fashion, whether or not intended by the
   authoritative network administrator.

4.5.1  Falsifications by Originators

   An originator of routing information can launch the falsifications
   that are described in the next sections.

4.5.1.1  Overclaiming

   Overclaiming occurs when a Byzantine router or outsider advertises
   its control of some network resources, while in reality it does not,
   or the advertisement is not authorized.  This is given in Figure 2
   and Figure 3.


















Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols      October 2004


              +-------------+   +-------+   +-------+
              | Internet    |---| Rtr B |---| Rtr A |
              +------+------+   +-------+   +---+---+
                     |                          .
                     |                          |
                     |                          .
                     |                        *-+-*
                 +-------+                   /     \
                 | Rtr C |------------------*  N 1  *
                 +-------+                   \     /
                                              *---*


                        Figure 2: Overclaiming-1



        +-------------+   +-------+   +-------+
        |  Internet   |---| Rtr B |---| Rtr A |
        +------+------+   +-------+   +-------+
               |
               |
               |
               |                        *---*
           +-------+                   /     \
           | Rtr C |------------------*  N 1  *
           +-------+                   \     /
                                        *---*


                        Figure 3: Overclaiming-2

   The above figures provide examples of overclaiming.  Router A, the
   attacker, is connected to the Internet through Router B.  Router C is
   authorized to advertise its link to Network 1.  In Figure 2, Router A
   controls a link to Network 1, but is not authorized to advertise it.
   In Figure 3, Router A does not control such a link.  But in either
   case, Router A advertises the link to the Internet, through Router B.

   Both Byzantine routers and outsiders can overclaim network resources.
   The consequence of overclaiming includes:
   o  Usurpation of the overclaimed network resources.  In Figure 2 and
      Figure 3, usurpation of Network 1 can occur when Router B (or
      other routers on the Internet, (not shown in the figures))
      believes that Router A provides the best path to reach the Network
      1.  As a result, routers forward data traffic destined to Network
      1 to Router A.  The best result is that the data traffic uses an
      unauthorized path, as in Figure 2.  The worst case is that the



Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols      October 2004


      data never reaches the destination Network 1, as in Figure 3.  The
      ultimate consequence is Router A gaining control over Network 1's
      services, by controlling the data traffic.
   o  Usurpation of the legitimate advertising routers.  In Figure 2 and
      Figure 3 Router C is the legitimate advertiser of Network 1.  By
      overclaiming, Router A also controls (partially or totally) the
      services/functions provided by the Router C.  (This is NOT a
      disruption, because Router C is operating in a way intended by the
      authoritative network administrator.)
   o  Deception of other routers.  In Figure 2 and Figure 3, Router B,
      or other routers on the Internet, might be deceived into believing
      the path through Router A is the best.
   o  Disruption of data planes on some routers.  This might happen to
      routers that are on the path that is used by other routers to
      reach the overclaimed network resources through the attacker.  In
      Figure 2 and Figure 3, when other routers on the Internet are
      deceived, they will forward the data traffic to Router B, which
      might be overloaded.

   The threat consequence zone varies based on the consequence:
   o  Where usurpation is concerned, the consequence zone covers the
      network resources that are overclaimed by the attacker (Network 1
      in Figure 2 and 3), and the routers that are authorized to
      advertise the network resources but lose the competition against
      the attacker(Router C in Figure 2 and Figure 3).
   o  Where deception is concerned, the consequence zone covers the
      routers that do believe the attacker's advertisement and use the
      attacker to reach the claimed networks (Router B and other
      deceived routers on the Internet in Figure 2 and Figure 3).
   o  Where disruption is concerned, the consequence zone includes the
      routers that are on the path of misdirected data traffic (Router B
      in Figure 2 and Figure 3 and other routers in the Internet on the
      path of the misdirected traffic).

   The threat consequence will not cease when the attacker stops
   overclaiming, and will totally disappear only when the routing tables
   are converged.  As a result the consequence period is longer than the
   duration of the overclaiming.

4.5.1.2  Misclaiming

   A misclaiming threat is defined as an action where an attacker is
   advertising some network resources that it is authorized to control,
   but in a way that is not intended by the authoritative network
   administrator.  For example, it may be advertising inappropriate link
   costs in an OSPF LSA.  An attacker can eulogize or disparage when
   advertising these network resources.  Byzantine routers can misclaim
   network resources.



Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols      October 2004


   The threat consequences of misclaiming are similar to the
   consequences of overclaiming.

   The consequence zone and period are also similar to those of
   overclaiming.

4.5.2  Falsifications by Forwarders

   In each routing protocol, routers which forward routing protocol
   messages are expected to leave some fields unmodified and to modify
   other fields in certain circumscribed ways.  The fields to be
   modified, the possible new contents of those fields and their
   computation from the original fields, the fields that must remain
   unmodified, etc., are all detailed in the protocol specification.
   They may vary depending on the function of the router or its network
   environment.  For example, in RIP, the forwarder must modify the
   routing information by increasing the hop count by 1.  On the other
   hand, a forwarder must not modify any field of the type 1 LSA in OSPF
   except the age field.  In general, forwarders in distance vector
   routing protocols are authorized to and must modify the routing
   information, while most forwarders in link state routing protocols
   are not authorized to and must not modify most routing information.

   As a forwarder authorized to modify routing messages, an attacker
   might also falsify by not forwarding routing information to other
   authorized routers as required.

4.5.2.1  Misstatement

   This is defined as an action whereby the attacker modifies route
   attributes in an incorrect manner.  For example, in RIP, the attacker
   might increase the path cost by two hops instead of one.  In BGP, the
   attacker might delete some AS numbers from the AS PATH.

   Where forwarding routing information should not be modified, an
   attacker can launch the following falsifications:
   o  Deletion: Attacker deletes valid data in the routing message.
   o  Insertion: Attacker inserts false data in the routing message.
   o  Substitution: Attacker replaces valid data in the routing message
      with false data.

   A forwarder can also falsify data by replaying out-dated data in the
   routing message as current data.

   All types of attackers, outsiders and Byzantine routers, can falsify
   the routing information when they forward the routing messages.

   The threat consequences of these falsifications by forwarders are



Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols      October 2004


   similar to those caused by originators: usurpation of some network
   resources and related routers; deception of routers using false
   paths; and disruption of data planes of routers on the false paths.
   The threat consequence zone and period are also similar.

4.6  Interference

   Interference is a threat action where an attacker inhibits the
   exchanges by legitimate routers.  The attacker can do this by adding
   noise, by not forwarding packets, by replaying out-dated packets, by
   inserting or corrupting messages, by delaying responses, by denial of
   receipts, or by breaking synchronization.

   Byzantine routers can slow down their routing exchanges or induce
   flapping in the routing sessions of legitimate neighboring routers.

   The consequence of interference is the disruption of routing
   operations.

   The consequence zone of interference depends on the severity of the
   interference.  If the interference results in consequences at the
   neighbor maintenance level, then there may be changes in the
   database, resulting in consequences network-wide.

   The threat consequences might disappear as soon as the interference
   is stopped, or might not totally disappear until the networks have
   converged.  Therefore, the consequence period is equal or longer than
   the duration of the interference.

4.7  Overload

   Overload is defined as a threat action whereby attackers place excess
   burden on legitimate routers.  For example, it is possible for an
   attacker to trigger a router to create an excessive amount of state
   that other routers within the network are not able to handle.  In a
   similar fashion, it is possible for an attacker to overload database
   routing exchanges and thus influence the routing operations.














Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols      October 2004


5.  Security Considerations

   This entire document is security related.  Specifically the document
   addresses security of routing protocols as associated with threats to
   those protocols.  In a larger context, this work builds upon the
   recognition of the IETF community that signaling and
   control/management planes of networked devices need strengthening.
   Routing protocols can be considered part of that signaling and
   control plane.  However, to date, routing protocols have largely
   remained unprotected and open to malicious attacks.  This document
   discusses inter- and intra-domain routing protocol threats that are
   currently known and lays the foundation for other documents that will
   discuss security requirements for routing protocols.  This document
   is protocol independent.





































Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols      October 2004


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.
















































Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols      October 2004


7.  References

7.1  Normative References

   [1]  Shirey, R, "Internet Security Glossary", RFC 2828 , May 2000.

   [2]  Rosen, E., "Vulnerabilities of Network Control Protocols: An
        Example, Computer Communication Review",  , July 1981.

   [3]  Perlman, R, "Network Layer Protocols with Byzantine Robustness",
        , August 1988 .

   [4]  Moy, J, "OSPF Version 2", RFC  2328, April   1998.

   [5]  Shen, N.  et. al., "Dynamic Hostname Exchange Mechanism for
        IS-IS", RFC 2763 , February  2000.

   [6]  Malkin, G., "RIP Version 2 Protocol Analysis", RFC 1721 ,
        November  1994.

7.2  Informative References

   [7]  Kent, S. et al., "Secure Border Gateway Protocol
        (Secure-BGP)", IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications
        , April 2000.


Authors' Addresses

   Abbie Barbir
   Nortel Networks
   3500 Carling Avenue
   Nepean, Ontario  K2H 8E9
   Canada

   Phone:
   EMail: abbieb@nortelnetworks.com


   Sandy Murphy
   Sparta, Inc.
   7075 Samuel Morse Drive
   Columbia, MD
   USA

   Phone: 410-872-1515 x206
   EMail: sandy@tislabs.com




Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols      October 2004


   Yi Yang
   Cisco Systems
   7025 Kit Creek Road
   RTP, NC  27709
   USA

   Phone:
   EMail: yiya@cisco.com











































Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols      October 2004


Appendix A.  Acknowledgments

   This draft would not have been possible save for the excellent
   efforts and team work characteristics of those listed here.
   o  Dennis Beard- Nortel Networks
   o  Ayman Musharbash - Nortel Networks
   o  Jean-Jacques Puig, int-evry, France
   o  Paul Knight - Nortel Networks
   o  Elwyn Davies - Nortel Networks
   o  Ameya Dilip Pandit - Graduate student - University of Missouri
   o  Senthilkumar Ayyasamy - Graduate student - University of Missouri
   o  Stephen Kent- BBN
   o  Tim Gage - CISCO
   o  James Ng - CISCO
   o  Alvaro Retana - CISCO




































Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols      October 2004


Appendix B.  Acronyms

   AS - Autonomous system.  Set of routers under a single technical
   administration.  Each AS normally uses a single interior gateway
   protocol (IGP) and metrics to propagate routing information within
   the set of routers.  Also called routing domain.

   AS-Path - In BGP, the route to a destination.  The path consists of
   the AS numbers of all routers a packet must go through to reach a
   destination.

   BGP - Border Gateway Protocol.  Exterior gateway protocol used to
   exchange routing information among routers in different autonomous
   systems.

   LSA - Link-State Announcement

   NLRI - Network layer reachability information.  Information that is
   carried in BGP packets and is used by MBGP.

   OSPF - Open Shortest Path First.  A link-state IGP that makes routing
   decisions based on the shortest-path-first (SPF) algorithm (also
   referred to as the Dijkstra algorithm).




























Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft    Generic Threats to Routing Protocols      October 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Barbir, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 25]


