
Internet Engineering Task Force                                J. Griner
INTERNET DRAFT                                                NASA Lewis
                                                        16 November 1998


              TCP Performance Enhancing Proxy Terminology
                    draft-griner-tcppep-term-00.txt

Status of This Memo

    Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

    This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
    documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
    and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
    working documents as Internet-Drafts.

    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
    at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as
    reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

    To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check the
    "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
    Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net (Northern
    Europe), ftp.nic.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim),
    ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

Abstract

    This document presents definitions for many terms to be used during
    the discussion of various TCP Performance Enhancing Proxies (PEP).
    A PEP, located between two end-systems, is used to, in some way,
    enhance a TCP connection.  PEP's are commonly referred to as
    spoofing, connection splitting gateways, etc.

1.  Introduction

    This document presents definitions for many terms to be used during
    the discussion of various TCP Performance Enhancing Proxies (PEP).
    A PEP, located between two end-systems, is used to enhance a TCP
    connection.  PEP's are commonly referred to as spoofing, a
    connection splitting gateway, etc.  With commonly agreed
    definitions, it is expected that PEP designers will be able to
    discuss more clearly the advantages and disadvantages of their PEP
    methods.

    This document is a strawman, based on conversations conducted on the
    tcppep mailing list.  For information on subscribing to the tcppep 
    mailing list reference: http://tcppep.lerc.nasa.gov

    





Expires: 16 May 1999                                            [Page 1]

draft-griner-tcppep-term-00.txt                            November 1998

2.  Definitions for TCP Performance Enhancing Proxy Terms

      asymmetric link

        A link which has different rates for the forward channel (used
        for data segments) and the back, or return, channel (used for
        ACKs).

      raw bandwidth

        The total capacity (bytes/sec) of an unloaded link available to
        carry information.

      available bandwidth

        The total capacity (bytes/sec) of a link that is available at
        any given time. May be lower than raw bandwidth due to competing
        traffic.

      bandwidth utilization

        The actual amount of information delivered over a link, in a
        given period, expressed as a percent of the raw bandwidth on
        that link.

      gateway

        A device capable of initiating and terminating IP connections on
        behalf of a user.  (eg. firewall, proxy, etc.)  Not necessarily,
        but could be, the same as a "router".

      opaque

        A modification that requires changes to be made to both
        end-systems.

      protocol tunneling

        When a packet from an originating host is subsequently wrapped
        for transmission, and the wrapper later removed for final
        delivery to an end host.

      proxies

        An entity in the network acting on behalf of a user (with or
        without the user's knowledge)

        Type 1: Traditional web proxy, which contains content and
        requires a configuration change on the client end. (mirrors seem
        like a brute force/higher level implementation of this)

        Type 2: Does not break the end-to-end TCP connection, but
        modifies things like ACK spacing to improve performance.  This
        proxy is invisible to client and server.

Expires: 16 May 1999                                            [Page 2]

draft-griner-tcppep-term-00.txt                            November 1998


        Type 3: Uses TCP splitting for communications between two
        end-systems, and is invisible to client and server.

      router

        A device for routing IP packets through an internetwork.

      Snoop

        A TCP-aware link layer developed for wireless packet radio or
        cellular networks. It works by caching segments at a wireless
        base station. If the base station sees dupacks for a segment
        that it has cached, it retransmits the missing segment while
        suppressing the dupack stream back to the sender until the
        wireless receiver starts to ack new data. [BSK95]

      split-connection

        A TCP connection that has been terminated, before reaching the
        destination end-system, in order to initiate a second connection
        towards the end-system. [BB95]
 
      TCP splitting

        Using one or more split-connections, for communications between
        two unaltered end-systems.

      translucent

        A modification that requires changes to be made at only one
        end-system.

      transparent
	
        No changes are necessary in either of the end-systems.


Acknowledgements
	
    I would like to thank the people who contributed to the tcppep
    mailing list.  Most of the definitions were extracted from
    discussions on this list.

References

    [BSK95] Hari Balakrishnan, Srinivasan Seshan, Randy
        H. Katz. Improving Reliable Transport and Handoff Performance in
        Cellular Wireless Networks. ACM Wireless Networks, 1(4),
        December 1995.

    [BB95] A. Bakre and B. R. Badrinath. I-TCP: Indirect TCP for Mobile
        Hosts. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on
        Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), May 1995.

Expires: 16 May 1999                                            [Page 3]

draft-griner-tcppep-term-00.txt                            November 1998


Author's Address

    Jim Griner
    NASA Lewis Research Center
    MS: 54-2
    21000 Brookpark Rd.
    Cleveland, OH 44135
    +1-216-433-5787
    jgriner@lerc.nasa.gov













































Expires: 16 May 1999                                            [Page 4]





Jim Griner

