

INTERNET-DRAFT                                    Donald E. Eastlake 3rd
                                                   Motorola Laboratories
Expires February 2005                                        August 2004


    How to Gain Prominence and Influence in Standards Organizations
    --- -- ---- ---------- --- --------- -- --------- -------------
                   <draft-eastlake-prominence-01.txt>
                         Donald E. Eastlake 3rd



Status of This Document

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed,
   or will be disclosed, and any of which I become aware will be
   disclosed, in accordance with RFC 3668.

   Distribution of this document is unlimited. Comments should be sent
   to the author.  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet
   Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.
   Note that other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than a "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society 2004. All Rights Reserved.



Abstract

   Following some simple guidelines can make it easier for you to gain
   prominence and influence in most standards or other organizations.











D. Eastlake 3rd                                                 [Page 1]


INTERNET-DRAFT                                  Prominence and Influence


Table of Contents

      Status of This Document....................................1
      Abstract...................................................1

      Table of Contents..........................................2

      1. Introduction............................................3
      2. Characteristics of Human Organizations..................3
      3. Eighty Percent of Success is Showing Up.................3
      4. Sit Up Front............................................4
      5. Break Bread.............................................4
      6. Be Helpful..............................................5
      7. Learn The Traditions, Rules, and Procedures.............5
      8. Develop Some Friends and Mentors........................6
      9. Know the Acronyms and Special Terms.....................6
      10. Pick Your Points and Fights............................7
      11. Technical and Communications Skill.....................7
      12. Do Not Try Too Hard....................................8

      13. Informative References.................................9
      Copyright and Disclaimer...................................9

      Authors Address...........................................10
      Expiration and File Name..................................10



























D. Eastlake 3rd                                                 [Page 2]


INTERNET-DRAFT                                  Prominence and Influence


1. Introduction

   There are some guidelines that can help your prominence and influence
   in most standards organizations or other human organizations.  They
   can be followed with reasonable safety and moderate effort, assuming
   you have at least normal communications and technical skills.



2. Characteristics of Human Organizations

   All organizations are composed of human beings and give the
   appearance to newcomers of having an inner clique that runs things.
   This is true whether there is a semi-permanent cohesive inside group
   that is actually trying to keep all power in its own hands or those
   in positions of power are genuinely trying to be open and willing to
   share and there is a system for their regular replacement. This is
   just the nature of human society. It always takes time and effort to
   get to know new people. [Carnegie]

   All organizations have procedures. It always takes time and effort to
   learn how things are done in an organization. In an organization of
   any size, those who happen to be in positions of authority just can
   not spend equal time talking with everyone about every issue in the
   organization. Their positions mean they will necessarily be in many
   conversations with each other and fewer conversations with the
   average member. And there really are some types of information that
   should normally be kept confidential, at least until verified, and
   sometimes even then.  For example, charges of ethical or other
   violations against individuals.

   But, despite all this, by following some simple guidelines you can
   greatly accelerate the rate at which you will become favorably known
   in an organization.

   Favorable prominence can increase your chance of being selected for
   positions such as editorship of documents, secretary or clerk of a
   group (so you get to produce the record of what *actually* happened),
   or possibly even some level of chair or deputy chair position.



3. Eighty Percent of Success is Showing Up

   It is the simplest thing! If you are absent, how can you have much
   prominence or influence?

   This applies to all venues, email/messaging, telephone/video
   conference, and especially in person or face-to-face meetings. You do
   not need 100% attendance but your absences should be rare and, if


D. Eastlake 3rd                                                 [Page 3]


INTERNET-DRAFT                                  Prominence and Influence


   possible, only miss less important events.

   Attendance is obviously most important at meetings of the specific
   body in which you are interested. But you should also be on the look
   out for higher-level or lower-level meetings that are open. Many
   standards groups have a multi-level structure. As well as attending
   the group you are interested in, if there are open meetings of
   various group chairs or the like, attending those can be a fast track
   even if you only get to observe and be noticed. And if there are sub-
   groups of the group you are most interested in, consider attending
   them also to become better known more quickly. Higher-level meetings
   may be before the beginning or after the end of the regular member
   meetings so if you are really serious, you should be prepared to
   arrive early and leave late.



4. Sit Up Front

   If a meeting is small enough, it does not make as much difference.
   But for meetings of any size, especially when starting with an
   organization, sit up front. Do not be afraid of the first row even if
   it is empty, although the second and sometimes even the third are not
   too bad. Show up early if you need to, but it is usually not
   necessary as most people are extraordinarily reluctant to put
   themselves in an exposed place, like the front row.

   After you have some experience, there may be some group that sits in
   some part of the audience you want to sit with. But, for larger
   meetings, the prominent people generally sit either up near the
   front, or way at the back. (Being in the back generally means you can
   wander around and talk to people, to some extent, without disrupting
   things.)



5. Break Bread

   All meetings of any length involve refreshment and meals. Otherwise
   the attendees would starve.

   If there is a group catered meal, try sitting with different groups
   or factions to get an idea of the different viewpoints in the
   organization. Or try to sit at a table and eat with people who have
   some seniority and experience in the organization, if they seem
   receptive.

   Usually, for multi-day meetings, there is at least one big social
   event where the attendees can get together. From small (attendance
   under 100) and medium size (attendance under 500 or so) meetings, it


D. Eastlake 3rd                                                 [Page 4]


INTERNET-DRAFT                                  Prominence and Influence


   is common for most people to go to the social. Typically some alcohol
   is available, people are more relaxed and informal. These are good
   events at which to approach high-level officials to exchange a
   pleasant word or two or even make a small request. But do not count
   on being able to engage in detailed technical discussions. Social
   events are commonly at noisy locations. Sometimes, as organizations
   get larger, well over 500, the socials get so large and congested
   that many of the most prominent people schedule informal meetings or
   the like opposite them. You will just have to see how it works in
   your organization.

   But there will also be plenty of informal dinner groups and lunch
   groups (unless they are all catered) and other get-togethers. At some
   standards meetings you can more or less invite yourself along to such
   meal groups, unless they are a small confidential group or a group of
   employees of a particular company or the like. Usually people will
   warn you if the group plans to spend much of the meal discussing some
   particular issue and you can then decide if you want to go with them.



6. Be Helpful

   Within reason, volunteer to do some of the drudgery for which you are
   competent, such as taking notes during meetings or helping someone
   else draft a proposal, or volunteering to re-write part of a draft
   for clarity and consistency.

   This sort of thing will get you noticed and put some people in your
   debt, at least in a minor way. But be careful not to volunteer for
   more than you can actually do. Failing to follow through will damage
   your reputation. If you do get over committed, seek help as soon as
   you realize it. The worst possible thing is to fail to meet your
   promises and not let anyone know about it until it is too late for
   them to recover.



7. Learn The Traditions, Rules, and Procedures

   It is quite important to know the traditions of an organization, how
   things get done, what rules are ignored, how rules are interpreted,
   and what rules are rigorously enforced.

   While traditions are more important, it cannot hurt to know the
   official rules and procedures. The probability that the lowest level
   groups in the organization actually operate according to the
   officially adopted rules and procedures in minute detail is quite low
   unless the organization has pretty informal rules.



D. Eastlake 3rd                                                 [Page 5]


INTERNET-DRAFT                                  Prominence and Influence


   Do not try to gain prominence by objecting to procedure just for the
   sake of objecting. If you invoke little known and rarely used
   official rules in small matters, it is a sure way to make people
   assume that what you have to say is silly or obstructionist until
   proven otherwise. If you invoke the official rules so as to override
   tradition in an important matter, be aware that you are playing with
   a weapon of mass destruction. You may or may not accomplish your
   immediate goal but the blowback will probably damage any future
   efforts in that organization.

   Conversely, while it is always the path of least resistance to follow
   tradition, knowing the official rules makes you aware of when they
   could be invoked against you. This may enable you to adopt a path
   that is reasonably congruent with both the traditions and the rules,
   maximizing your chances of success.



8. Develop Some Friends and Mentors

   Trying to get things done and learn what is going on entirely by
   yourself is very hard. If you can, find a few people with more
   experience that you can go to with questions.

   Introduce yourself to people and be friendly. But do not necessarily
   link up with the first people you meet. You want people who is
   knowledgeable and of whom their is a favorable impression within the
   organization.

   If you follow the advice in Section 6 above about being helpful, you
   should have plenty of opportunity to get to know experienced people
   in an organization.



9. Know the Acronyms and Special Terms

   Essentially all technical standards efforts wallow in acronyms and
   special "terms of art". It sometimes seems as if no effort or sub-
   effort is really rolling until it has come up with several non-
   obvious terms to confuse those who have not been involved for a
   while. Nor are acronyms constant. Especially in the early part of a
   standards effort, when ideas are flopping around, acronyms and
   special terms frequently change for further confusion of those not in
   the most active part of the group.

   In fact, if you read an explanation of some deep technical matter
   written so someone outside that field can understand it, you can be
   virtually certain that it is not how experts in the field communicate
   with each other, verbally or in writing. This is true of all fields.


D. Eastlake 3rd                                                 [Page 6]


INTERNET-DRAFT                                  Prominence and Influence


   Read something about engineering big "air vents" and "water pipes"?
   Experts use "plenum" and "penstock".

   It is not a good strategy to get lost in acronyms you do not know, so
   you cannot understand what people are talking about and may make a
   fool of yourself if you guess wrong. The best thing is to find out
   about and learn the acronyms in advance. Failing that ask about what
   acronyms or strange terms mean as soon as you can, preferably the
   first time you encounter them. Making a written note of their meaning
   could not hurt. Usually there will be others who also wanted to ask
   but were afraid to and will be grateful you took the initiative.



10. Pick Your Points and Fights

   Think a bit about the impression people are going to get of you.

   If you insist on speaking to every issue, you may get a reputation as
   a blow hard that usually is not adding much and just gets in the way
   of getting things done.  If you speak rarely, but have solid points
   to make when you do, people will pay much more attention to your
   occasional speeches.

   Similarly, if you quibble about everything, you will use up good will
   you have acquired and may be viewed as an obstructionist who
   needlessly delays things. If an organization is doing or developing
   something complex, all the decisions are not going to go the way you
   want. If you consider the points where you could try to get your way,
   figure out how important they are to you, how strong your arguments
   would be, and how much opposition you are likely to encounter. Based
   on this, you can make a reasoned choice of where to really put up a
   fight and possibly recruit allies or call in favors.

   This is not to say that you should ignore minor issues and not speak
   up about them if you have new information or opinions to contribute.
   Just do not invest a lot of effort in fighting an issue unless it is
   important to you and you judge that you have a reasonable chance of
   winning.



11. Technical and Communications Skill

   You may be surprised that I have said very little about technical and
   communication skills although in the Introduction above, it was
   assumed that you had normal skills in these areas.  Certainly, you
   need to understand the technical aspects of what is going on so that
   you cannot be easily bamboozled.



D. Eastlake 3rd                                                 [Page 7]


INTERNET-DRAFT                                  Prominence and Influence


   If you are very strong technically and can make substantial
   contributions, this can be helpful in accomplishing your goals, if
   you can do it in a way that does not offend too many people. But,
   especially in a large technical standards body, not everyone can be a
   strong technical contributor.

   If you have strong verbal and written communications skills, this can
   also be helpful in accomplishing your goals. But if you are not
   fluent in the dominant language of the organization you are
   interested in, you will be at a disadvantage. While the organization
   should make some attempt to be approachable by those for whom its
   dominant language is a second language, the best thing to do is to
   put in the time and effort to become fluent. [Farber] As a stop gap,
   you can team up with someone with whom you communicate well and who
   is fluent in the standards organization language. They can speak for
   you in meetings, if necessary, and co-author written contributions
   with you.

   If you are the rare genius with superb technical, communication, and
   interpersonal skills, you are wasting your time reading this and
   might be able to get away with doing exactly the opposite of some of
   its recommendations. But I would not count on it...



12. Do Not Try Too Hard

   Lastly, after you have given it a bit of time and settled into an
   organization, be reasonably assertive but do not be too pushy. And
   try to never lose your temper.

   Unless you are a genius at inter-personal relations, you will not
   gain substantial prominence and influence in a standards organization
   overnight. These things take time and patience.


















D. Eastlake 3rd                                                 [Page 8]


INTERNET-DRAFT                                  Prominence and Influence


13. Informative References

   [Carnegie] - "How To Win Friends And Influence People", Dale
   Carnegie, 1990, ISBN 0671723650.

   [Farber] - "How to Learn Any Language", Barry Farber, 1991, ISBN
   1-56731-543-7.



Copyright and Disclaimer

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78 and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.


   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.




























D. Eastlake 3rd                                                 [Page 9]


INTERNET-DRAFT                                  Prominence and Influence


Authors Address

   Donald E. Eastlake 3rd
   Motorola Laboratories
   155 Beaver Street
   Milford, MA 01757 USA

   Telephone:   +1 508-786-7554 (w)
                +1 508-634-2066 (h)
   EMail:       Donald.Eastlake@motorola.com



Expiration and File Name

   This draft expires February 2005.

   Its file name is draft-eastlake-prominence-01.txt.


































D. Eastlake 3rd                                                [Page 10]


