


6LoWPAN Working Group                                             E. Kim
Internet-Draft                                                      ETRI
Expires: January 15, 2009                                      D. Kaspar
                                              Simula Research Laboratory
                                                                C. Gomez
                                                 Technical University of
                                                         Catalonia/i2CAT
                                                              C. Bormann
                                                 Universitaet Bremen TZI
                                                           July 14, 2008


      Problem Statement and Requirements for 6LoWPAN Mesh Routing
                   draft-dokaspar-6lowpan-routreq-06

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 15, 2009.












Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


Abstract

   This document provides the problem statement for 6LoWPAN mesh
   routing.  It also defines the requirements for 6LoWPAN mesh routing
   considering the low-power characteristics of the network and its
   devices.


Table of Contents

   1.  Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Design Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  Scenario Considerations and Parameters for 6LoWPAN Routing . .  8
   4.  6LoWPAN Routing Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     4.1.  Routing Requirements depending on the 6LoWPAN Device
           Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     4.2.  Routing Requirements depending on Types of 6LoWPAN
           Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     4.3.  MAC-coupled Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     4.4.  Mesh-under specific Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     4.5.  Route-over specific Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   6.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 26























Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


1.  Problem Statement

   Low-power wireless personal area networks (LoWPANs) are formed by
   devices complying to the IEEE 802.15.4 standard [5][6].  LoWPAN
   devices are distinguished by their low bandwidth, short range, scarce
   memory capacity, limited processing capability and other attributes
   of inexpensive hardware.  In this document, the characteristics of
   nodes participating in LoWPANs are assumed to be those described in
   [3].

   IEEE 802.15.4 networks support star and mesh topologies and consist
   of two different device types: reduced-function devices (RFDs) and
   full-function devices (FFDs).  RFDs have the most limited
   capabilities and are intended to perform only simple and basic tasks.
   RFDs may only associate with a single FFD at a time, but FFDs may
   form arbitrary topologies and accomplish more advanced functions,
   such as multi-hop routing.

   However, neither the IEEE 802.15.4 standard nor the 6LoWPAN format
   specification ("IPv6 over IEEE 802.15.4" [4]) specify how mesh
   topologies could be obtained and maintained.  Thus, the 6LoWPAN
   formation and multi-hop routing should be supported by higher layer,
   either 6LoWPAN adaptation layer or IP layer.  In the IETF, a number
   of experimental protocols in IP layer have been developed in many
   working groups.  However, these existing routing protocols may not be
   satisfying for mesh routing in a LoWPAN domain, for the following
   reasons:

   o  6LoWPAN nodes have special types and roles, such as primary
      battery-operated RFDs, battery-operated and mains-powered FFDs,
      possibly various levels of RFDs and FFDs, mains-powered and high-
      performance gateways, data aggregators, etc. 6LoWPAN routing
      protocols should support multiple device types and roles.

   o  The more stringent requirements that apply to 6LoWPANs as opposed
      to higher performance or non-battery-operated networks. 6LoWPAN
      nodes are characterized by small memory sizes, low processing
      power, and are running on very limited power supplied by primary
      non-rechargeable batteries.  A node's lifetime is usually defined
      by the lifetime of its battery.

   o  Handling sleeping nodes is very critical in 6LoWPANs, more than in
      traditional ad-hoc networks. 6LoWPAN nodes might stay in sleep-
      mode for most of the time.  Time synchronization is important for
      efficient forwarding of packets.

   o  A possibly simpler routing problem; 6LoWPANs might be either
      transit-networks or stub-networks.  We can focus on stub networks



Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


      first as existing 6LoWPAN documents (implicitly or explicitly)
      show the 6LoWPAN picture under the configuration of stub networks
      at this moment [4], [8].  We can simplify networks by an
      assumption of no transit networks. (based on the necessity, we may
      extend the network configuration including transit network case)

   o  A possibly harder routing problem; routing in 6LoWPANs requires to
      consider power-optimization, harsh environment, data-aware
      routing, etc.  These are not easy requirements to satisfy
      together.

   This creates new challenges on obtaining robust and reliable mesh
   routing within LoWPANs.

   The 6LoWPAN problem statement document ("6LoWPAN Problems and Goals"
   [3]) briefly mentions four requirements on routing protocols;

      (a) low overhead on data packets

      (b) low routing overhead

      (c) minimal memory and computation requirements

      (d) support for sleeping nodes considering battery saving

   These four high-level requirements only describe the need for low
   overhead and power saving.  But, based on the fundamental features of
   LoWPAN, more detailed routing requirements are presented in this
   document, which can lead to further analysis and protocol design.

   Using the 6LoWPAN header format[6], there are two layers routing
   protocols can be defined at, commonly referred to as "mesh-under" and
   "route-over".  The mesh-under approach supports routing under the IP
   link and is directly based on the link-layer IEEE 802.15.4 standard,
   therefore using (64-bit or 16-bit short) MAC addresses.  On the other
   hand, the route-over approach relies on IP routing and therefore
   supports routing over possibly various types of interconnected links
   (see also Figure 1).

   Most statements in this document consider to both the mesh-under and
   route-over cases.

   In summary, the main issues of mesh routing in 6LoWPANs are:

   1.  The precise 6LoWPAN routing requirements must be defined.

   2.  If a routing protocol for 6LoWPAN is designed to run in the IP
       layer, it should meet the 6LoWPAN-specific requirements.  It



Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


       needs to be clarified how existing routing solutions can be
       adapted to meet the low-power requirements presented in
       Section 4.
       [Note] ROLL WG is now working on the protocol survey for Low
       power and Lossy Networks (LLNs), not specifically for 6LoWPAN.
       It will decide whether new solution will be developed or not,
       after that survey.  This document is focused on 6LoWPAN specific
       requirements, in alignment with ROLL WG.

   3.  If a routing procotol for 6LoWPAN within a subnet is designed to
       run in adaptation layer, existing routing solutions do not
       operate in 6LoWPAN's adaptation layer (and do not support the
       addressing scheme defined by IEEE 802.15.4).

   Considering the problems above, this draft addresses routing
   requirements for 6LoWPANs for both mesh-under and route-over routing
   protocol design.

   Application-specific features affect the design of 6lowpan routing
   requirements and the corresponding solutions.  However, various
   applications can be profiled by similar technical characteristics.
   This document states the requirements to consider the features of
   6LoWPAN applications in general.  However, it does not mean that one
   single routing solution may be the best one for all 6LoWPAN
   applications.


























Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


2.  Design Space

   Apart from a wide variety of routing algorithms possible for 6LoWPAN,
   the question remains as to whether routing should be performed mesh-
   under (in the adaptation layer defined by the 6lowpan format document
   [4]), or in the IP-layer using a route-over approach.  The most
   significant consequence of mesh-under routing is that routing would
   be directly based on the IEEE 802.15.4 standard, therefore using (64-
   bit or 16-bit short) MAC addresses instead of IP addresses, and a
   LoWPAN would be seen as a single IP link.  In case a route-over
   mechanism is to be applied to a LoWPAN it must also support 6LoWPAN's
   unique properties using global IPv6 addressing.

   Additionally, because of the low-performance characteristics of
   LoWPANs, a light-weight routing protocol must be provided that meets
   the design goals and requirements presented in this document.

   Figure 1 shows the place of 6LoWPAN mesh routing in the entire
   network stack;

    +-----------------------------+    +-----------------------------+
    |  Application Layer          |    |  Application Layer          |
    +-----------------------------+    +-----------------------------+
    |  Transport Layer (TCP/UDP)  |    |  Transport Layer (TCP/UDP)  |
    +-----------------------------+    +-----------------------------+
    |  Network Layer (IPv6)       |    |  Network       +---------+  |
    +-----------------------------+    |  Layer         | Routing |  |
    |  6LoWPAN       +---------+  |    |  (IPv6)        +---------+  |
    |  Adaptation    | Routing |  |    +-----------------------------+
    |  Layer         +---------+  |    |  6LoWPAN Adaptation Layer   |
    +-----------------------------+    +-----------------------------+
    |  IEEE 802.15.4 (MAC)        |    |  IEEE 802.15.4 (MAC)        |
    +-----------------------------+    +-----------------------------+
    |  IEEE 802.15.4 (PHY)        |    |  IEEE 802.15.4 (PHY)        |
    +-----------------------------+    +-----------------------------+

        Figure 1: Mesh-under (left) and route-over routing (right)

   In order to avoid packet fragmentation and the overhead for
   reassembly, routing packets should fit into a single IEEE 802.15.4
   physical frame and application data should not be expanded to an
   extent that they no longer fit.

   If a mesh-under routing protocol is built for operation in 6LoWPAN's
   adaptation layer, routing control packets are placed after the
   6LoWPAN Dispatch, unless a new code type is assigned for mesh-under
   routing.  Multiple routing protocols can be supported by the usage of
   different Dispatch bit sequences.  When a route-over protocol is



Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


   built in the IPv6 layer, the Dispatch value can be chosen as one of
   the Dispatch patterns for 6LoWPAN compressed or uncompressed IPv6,
   followed by the IPv6 header.

   If a 6LoWPAN is formed like the Figure 2 , the PnC is the only IPv6
   router in the LoWPAN in the assumption of [8].  The mesh-under
   routing mechanism MUST be provided to forward packets which require
   multi-hop forwarding.  If route-over routing is used in the stub-
   network, not only the PnC but also other FFDs need to set up IP paths
   for multi-hop transmission.


       O     X
       |     |                    PnC: PAN Coordinator
   PnC --- O --- O --- X         C: Coordinator
              / \                O: FFD
         X   C--X                X: RFD
             |
            / \
           O---O--X

                     Figure 2: An example of a 6LoWPAN

   If multiple 6LoPWANs are formed with globally unique IPv6 addresses
   in the 6LoWPANs, and node (a) of 6LoWPAN [A] wants to communicate
   with node (b) of 6LoWPAN [B], the PnC (= IPv6 router) will be always
   the default router for the outgoing packet of the 6LoWPAN.
























Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


3.  Scenario Considerations and Parameters for 6LoWPAN Routing

   IP-based low-power WPAN technology is still in its early stage of
   development, but the range of conceivable usage scenarios is
   tremendous.  The numerous possible applications of sensor networks
   make it obvious that mesh topologies will be prevalent in LoWPAN
   environments and routing will be a necessity for expedient
   communication.  Research efforts in the area of sensor networking
   have put forth a large variety of multi-hop routing algorithms [7].
   Most related work focuses on optimizing routing for specific
   application scenarios, which can largely be categorized into several
   models of communication, including the following ones:

   o  Flooding (in very small networks)

   o  Data-aware routing (dissemination vs. gathering)

   o  Event-driven vs. query-based routing

   o  Geographic routing

   o  Probabilistic routing

   o  Hierarchical routing

   Depending on the topology of a 6LoWPAN and the application(s) running
   over it, different types of routing may be used.  However, this
   document abstracts from application-specific communication and
   describes general routing requirements valid for any type of routing
   in 6LoWPANs.

   The following parameters can be used to describe specific scenarios
   in which the candidate routing protocols could be evaluated.

   a.  Network Properties:

       *  Device Number, Density and Network Diameter:
          These parameters usually affect the routing state directly
          (e.g. the number of entries in a routing table or neighbor
          list).  Especially in large and dense networks, policies must
          be applied for discarding "low-quality" and stale routing
          entries in order to prevent memory overflow.

       *  Connectivity:
          Due to external factors or programmed disconnections, a
          6LoWPAN can be in several states of connectivity; anything in
          the range from "always connected" to "rarely connected".  This
          poses great challenges to the dynamic discovery of routes



Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


          across a LoWPAN.

       *  Dynamicity (include mobility):
          Location changes can be induced by unpredictable external
          factors or by controlled motion, which may in turn cause route
          changes.  Also, nodes may dynamically be introduced into a
          LoWPAN and removed from it later.  The routing state and the
          volume of control messages is heavily dependent on the number
          of moving nodes in a LoWPAN and their speed.

       *  Deployment:
          In a LoWPAN, it is possible for nodes to be scattered randomly
          or to be deployed in an organized manner.  The deployment can
          occur at once, or as an iterative process, which may also
          affect the routing state.

       *  Spatial Distribution of Nodes and Gateways:
          Network connectivity depends on node spatial distribution
          besides other factors like device number, density and
          transmission range.  For instance, nodes can be placed on a
          grid, or can be randomly placed in an area (bidimensional
          Poisson distribution), etc.  In addition, if the LoWPAN is
          connected to other networks through infrastructure nodes
          called gateways, the number and spatial distribution of
          gateways affects network congestion and available bandwidth,
          among others.

       *  Traffic Patterns, Topology and Applications:
          The design of a LoWPAN and the requirements on its application
          have a big impact on the network topology and the most
          efficient routing type to be used.  For different traffic
          patterns (point-to-point, multipoint-to-point, point-to-
          multipoint) and network architectures, various routing
          mechanisms have been introduced, such as data-aware, event-
          driven, address-centric, and geographic routing.

       *  Quality of Service (QoS):
          For mission-critical applications, support of QoS is mandatory
          in resource-constrained LoWPANs and cannot be achieved without
          a certain degree of routing protocol overhead.

       *  Security:
          LoWPANs may carry sensitive information and require a high
          level of security support where the availability, integrity,
          and confidentiality of data are primordial.  Secured messages
          cause overhead and affect the power consumption of LoWPAN
          routing protocols.




Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


   b.  Node Parameters:

       *  Processing Speed and Memory Size:
          These basic parameters define the maximum size of the routing
          state.  LoWPAN nodes may have different performance
          characteristics beyond the common RFD/FFD distinction.

       *  Power Consumption and Power Source:
          The number and topology of battery- and mains-powered nodes in
          a LoWPAN affect routing protocols in their selection of
          optimal paths for network lifetime maximization.

       *  Transmission Range:
          This parameter affects routing.  For example, a high
          transmission range may cause a dense network, which in turn
          results in more direct neighbors of a node, higher
          connectivity and a larger routing state.

       *  Traffic Pattern: This parameter affects routing since high-
          loaded nodes (either because they are the source of packets to
          be transmitted or due to forwarding) may incur a greater
          contribution to delivery delays than low-loaded nodes.  This
          applies to both data packets and routing control messages
          themselves.

   c.  Link Parameters:

       *  Throughput:
          The maximum user data throughput of a bulk data transmission
          between a single sender and a single receiver through an
          unslotted IEEE 802.15.4 2.4 GHz channel in ideal conditions is
          as follows [17]:

          +  16-bit MAC addresses, unreliable mode: 151.6 kbps

          +  16-bit MAC addresses, reliable mode: 139.0 kbps

          +  64-bit MAC addresses, unreliable mode: 135.6 kbps

          +  64-bit MAC addresses, reliable mode: 124.4 kbps

          In the case of 915 MHz band:

          +  16-bit MAC addresses, unreliable mode: 31.1 kbps

          +  16-bit MAC addresses, reliable mode: 28.6 kbps





Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


          +  64-bit MAC addresses, unreliable mode: 27.8 kbps

          +  64-bit MAC addresses, reliable mode: 25.6 kbps

          In the case of 868 MHz band:

          +  16-bit MAC addresses, unreliable mode: 15.5 kbps

          +  16-bit MAC addresses, reliable mode: 14.3 kbps

          +  64-bit MAC addresses, unreliable mode: 13.9 kbps

          +  64-bit MAC addresses, reliable mode: 12.8 kbps

       *  Latency:
          The range of latencies of a frame transmission between a
          single sender and a single receiver through an unslotted IEEE
          802.15.4 2.4 GHz channel in ideal conditions are as follows
          [20]:

          +  16-bit MAC addresses, unreliable mode: [1.92 ms, 6.02 ms]

          +  16-bit MAC addresses, reliable mode: [2.46 ms, 6.56 ms]

          +  64-bit MAC addresses, unreliable mode: [2.75 ms, 6.02 ms]

          +  64-bit MAC addresses, reliable mode: [3.30 ms, 6.56 ms]

          In the case of 915 MHz band:

          +  16-bit MAC addresses, unreliable mode: [5.85 ms, 29.35 ms]

          +  16-bit MAC addresses, reliable mode: [8.35 ms, 31.85 ms]

          +  64-bit MAC addresses, unreliable mode: [8.95 ms, 29.35 ms]

          +  64-bit MAC addresses, reliable mode: [11.45 ms, 31.82 ms]

          In the case of 868 MHz band:

          +  16-bit MAC addresses, unreliable mode: [11.7 ms, 58.7 ms]

          +  16-bit MAC addresses, reliable mode: [16.7 ms, 63.7 ms]

          +  64-bit MAC addresses, unreliable mode: [17.9 ms, 58.7 ms]

          +  64-bit MAC addresses, reliable mode: [22.9 ms, 63.7 ms]




Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


4.  6LoWPAN Routing Requirements

   This section defines a list of requirements for 6LoWPAN routing.  The
   most important design property unique to low-power networks is that
   6LoWPANs support multiple device types and roles, for example:

   o  primary battery-operated RFDs

   o  battery-operated and mains-powered FFDs

   o  possibly various levels of RFDs and FFDs

   o  mains-powered, high-performance gateway(s)

   o  data aggregators, etc.

   Due to these unique device types and roles 6LoWPANs need to consider
   the following two primary features:

   o  Power conservation: some devices are mains-powered, but most are
      battery-operated and need to last several months to a few years
      with a single AA battery.  Many devices are mains-powered most of
      the time, but still need to function for possible extended periods
      from batteries (e.g. on a construction site before building power
      is switched on for the first time).

   o  Low performance: tiny devices, small memory sizes, low-performance
      processors, low bandwidth, high loss rates, etc.

   These fundamental features of LoWPANs affect the design of routing
   solutions, so that existing routing specifications should be
   simplified and modified to the smallest extent possible, in order to
   fit the low-power requirements of LoWPANs, meeting the following
   requirements:

4.1.  Routing Requirements depending on the 6LoWPAN Device Properties

   The general objectives listed in this subsection should be followed
   by 6LoWPAN routing protocols.  The importance of each requirement is
   dependent on what device type the protocol is running on and what the
   role of the device is.

   [R01] A 6LoWPAN routing protocol SHOULD be designed to minimize the
   required computational and algorithmical complexity.

      The lifetime of a wireless sensor node depends on the energy it
      can store and harvest.  Saving energy is crucially important to
      6LoWPAN devices that are not mains-powered.  However, one major



Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


      factor of power consumption in 6LoWPAN nodes is caused by the
      microcontroller.  Typical low power sensor nodes have 8 or 16 bit
      microcontrollers.  They normally consume between 0.250 mA and 2.5
      mA per MHz [10].  Low power microcontrollers can have a
      significant impact on system performance.  A routing protocol of
      low complexity helps to achieve the goal of reducing power
      consumption, improves robustness, requires lower routing state, is
      more easy to analyze, and is implicitly less prone to security
      attacks.

      See also Section 4.2 in [14] and Section 6.2 in [16].

   [R02] 6LoWPAN routing protocols SHOULD have a low routing state to
   fit the typical 6LoWPAN node capacity.

      Typical RAM size of 6LoWPAN nodes ranges between 2KB and 10KB, and
      program flash memory normally consists of 48KB to 128KB. (e.g., in
      the current market, MICAz has 128KB program flash, 4KB EEPROM,
      512KB external flash ROM; TIP700CM has 48KB program flash, 10KB
      RAM, 1MB external flash ROM).  Operation with low routing state
      (such as routing tables and neighbor lists) SHOULD be maintained
      since some typical memory sizes preclude to store state of a large
      number of nodes.

      For example, devices may have only 32 forwarding entries
      available.  A LoWPAN routing protocol solution should consider the
      limited memory size typically starting at 4KB, in which it is hard
      to store neighbor state of hundreds of nodes) and computation
      capabilities of participating devices; due to these hardware
      restrictions, code length should be considered to fit within a
      small memory size.  In addition, it should consider that flash
      writing/reading is energy expensive, while power consumption for
      RAM is may be comparably negligible.  For instance, in MICA motes,
      writing and reading consumes 1.1 nAh/byte and 83.3 nAh/byte,
      respectively.

      See also Section 4.2 in [14], Section 5 in [15] and Section 6.2 in
      [16].

   [R03] 6LoWPAN routing protocols SHOULD cause minimal power
   consumption, both in the efficient use of control packets and also in
   the process of packet forwarding after route establishment.

      Routing protocol design for 6LoWPAN should consider IEEE 802.15.4
      link layer feedback on energy consumption.  Power-aware routing is
      a non-trivial task, because it is affected by many mutually
      conflicting goals:




Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


      *  Minimization of total energy consumed in the network

      *  Maximization of the time until a network partition occurs

      *  Minimizing the energy variance at each node

      *  Minimizing the cost per packet

      while keeping packet delivery ratio, latency or other requirements
      depending on each application.

      One way of battery lifetime optimization is by achieving a minimal
      control message overhead.

      Compared to functions such as computational operations or taking
      sensor samples, radio communications is by far the dominant factor
      of power consumption [9]. power consumption of transmission and/or
      reception depends linearly on the length of data units and on the
      frequency of transmission and reception of the data units [12]

      In [10] the energy consumption of two example RF controllers for
      low-power nodes is shown.  The TR1000 radio consumes: 21mW on
      transmitting at 0.75mW; 15mW on reception (a receiver sensitivity
      of -85dBm).  The CC1000 consumes: 31.6mW on transmitting 0.75mW;
      20mW on reception (a receiver sensitivity of -105dBm). [10]
      explains the power continuation under the concept of an idealized
      power source: the CC1000 can transmit for approximately 4 days
      straight or receive for 9 days straight.  The CC1000 must operate
      at a duty cycle of approximately 2% to survive for one year.

      See also Section 4.2 in [14].

   [R04] The procedure of route repair and related control messages
   should not harm overall energy consumption from the routing
   protocols.

      Local repair improves throughput and end-to-end latency,
      especially in large networks.  Since routes are repaired quickly,
      fewer data packets are dropped, and a smaller number of routing
      protocol packet transmissions is needed since routes can be
      repaired without source initiated Route Discovery [11].

   [R05] Neighbor discovery for 6LoWPAN routing SHOULD be energy-
   efficient.

      Neighbor discovery is a major precondition to allow routing in a
      network.  Especially in a low-power environment, where nodes might
      be in periodic sleeping states, it is difficult to define whether



Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


      a node is a neighbor of another or not.  Mesh-under neighbor
      discovery for 6LoWPANs is currently still in progress and
      described more detailed in [8].

   [R06] 6LoWPAN routing protocols SHOULD be reliable despite
   unresponsive nodes due to periodic hibernation.

      Many nodes in 6LoWPAN environments might periodically hibernate
      (i.e. disable their transceiver activity) in order to save energy.
      Therefore, mesh routing protocols must ensure robust packet
      delivery despite nodes frequently shutting off their radio
      transmission interface.  Feedback, for instance from periodic
      beacons, from the lower IEEE 802.15.4 layer may be considered to
      enhance the power-awareness of 6LoWPAN routing protocols.

      See also Section 4.2 in [14].

4.2.  Routing Requirements depending on Types of 6LoWPAN Applications

   The routing requirements described in this subsection are heavily
   dependent on application needs.

   [R07] 6LoWPAN routing protocol SHOULD support various traffic
   patterns; point-to-point, point-to-multipoint, and multipoint-to-
   point, while avoid excessive multicast traffic (broadcast in Link) in
   6LoWPAN.

      6LoWPANs often have point-to-multipoint or multipoint-to-point
      traffic patterns.  Many emerging applications include point-to-
      point communication as well. 6LoWPAN routing protocols should be
      designed with the consideration of forwarding packets from/to
      multiple sources/destinations.  Current WG drafts in the ROLL
      working group explain that the workload or traffic pattern of use
      cases for 6LoWPANs tend to be highly structured, unlike the any-
      to-any data transfers that dominate typical client and server
      workloads.  In many cases, exploiting such structure may simplify
      difficult problems arising from resource constraints or variation
      in connectivity.

      See also Section 5 in [14], Section 2.1 in [15] and Section 5 in
      [16].

   [R08] 6LoWPAN routing protocols SHOULD be robust to dynamic loss
   caused by link failure or device unavailability either in short-term
   (e.g. due to RSSI variation, interference variation, noise and
   asynchrony) or in long-term (e.g. due to a depleted power source,
   hardware breakdown, operating system misbehavior, etc).




Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


      An important trait of 6LoWPAN devices is their unreliability due
      to limited system capabilities, and also because they might be
      closely coupled to the physical world with all its unpredictable
      variation.  In harsh environments, LoWPANs easily suffer from link
      failure.  Collision or link failure easily increases Send Queue/
      Receive Queue (SQ/RQ) and it can lead to queue overflow and packet
      losses.

      The routing protocol has to exploit network resources (e.g. path
      redundancy) to offer good network behavior despite node failure.
      For instance, in case of structural health monitoring, hundreds of
      nodes could be placed on 20 bridge pillars spanning over a river.
      Once the nodes are distributed, they are hardly accessible for
      maintenance and in case of single node failure, the network should
      not break down.

      The design of routing protocols for 6LoWPANs must consider the
      fact that packets are to be delivered with reasonable probability
      despite unreliable and unresponsive nodes.

      See also Section 4 in [15].

   [R09] 6LoWPAN routing protocols SHOULD allow for dynamically adaptive
   topologies and mobile nodes.  When supporting dynamic topologies and
   mobile nodes, route maintenance should be managed by keeping in mind
   the goal of a minimal routing state.

      There are several challenges that should be addressed by a 6LoWPAN
      routing protocol in order to create robust routing in dynamic
      environments:

      *  Mobile nodes changing their location inside a 6LoWPAN:
         If the nodes' movement pattern is unknown, mobility cannot
         easily be detected or distinguished from the routing protocols.
         Mobile nodes can be treated as nodes that disappear and re-
         appear in another place.  Movement pattern tracking increases
         complexity and can be avoided by handling moving nodes using
         reactive route updates.

      *  Movement of a 6LoWPAN with respect to other (inter)connected
         6LoWPANs:
         Within stub networks, more powerful gateway nodes need to be
         configured to handle moving 6LoWPANs.

      *  Nodes permanently joining or leaving the 6LoWPAN:
         In order to ease routing table updates and reduce error control
         messages, it would be helpful if nodes leaving the network
         inform their coordinator about their intention to disassociate.



Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


      *  See also Section 6.7 in [14], Section 8 in [15] and Section 4.3
         in [16].

   [R10] 6LoWPAN routing protocols SHOULD be designed to achieve both
   scalability and minimality in terms of used system resources.

      A 6LoWPAN may consist of just a couple of nodes (for instance in a
      body-area network), but may expand to much higher numbers of
      devices (e.g. monitoring of a city infrastructure or a highway).
      It is therefore necessary that routing mechanisms are designed to
      be scalable for operation in various network sizes.  However, due
      to a lack of memory size and computational power, 6LoWPAN routing
      might limit forwarding entries to a small number, such as 32
      routing table entries.

      See also Section 4.5 in [14] and Section 6.1 in [16].

4.3.  MAC-coupled Requirements

   The routing requirements described in this subsection allow
   optimization and correct operation of routing solutions taking into
   account the specific features of IEEE 802.15.4 physical and MAC
   layers.

   [R11] 6LoWPAN protocols SHOULD support secure delivery of control
   messages.  A minimal security level can be achieved by utilizing AES-
   based mechanism provided by IEEE 802.15.4.

      Security threats within LoWPANs may be different from existing
      threat models in ad-hoc network environments.  Neighbor Discovery
      in IEEE 802.15.4 links may be susceptible to threats as listed in
      RFC3756 [2].  Bootstrapping may also impose additional threats.
      Security is also very important for designing robust routing
      protocols, but it should not cause significant transmission
      overhead.  While there are applications which require very high
      security, such as in traffic control, other applications are less
      easily harmed by wrong node behavior, such as a home entertainment
      system.

      The IEEE 802.15.4 MAC provides an AES-based security mechanism.
      Routing protocols need to define how this mechanism can be used to
      obtain the intended security.  Byte overhead of the mechanism,
      which depends on the security services selected, must be
      considered.  In the worst case in terms of overhead, the mechanism
      consumes 21 bytes of MAC payload.

   [R12] 6LoWPAN routing protocol control messages SHOULD not create
   fragmentation of physical layer (PHY) frames.



Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


      In order to save energy, routing overhead should be minimized to
      prevent fragmentation of frames on the physical layer (PHY).
      Therefore, 6LoWPAN routing should not cause packets to exceed the
      IEEE 802.15.4 frame size.  This reduces the energy required for
      transmission, avoids unnecessary waste of bandwidth, and prevents
      the need for packet reassembly.  As calculated in RFC4944 [4], the
      maximum size of a 6LoWPAN frame, in order not to cause
      fragmentation on the PHY layer, is 81 octets.

   [R13] The metric used by 6LoWPAN routing protocols MAY utilize a
   combination of the inputs provided by the MAC layer and other
   measures

      Simple hop-count-only mechanisms may be inefficient in 6LoWPANs.
      There is a Link Quality Indicator (LQI), Link Delivery Ratio
      (LDR), or/and RSSI from IEEE 802.15.4 that may be taken into
      account for better metrics.  The metric to be used (and its goal)
      may depend on application and requirements.

      The numbers in Figure 3 represent the Link Delivery Ratio (LDR)
      between each pair of nodes.  There are studies that show a
      piecewise linear dependence between LQI and LDR [13].


                                     0.6
                                  A-------C
                                   \     /
                                0.9 \   / 0.9
                                     \ /
                                      B

                         Figure 3: An example network

      In this simple example, there are two options in routing from node
      A to node C:

      A.  Path AC:

          +  (1/0.6) = 1.67 avg. transmissions needed for each packet

          +  one-hop path

          +  good in energy consumption, bad in delivery ratio (0.6)

      B.  Path ABC

          +  2*(1/0.81) = 2.47 avg. transmissions needed for each packet




Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


          +  two-hop path

          +  bad in energy consumption, good in delivery ratio (0.81)

      If energy consumption of the network must be minimized, path AC is
      the best (this path would be chosen by hop count metric).
      However, if delivery ratio in that case is not sufficient, best
      path is ABC (it would be chosen by an LQI based metric).
      Combinations of both of metrics can be used.

4.4.  Mesh-under specific Requirements

   The routing requirements described in this subsection allow
   optimization and correct operation of routing solutions taking into
   account the specific features mesh-under routing.

   [R14] In case a routing protocol operates in 6LoWPAN's adaptation
   layer, then routing tables and neighbor lists MUST support 16-bit
   short and 64-bit extended addresses.

   [R15] For neighbor discovery, 6LoWPAN devices SHOULD avoid sending
   "Hello" messages.  Instead, link-layer mechanisms (such as
   acknowledgments or beacon responses) MAY be utilized to keep track of
   active neighbors.

      After an IEEE 802.15.4 PAN coordinator permits a device to join,
      the new device adds the PAN coordinator to its neighbor list and
      starts transmitting periodic beacons.  These beacons can be used
      as an indication of current neighbors.

   [R16] In case there are one or more alternative PAN coordinators, the
   coordinators MAY take the role of keeping track of node association
   and de-association within the LoWPAN.

   [R17] Alternative PAN coordinators, if any, MAY be a relay point of
   group-targeting message instead of using multicast (broadcast in the
   link layer).

      For example, RS and RA can be only sent to the coordinators,
      instead of being multicast.  The coordinators take the role to
      pass the packets to their own neighbors.

4.5.  Route-over specific Requirements

   The routing requirements described in this subsection allow
   optimization and correct operation of routing solutions taking into
   account the specific features of route-over routing.




Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


   [R18] In a mesh topology, 6LoWPAN network formation MUST support to
   build IP routing connection.

   [R19] IP multicast SHOULD be optimized.

      In case route-over protocols is applied to 6LoWPAN, excessive IP
      multicast should be avoided, as it causes not-necessary
      broadcasting in Link of 6LoWPANs.  For example, Multicast
      (broadcast in Link layer) messages will consume a lot of energy if
      IPv6 ND cannot be optimized well to suit for 6LoWPAN device.









































Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


5.  Security Considerations

   Security issues are described in Section 4.2
















































Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 21]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


6.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Myung-Ki Shin for giving the idea of
   writing this draft.















































Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 22]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [1]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]   Nikander, P., Kempf, J., and E. Nordmark, "IPv6 Neighbor
         Discovery (ND) Trust Models and Threats", RFC 3756, May 2004.

   [3]   Kushalnagar, N., Montenegro, G., and C. Schumacher, "IPv6 over
         Low-Power Wireless Personal Area Networks (6LoWPANs): Overview,
         Assumptions, Problem Statement, and Goals", RFC 4919,
         August 2007.

   [4]   Montenegro, G., Kushalnagar, N., Hui, J., and D. Culler,
         "Transmission of IPv6 Packets over IEEE 802.15.4 Networks",
         RFC 4944, September 2007.

   [5]   IEEE Computer Society, "IEEE Std. 802.15.4-2003", October 2003.

   [6]   IEEE Computer Society, "IEEE Std. 802.15.4-2006",
         September 2006.

7.2.  Informative References

   [7]   Bulusu, N. and S. Jha, "Wireless Sensor Networks", July 2005.

   [8]   Chakrabarti, S. and E. Nordmark, "LoWPAN Neighbor Discovery
         Extensions, draft-chakrabarti-6lowpan-ipv6-nd-04 (work in
         progress)", November 2007.

   [9]   Pister, K. and B. Boser, "Smart Dust: Wireless Networks of
         Millimeter-Scale Sensor Nodes".

   [10]  Hill, J., "System Architecture for Wireless Sensor Networks".

   [11]  Lee, S., Belding-Royer, E., and C. Perkins, "Scalability Study
         of the Ad Hoc On-Demand Distance-Vector Routing Protocol",
         March 2003.

   [12]  Shih, E., "Physical Layer Driven Protocols and Algorithm Design
         for Energy-Efficient Wireless Sensor Networks", July 2001.

   [13]  Chen, B., Muniswamy-Reddy, K., and M. Welsh, "Ad-Hoc Multicast
         Routing on Resource-Limited Sensor Nodes", 2006.

   [14]  Brandit, A. and G. Porcu, "Home Automation Routing Requirement



Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 23]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


         in Low Power and Lossy Networks,
         draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs-01 (work in progress)",
         July 2008.

   [15]  Pister, K., Thubert, P., Dwars, S., and T. Phinney, "Industrial
         Routing Requirements in Low Power and Lossy Networks,
         draft-ietf-roll-indus-routing-reqs-01 (work in progress)",
         July 2008.

   [16]  Dohler, M., Watteyne, T., and T. Winter, "Urban WSNs Routing
         Requirements in Low Power and Lossy Networks,
         draft-ietf-roll-urban-routing-reqs-01 (work in progress)",
         July 2008.

   [17]  Latre, M., De Mil, P., Moerman, I., Dhoedt, B., and P.
         Demeester, "Throughput and Delay Analysis of Unslotted IEEE
         802.15.4", May 2006.


































Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 24]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


Authors' Addresses

   Eunsook Eunah Kim
   ETRI
   161 Gajeong-dong
   Yuseong-gu
   Daejeon  305-700
   Korea

   Phone: +82-42-860-6124
   Email: eunah.ietf@gmail.com


   Dominik Kaspar
   Simula Research Laboratory
   Martin Linges v 17
   Snaroya  1367
   Norway

   Phone: +47-6782-8223
   Email: dokaspar.ietf@gmail.com


   Carles Gomez
   Technical University of Catalonia/i2CAT
   Escola Politecnica Superior de Castelldefels
   Avda. del Canal Olimpic, 15
   Castelldefels  08860
   Spain

   Phone: +34-93-413-7206
   Email: carlesgo@entel.upc.edu


   Carsten Bormann
   Universitaet Bremen TZI
   Postfach 330440
   Bremen  D-28359
   Germany

   Phone: +49-421-218-63921
   Fax:   +49-421-218-7000
   Email: cabo@tzi.org








Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 25]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements          July 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Kim, et al.             Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 26]


