


Network Working Group                                        M. Mealling
Internet-Draft                                              October 2002
Expires: April 1, 2003


                   The 'microsoft-com' URN Namespace
                draft-mealling-microsoft-com-urn-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 except that the right to
   produce derivative works is not granted.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 1, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document describes a URN namespace that is owned by the Author
   and used for documents and XML fragments generated by the author for
   public use.

1. Introduction

   This document describes the namespace and registration template for
   the 'microsoft-com' URN namespace ID.  The author produces various
   documents, applications and XML fragments that require persistent
   identifiers by which those items can be identified in document
   management systems and XML applications.



Mealling                  Expires April 1, 2003                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      The 'microsoft-com' URN Namespace       October 2002


   This namespace specification is for a formal namespace.

2. Specification Template

   Namespace ID:


         "microsoft-com" requested.


   Registration Information:


         Registration Version Number: 1

         Registration Date: 2002-09-30


   Declared registrant of the namespace:


         Michael Mealling

         950 Herrington Drive, Suite C-190

         Lawrenceville, BA 30044


   Declaration of structure:


         The structure of the NSS is a flat space of alphanumeric
         characters which have no knowable structure outside of the
         context of author's resolution service.  Future changes to the
         assignement methods may allow others to assign sub-spaces of
         the flat namesapce but again, this knowledge is only valid
         internally and should never be inferred or relied upon
         externally.


   Relevant ancillary documentation:


         None


   Identifier uniqueness considerations:




Mealling                  Expires April 1, 2003                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      The 'microsoft-com' URN Namespace       October 2002


         Identifiers are assigned by the author via a proprietary
         registration system in a way that guarantees uniqueness.  At
         this time the algorithm is to iterate from the last assigned
         number by some positive integer.  In the future this algorithm
         may change to incorporate a full range of alphanumeric
         elements.  In either case, the system will compare the newly
         created identifier with all of the previous ones to ensure that
         it has not already been assigned.


   Identifier persistence considerations:


         The assignment process guarantees that names are not reassigned
         and that the binding between the name and the resource is
         permanent, regardless of any document name changes, corporate
         restructuring, death or dissoluion.


   Process of identifier assignment:


         Names are granted via the author via proprietary registration
         procedures.


   Process of identifier resolution:


         Resolution is provided via URN resolvers run by the author.


   Rules for Lexical Equivalence:


         The entire URN is case-insensitive.


   Conformance with URN Syntax:


         There are no additional characters reserved.


   Validation mechanism:


         None additional to resolution specified



Mealling                  Expires April 1, 2003                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      The 'microsoft-com' URN Namespace       October 2002



   Scope:


         Global



3. Examples

   The following examples are not guaranteed to be real.  They are
   listed for pedagogical reasons only.

      URN:microsoft-com:bs4321234

      URN:microsoft-com:324kj5hkj45

      URN:microsoft-com:mm2136


4. Security Considerations

   Since the URNs in this namespace are opaque there are no additional
   security considerations other than those normally associated with the
   use and resolution of URNs in general.

References

   [1]  Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997.


Author's Address

   Michael Mealling
   VeriSign, Inc.
   21345 Ridgetop Circle
   Dulles, VA  21345
   US

   Phone: +1 770-717-0732
   EMail: michael@neonym.net
   URI:   http://www.verisignlabs.com
















Mealling                  Expires April 1, 2003                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      The 'microsoft-com' URN Namespace       October 2002


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Mealling                  Expires April 1, 2003                 [Page 5]

