

DHC                                                 Markus Rentschler
Internet Draft                                 Hirschmann Electronics          
Expires: April 2004                                     November 2003


                    DHCP Interface Information Option
               <draft-rentschler-dhc-interface-opt-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 30, 2004.


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.


Abstract

   This draft defines a new option to inform the server about
   the client's physical interface it is connected to.
   This information may be used together with the relay agent 
   information option (RFC 3046) for the purpose of topology 
   recognition as well as for IP and other parameter assignment
   policies.


Requirements terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.



Rentschler                Expires April 2004                    [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       DHCP Interface Information Option          Oct 2003


1. Introduction

   The relay agent information option [RFC 3046], which MAY be added by
   a relay agent to a client's request to the server, MAY contain a 
   Circuit ID sub option that contains the number of the physical 
   interface on which the relay received this client's request.

   When the client itself is a device with multiple interfaces 
   (for example a Switching Hub), it would be of interest to know which
   of the client's interfaces is connected to the relay agent or the 
   server. These informations together could then easily be used to 
   detect and display the active topology of the underlying network.
   To get the information about the client's physical interface to
   the server, a new option has to be introduced.



2. Interface Information Option 

   The Interface Information Option encodes a client-local identifier
   (such as a Switching Hub port number) of the interface from which
   the initial DHCP server-to-client packet was received.

   This option MAY be added by DHCP clients. 
      

         Opt    Len   Interface Information
       +------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+--
       | TBD  |   n  |  c1  |  c2  |  c3  |  c4  |  c5  |  c6  | ...
       +------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+--


   The DHCP server SHOULD report the Interface Information Option of
   current leases in statistical reports, its MIB and in logs.
   Since the Interface Information Option is local only to a particular
   client, the Interface Information Option should be qualified with 
   the MAC or IP address that identifies the client.

   Servers MAY use the Interface Information Option for IP and other 
   parameter assignment policies on the basis of an exact string match.










Rentschler                Expires April 2004                    [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       DHCP Interface Information Option          Nov 2003


3. Description of Operation

   If a client receives a DHCP message from a server, it SHOULD 
   always send  the new Interface Information Option in responding
   messages to the server. This rule generally applies also to new
   DHCP message types not yet defined.

   During the normal four message exchange the Interface Information 
   Option would therefore be sent in the DHCPREQUEST message.
   If a client receives a DHCPFORCERENEW message, the Interface 
   Information Option SHOULD be sent in the following DHCPREQUEST or 
   DHCPINFORM message.

   


4. Security Considerations

   This document does not cover possible security attacks.



5. IANA Considerations

   The value for the new Interface Information Option must be assigned
   from the numbering space defined for DHCP options in RFC 2939.



6. References

    RFC 2131  R. Droms, March 1997, 
              "The Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol", 
    RFC 2132  S.Alexander, R. Droms, March 1997, 
              "DHCP Options and BOOTP vendor Extensions"
    RFC 2939  R. Droms, September 2000, 
              "Procedures an IANA guidelines for Definition
               of new DHCP Options and Message Types", 
    RFC 3046, M. Patrick, January 2001, 
              "DHCP Relay Agent Information Option", 
    RFC 3203, Y. T'Joens et. al., December 2001, 
              "DHCP reconfigure extension", 









Rentschler                Expires April 2004                    [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       DHCP Interface Information Option          Nov 2003


7. Author's Address

   Markus Rentschler
   Hirschmann Electronics GmbH & Co. KG,
   Neckartenzlingen,
   Germany.
   Email: mrentsch@nt.hirschmann.de


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into.

























Rentschler                Expires April 2004                   [Page 4]

