


Network Working Group                                           Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
Internet-Draft                                                    ORACLE
Intended status: Standards Track                                 Mar 19, 2021
Expires: Sept 19,2021


                   The LIMITS SMTP Service Extension
                       draft-pradeepkumarxplorer-smtp-wildcard-00

Abstract

   To allow wild card emailing like walling

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 19, 2021.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of




Freed                  Expires September 19, 2021               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              WildCard Extensions                March 2021


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

1.  Introduction

Proposal for Wall Mail Transfer Protocol and Intelligent Mail Transfer Protocol

I had thought about this when I was a artificial intelligence researcher1992/1993 when I started first using email and using Unix computerusing wall and wild card for unix commands. I wanted to email everyone in the world my email .I think this can also be implemented So an email toTo : * would expand to all emails that can be gathered An email toTo : *@*.com would send emails to all thats having a .com their emails that can be gatheredAn email to *@*.gov would send emails to all thats having a .gov extension
An email to *@*.id would send emails to all thats in indonesia or with.id extensionAn email to pradeep@* would send emails to all that has name pradeep as username in the email addressIntelligent Mail transfer protocol This is adding an intelligence layer to expand the recipient email list An email to trekkers@himalayas would send emails to all trekkers in the himlayasAn email to coffeedrinkers@usa would send emails to all coffee drinkers in usaAn email to beerdrinkers@thailand would send emails to all beer drinkers in thailandAn email to AllinAfrica would send emails to all in Africa

   

Freed                  Expires September 19, 2021               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              WildCard Extensions 		March 2021


 
Author's Address

   Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
   Oracle

   Email: pradeepan88@hotmail.com













































Freed                  Expires September 16, 2021            