INTERNET-DRAFT                          Danny McPherson, Ed.
                                           Geoff Huston, Ed.

                                 Internet Architecture Board
Expires: April 2009                             October 2008
Intended Status: Best Current Practice

            Defining the Role and Function of IETF Protocol
                      Parameter Registry Operators
                        <draft-iab-iana-04.txt>



Status of this Memo


   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html



Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).





McPherson, Huston                                               [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2009              October 2008


                                Abstract


   Many IETF protocols make use of commonly defined values that are
   passed within protocol objects.  To ensure consistent interpretation
   of these values between independent implementations, there is a need
   to ensure that the values and associated semantic intent are uniquely
   defined.  The IETF uses registry functions to record assigned
   protocol parameter values and their associated semantic intent. For
   each IETF protocol parameter it is current practice for the IETF to
   delegate the role of protocol parameter registry operator to a
   nominated entity.  This document provides a description of and the
   requirements for these delegated functions.






































McPherson, Huston                                               [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2009              October 2008



Table of Contents


   1. Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2. Definition of an IETF Protocol Parameter
   Registry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   3. Publication of Protocol Parameter Registry
   Assignments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   4. The Procedures related to IETF Protocol Parameter
   Management. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5. The Operation of IETF Protocol Parameter Reg-
   istries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6. Current IETF  Protocol Parameter Assignments . . . . . . . . .   7
   7. Roles and Responsibilities concerning IETF Proto-
   col Registries. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
    7.1. Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
    7.2. Protocol Parameter Registry Operator Role . . . . . . . . .   8
    7.3. IAB Role. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
    7.4. IESG Role . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
    7.5. Role of the IETF Trust. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   8. Miscellaneous Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   9. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   10. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   11. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   12. References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
    12.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
    12.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   13. Authors' Addresses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   14. Appendix A: IAB Members . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15





















McPherson, Huston                                               [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2009              October 2008


1.  Overview


   Many IETF protocols make use of commonly defined values that are
   passed within protocol objects.  To ensure consistent interpretation
   of these values between independent implementations, there is a need
   to ensure that the values and associated semantic intent are uniquely
   defined.  The IETF uses registries to record each of the possible
   values of a protocol parameter and their associated semantic intent.
   The document describes the function of these registries as they apply
   to individual protocol parameters defined by the IETF Internet
   Standards Process [RFC 2026].

   At the time of writing this document (October 2008) the operation of
   the majority of the protocol parameter registries is delegated to the
   Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) according
   to the terms and conditions described in RFC 2860 [RFC 2860] and
   supplements developed thereafter. Not all IETF protocol parameter
   registries are delegated to ICANN, and at present the operation of
   the 'e164.arpa' registry has been delegated to the RIPE Network
   Coordination Center (RIPE NCC) [RIPE NCC].

   The term "Internet Assigned Numbers Authority" (IANA), has been used
   historically to refer to the entire collection of protocol parameter
   registries. It is noted that there is current general use of this
   term to refer specifically to the set of registries operated by ICANN
   under terms of this delegation of function. While IETF documents
   continue to use the term "IANA Considerations" when referring to
   specific functions to be performed with respect to a protocol
   parameter registry [RFC 5226], it is noted that the use of the term
   'IANA' in this context does not necessarily imply the delegation of
   the parameter registry operation to the body managed by ICANN.

   This IETF - IANA organizational separation is one that appears to be
   a relatively unique arrangement in the context of standards
   development organizations (SDOs), and similar arrangements of
   structural separation are not generally used by SDOs. Other SDOs that
   undertake a similar protocol parameter registration function
   generally do so as part of their secretariat service functions or
   their equivalent, thereby avoiding the overheads of detailed
   coordination of activity across multiple distinct organizations.
   However, as already noted, this structural separation of roles exists
   within several places in the IETF framework (e.g., to include the RFC
   Editor function) and the IETF has the responsibility to define and
   manage the relationship with the IANA role. This IETF responsibility
   includes the selection and management of the protocol parameter
   registry operator(s), as well as management of the parameter
   registration process and the guidelines for parameter allocation.



McPherson, Huston                                   Section 1.  [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2009              October 2008


   Furthermore, as with other SDO's, the IETF asserts full authority
   over the management of all the IETF protocol parameter registries.



2.  Definition of an IETF Protocol Parameter Registry


   Using the term 'IANA' in the sense of the entire set of IETF protocol
   parameter registries, the Internet Standards document, STD 2,
   published in October 1994, defined the role of the IANA as follows:

     The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) is the central
     coordinator for the assignment of unique parameter values for
     Internet protocols.  The IANA is chartered by the Internet
     Society (ISOC) and the Federal Network Council (FNC) to act as
     the clearinghouse to assign and coordinate the use of numerous
     Internet protocol parameters.

     The Internet protocol suite, as defined by the Internet
     Engineering Task Force (IETF) and its steering group (the IESG),
     contains numerous parameters, such as Internet protocol addresses,
     domain names, autonomous system numbers (used in some routing
     protocols), protocol numbers, port numbers, management information
     base object identifiers, including private enterprise numbers, and
     many others.

     The common use of the Internet protocols by the Internet
     community requires that the particular values used in these
     parameter fields be assigned uniquely.  It is the task of the
     IANA to make those unique assignments as requested and to maintain
     a registry of the currently assigned values [RFC 1700].

   Again using the term 'IANA' in the sense of the entire set of IETF
   protocol parameter registries, the definition of the protocol
   parameter registry role is provided in [RFC 5226]:

     Many protocols make use of identifiers consisting of constants
     and other well-known values.  Even after a protocol has been
     defined and deployment has begun, new values may need to be
     assigned (e.g., for a new option type in DHCP, or a new encryption
     or authentication transform for IPsec).  To ensure that such
     quantities have consistent values and interpretations across all
     implementations, their assignment must be administered by a
     central authority.  For IETF protocols, that role is provided by
     the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA).





McPherson, Huston                                   Section 2.  [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2009              October 2008


3.  Publication of Protocol Parameter Registry Assignments


   The current mode of publication of protocol parameter registry
   assignments undertaken within registries whose operation is currently
   delegated to ICANN is described in the Informational Document [RFC
   3232], published in January 2002:

     From November 1977 through October 1994, the Internet
     Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) periodically published
     tables of the Internet protocol parameter assignments in
     RFCs entitled, "Assigned Numbers". The most current of these
     Assigned Numbers RFCs had Standard status and carried the
     designation: STD 2.  At this time, the latest STD 2 is
     RFC 1700.

     Since 1994, this sequence of RFCs have been replaced
     by an online database accessible through a web page
     (currently, www.iana.org). The purpose of the present RFC
     is to note this fact and to officially obsolete RFC 1700,
     whose status changes to Historic.  RFC 1700 is obsolete, and
     its values are incomplete and in some cases may be wrong
     [RFC 3232].

   The mode of publication of the e164.arpa protocol parameter registry
   operated by the RIPE NCC is documented in reference [RIPE ENUM].




4.  The Procedures related to IETF Protocol Parameter Management


   IETF Protocol Parameter registry actions are defined through the
   inclusion of an "IANA Considerations" section in Internet Standards
   documents, as described in [RFC 5226].  There are also RFCs that
   specifically address IETF protocol parameter considerations for
   particular protocols, such as [RFC 2780], [RFC 2939], and [RFC 2978].



5.  The Operation of IETF Protocol Parameter Registries


   As documented in the IAB Charter [RFC 2850], the role of the Internet
   Architecture Board includes responsibility for the IETF Protocol
   Parameter registration function (referred to in the charter as
   'IANA'). The IAB, acting on behalf of the IETF, approves the



McPherson, Huston                                   Section 5.  [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2009              October 2008


   appointment of an organization to act as a protocol parameter
   registry operator on behalf of the IETF, and also approves the terms
   and conditions of this delegation of this function.

   The technical direction of the IETF Protocol Parameter registry
   function is provided by the Internet Engineering Steering Group
   (IESG) [RFC 2850].



6.  Current IETF  Protocol Parameter Assignments


   The list of current IETF  protocol parameters for which parameter
   value assignments are registered within registries whose operation is
   currently delegated to ICANN is listed in reference [IANA]. In
   addition there is the e164.arpa registry function, which is listed in
   reference [RIPE ENUM].

   As provided in the list list contained in [IANA], those protocol
   parameter registries that refer to registrations related to the
   allocation of public unicast IPv4 addresses, public unicast IPv6
   addresses, public use Autonomous System Numbers (ASNs) and the top
   level delegations within the Domain Name System, have associated
   registration mechanisms that have been delegated to the IANA function
   operated under the auspices of ICANN, as defined in [RFC 2860]. In
   these cases other bodies are responsible for the development of
   policies to manage the registrations of allocations performed as part
   this aspect of the registration function. Registrations that refer to
   reservations (e.g., IP address blocks for documentation purposes or
   ASNs defined for documentation purposes) and all other use cases
   within those registries must be prescribed by the IETF.



7.  Roles and Responsibilities concerning IETF Protocol Registries


   This section describes the operation and role of a delegated IETF
   Protocol Parameter Registry Operator, to be selected and administered
   by the IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA) [RFC 4071]. This
   section also includes a description of the roles of related bodies
   with reference to this function.

   This generic description is being provided for clarity, in order to
   document the protocol parameter registry administrative function that
   has evolved over time as intrinsic aspects of the IANA culture.




McPherson, Huston                                   Section 7.  [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2009              October 2008


7.1.  Introduction


   Many protocols make use of identifiers consisting of constants and
   other well-known values. Even after a protocol has been defined and
   deployment has begun, new values may need to be assigned (e.g., for a
   new option type in DHCP, or a new encryption or authentication
   algorithm for IPSec).  To insure that such quantities have consistent
   values and interpretations in different implementations, their
   assignment must be administered by a central authority. For IETF
   protocols, that role is provided by a delegated Protocol Parameter
   Registry operator. For any particular protocol parameter there is a
   single delegated registry operator.



7.2.  Protocol Parameter Registry Operator Role


   A IETF Protocol Parameter registry function is undertaken under the
   auspices of the Internet Architecture Board.

   The roles of the Protocol Parameter registry operator are as follows:

   o Review and Advise

     * The registry operator may be requested to review
       Internet-Drafts that are being considered by the Internet
       Engineering Task Force Steering Group (IESG), with the
       objective of offering advice to the IESG regarding the
       need for an "IANA Considerations" section, whether such
       a section, when required, is clear in terms of direction
       to the registry operator and whether the section is
       consistent with the current published registry operator
       guidelines.

   o Registry

     * To operate a registry of protocol parameter assignments.

     * The delegated registry operator registers values for
       Internet protocol parameters only as directed by the
       criteria and procedures specified in RFCs, including
       Proposed, Draft and full Internet Standards, Best Current
       Practice documents, and other RFCs that call for protocol
       parameter assignment, and only for those protocol parameters
       specified by the IETF.  If they are not so specified, or in
       case of ambiguity, the registry operator will continue to



McPherson, Huston                                 Section 7.2.  [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2009              October 2008


       assign and register only those protocol parameters that have
       already been delegated to the operator, following past and
       current practice for such assignments, unless otherwise
       directed in terms of operating practice by the IESG.  In
       the case of the current IANA operation, requirements are
       provided in the MoU with ICANN [RFC 2860] and associated
       supplements outlining service level agreements for IETF
       protocol parameter registry functions.

     * For each protocol parameter, the associated registry
       includes:

       + a reference to the RFC document that describes the
         parameter and the associated "IANA Considerations"
         concerning the parameter, and

       + for each registration of a protocol parameter value,
         the source of the registration and the date of the
         registration, if the date of registration is known.

     * If in doubt or in case of a technical dispute, the registry
       operator will seek and follow technical guidance exclusively from
       the IESG.  Where appropriate the IESG will appoint an expert to
       advise the registry operator.

     * The registry operator will work with the IETF to develop any
       missing criteria and procedures over time, which the registry
       operator will adopt when so instructed by the IESG.

     * Each protocol parameter registry operates as a public registry,
       and the contents of the registry are openly available to the
       public, on-line and free of charge.  Any related intellectual
       property rights associated with the registry and its contents
       are held by the IETF Trust [RFC 4748].

     * The registry operator assigns protocol parameter values in
       accordance with the policy associated with the protocol
       parameter.  Some policies are listed in [RFC 5226].

   o Mailing Lists

     * The registry operator maintains public mailing lists as
       specified in IANA Considerations [RFC 5226]. Such lists are
       designated for the purpose of review of assignment proposals
       in conjunction with a designated expert review function.  In
       addition, each protocol parameter registry operator should
       maintain a mailing list that enables the registry staff of
       each registry operator to be contacted by email.  For example,



McPherson, Huston                                 Section 7.2.  [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2009              October 2008


       iana@iana.org currently provides this function for IANA.

   o Liaison Activity

     * The registry operator will nominate a liaison point of contact.
       The registry operator, though this liaison, may be requested to
       provide advice to the IESG on IETF protocol parameters as well
       as the IANA Considerations section of Internet-drafts that are
       being reviewed for publication as an RFC.  Where appropriate the
       IESG will appoint an expert to advise IANA.

   o Reporting

     * The registry operator will submit periodic reports to the IAB
       concerning the operational performance of the registry function.
       As an exmaple of the requirements for such reports the reader is
       referred to a supplement to the MoU outlined in [RFC 2860], which
       was established by the IASA [RFC 4071] and provides SLA
       guidelines under which IANA, as implemented by ICANN, must
       operate.

     * At the request of the chair of the IETF, the registry operator
       will undertake periodic reports to the IETF Plenary concerning
       the status of the registry function.

     * The registry operator will publish an annual report describing
       the status of the function and a summary of performance
       indicators.

   o  Intellectual Property Rights and the Registry Operator

     * All assigned values are to be published and made available free
       of any charges and free of any constraints relating to further
       redistribution, with the caveat that the assignment information
       may not be modified in any redistributed copy.

     * Any intellectual property rights of the IETF Protocol Parameter
       assignment information, including the IETF Protocol Parameter
       registry and its contents, are to be held by the IETF Trust
       [RFC 4748], and all IETF Protocol Parameter registry publications
       relating to assignment information are to be published under the
       terms of Section 10 of [RFC 2026], and are to include the
       copyright notice as documented in Section 10.4 (C) of [RFC 2026].








McPherson, Huston                                Section 7.2.  [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2009              October 2008


7.3.  IAB Role


   An operator of an IETF Protocol Parameter registry undertakes the
   role as a delegated function under the auspices of the Internet
   Architecture Board (IAB).

   The IAB has the responsibility to, from time to time, review the
   current description of the registry function and direct the registry
   operator to adopt amendments relating to its role and mode of
   operation of the registry according to the best interests of the
   IETF.

   The IAB has the responsibility to select an organization to undertake
   the delegated functions of the Protocol Parameter registry for each
   IETF protocol parameter.

   The IAB has the responsibility to determine the terms and conditions
   of this delegated role. Such terms and conditions should ensure that
   the registry operates in a manner that is fully conformant to the
   functions described in this document. In addition, such terms and
   conditions must not restrict the rights and interests of the IETF
   with respect to the registry function.



7.4.  IESG Role


   The IESG is responsible for the technical direction of the IETF
   Protocol Parameter registries. Such technical direction is provided
   through the adoption of IETF RFC documents within the "IANA
   Considerations" section of such documents, or as stand-alone "IANA
   Considerations" RFC documents.

   The IESG shall ensure that the review of Internet-Drafts that are
   offered for publications as RFCs ensures that IANA Considerations
   sections are present when needed, and that IANA Considerations
   sections conform to the current published guidelines.

   At the discretion of the IESG, the registry operator may be required
   to designate a non-voting liaison to the IESG to facilitate clear
   communications and effective operation of the registry function.








McPherson, Huston                                Section 7.4.  [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2009              October 2008


7.5.  Role of the IETF Trust


   Any intellectual property rights of IETF Protocol Parameter
   assignment information, including the registry and its contents, and
   all registry publications, are to be held by the IETF Trust on behalf
   of the IETF.

   The IETF Trust [RFC 4748] was recently formed to act as the
   administrative custodian of all copyrights and other intellectual
   property rights relating to the IETF Standards Process that had
   previously been held by ISOC and the Corporation for National
   Research Initiatives (CNRI).



8.  Miscellaneous Considerations


   The IESG provides technical guidance for IETF created registries.
   For registries created by non-IETF stream documents the policies set
   by the IESG apply unless there are solid arguments to follow a
   different policy in which case the IAB has the final word.



9.  Acknowledgements


   This document is adapted from [RFC 5226], and has been modified to
   include explicit reference to Intellectual Property Rights, and the
   roles of the IAB and IESG in relation to the IETF Protocol Parameter
   registry function.

   The Internet Architecture Board acknowledges the assistance provided
   by reviewers of earlier drafts of this document, including Scott
   Bradner, Leslie Daigle and Thomas Narten.



10.  Security Considerations


   This document does not propose any new protocols, and therefore does
   not involve any security considerations in that sense.






McPherson, Huston                                 Section 10.  [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2009              October 2008


11.  IANA Considerations


   This document requires no direct IANA actions.



12.  References




12.1.  Normative References




12.2.  Informative References


   [RFC 1700] Reynolds, J. and J. Postel, "Assigned Numbers", RFC 1700,
              STD 2, October 1994.

   [RFC 2026] Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", RFC 2026, BCP 9, October 1996.

   [RFC 2780] Bradner, S. and V. Paxson, "IANA Allocation Guidelines
              For Values In the Internet Protocol and Related Headers",
              RFC 2780, BCP 37, March 2000.

   [RFC 2850] Carpenter, B., "Charter of the Internet Architecture
              Board", RFC 2850, BCP 39, May 2000.

   [RFC 2860] Carpenter, B., Baker, F. and M. Roberts, "Memorandum of
              Understanding Concerning the Technical Work of the
   Internet
              Assigned Numbers Authority", RFC 2860, June 2000.

   [RFC 2939] Droms, R., "Procedures and IANA Guidelines for Definition
              of New DHCP Options and Message Types", RFC 2939, BCP 43,
              September 2000.

   [RFC 2978] Freed, N. and J. Postel, "IANA Charset Registration
              Procedures", RFC 2978, BCP 19, October 2000.

   [RFC 3232] Reynolds, J., "Assigned Numbers: RFC 1700 is Replaced by
              an On-line Database", RFC 3232, January 2002.




McPherson, Huston                               Section 12.2.  [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2009              October 2008


   [RFC 4071] Austein, R., Wijnen, B., "Structure of the IETF
              Administrative Support Activity (IASA)", RFC 4071,
              April 2005.

   [RFC 4748] Bradner, S., "RFC 3978 Update to Recognize the IETF
              Trust", RFC 4748, BCP 78, October 2006.

   [RFC 5226] Narten, T., Alvestrand, H., "Guidelines for Writing
              an IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", RFC 5226,
              May 2008.

   [IANA] Reynolds, J., "IANA Protocol Numbers and Assignment
          Services", October 1994, <http://www.iana.org/numbers.htm>.

   [CORR] Dyson, E., "Correspondence from Esther Dyson, Interim
          Chairman, ICANN to Scott Bradner, Brian Carpenter and
          Fred Baker of the IETF", February 1999,
       <http://www.icann.org/correspondence/bradner-dyson-25feb99.htm>.

   [RIPE NCC] IAB, "ENUM LIAISON ON IAB INSTRUCTIONS TO RIPE-NCC",
              September 2002,
       <http://www.iab.org/Documents/sg2-liaison-e164-sep-02.html>.

   [RIPE ENUM]  RIPE NCC, "ENUM Registry", September 2002,
       <http://www.ripe.net/enum>.



13.  Authors' Addresses


   Danny McPherson, Editor
   Arbor Networks, Inc.
   Email: danny@arbor.net

   Geoff Huston, Editor
   APNIC
   Email: gih@apnic.net

   Internet Architecture Board
   Email: iab@iab.org










McPherson, Huston                                 Section 13.  [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2009              October 2008


14.  Appendix A: IAB Members


   Internet Architecture Board Members at the time this document was
   published were:

      Loa Andersson
      Gonzalo Camarillo
      Stuart Cheshire
      Aaron Falk
      Russ Housley
      Olaf Kolkman
      Gregory Lebovitz
      Barry Leiba
      Kurtis Lindqvist
      Andrew Malis
      Danny McPherson
      David Oran
      Dave Thaler
      Lixia Zhang



Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Copyright Statement



McPherson, Huston                                 Section 14.  [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2009              October 2008


   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST
   AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES,
   EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT
   THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY
   IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
   PURPOSE.

Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).
































McPherson, Huston                                 Section 14.  [Page 16]
