N Working Group                                                       
Internet Draft                                                Zhang Wei 
Document: draft-zhang-icn-uscamulsertag-00.txt                  He Jing 
Expires: September 11, 2019                               China SAPPRFT 
                                                             March 2019 
                                                                        
    
           the Use Cases for the Application of Multi-Service Tag 
                      draft-zhang-icn-uscamulsertag-00 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the 
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute 
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet- 
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on Nov 11, 2019. 
    
    
    
Abstract 
    
   Based on the important concepts and research challenges described in 
   RFC 7927, we consider multi-service tagging technology to be an 
   effective name mechanism for audio and video content in ICN. Since 
   audio and video traffic is the primary traffic transmitted over the 
   Internet, it will greatly advance the current Internet architecture 
   to the ICN architecture, the name mechanism for creating audio and 
   video content. This article discusses typical cases of improvements 
   using name mechanisms, including content resource exchange between 
   different ISPs, resource caching of content naming information, and 
   data distribution for different transmission quality requirements in 
   low latency environments. 
    
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   In examples, "C:" and "S:" indicate lines sent by the client and 
   server respectively. 
 
 
Zhang                  Expires - September 2019               [Page 1] 
                   draft-zhang-icn-uscamulsertag-00         March 2019 
 
 
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [i]. 
    
Copyright Notice 
 
   Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors.  All rights reserved. 
    
   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect 
   to this document. 
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. Terminology and Acronyms.......................................3 
   3. Use cases......................................................3 
      3.1 content resource sharing across ISP network................3 
      3.2 cache according to the content naming information..........4 
      3.3 Media transmission for different latency levels............4 
   Security Considerations...........................................5 
   IANA Considerations...............................................5 
   References........................................................5 
   Author's Addresses................................................5 
    
    
1. Introduction 
   Now the network traffic presents a rapid increase trend, the 
   popularization of network audio and video and the diversified viewing 
   model modes support watch audio and video in anytime and 
   anywhere,which also results in the increase of network traffic. The 
   network audio and video Apps must provide terrific Quality of 
   experience(QoE). These trends represent a developing direction of 
   future networks. Recognition and handling of the application traffic 
   is a key factor for network operation. Each network application uses 
   different protocol and is deployed by different ISP, which 
   incompletely depends on the network operaters. The method of the 
   recognition of traffic and applications uses the fuzzy heuristic 
   modes which are based on the port scope and key information of the 
   traffic and are similar with the DPI technology, but this series of 
   technologies have some limitations. The heuristic methods can't 
   effectively solve the problem of traffic recognition 
   because they can't keep up with the synchronization update of 
   application characteristics. The traffic recognition schemes based on 
 
 
Zhang                  Expires - September 2019               [Page 2] 
                   draft-zhang-icn-uscamulsertag-00         March 2019 
 
 
   the port scope detection face the great challenge because of enormous 
   amount of ports which are discontinuous, especially for http traffic, 
   the http traffic usually use 80 or 8080 port, so the content in http 
   traffic is difficult to be identified accurately. Due to the 
   encryption transmission of more and more traffic, these lead to the 
   great increase of DFI/DPI calculated amount and make these two 
   technologies be faced with invalidation. IP tunneling technology 
   makes the operator's network more complex. So we need a new 
   technology which can rapidly and uniquely recognize the traffic based 
   on its characteristics without resolve the whole package. 
    
2. Terminology and Acronyms 
    
    
   This document makes use of the same terminology and definitions as 
   RFC 7927 [RFC7927].  In addition it uses the terms defined 
   below: 
    
      Multi-Service Tag: uses the tag field in each packet header to  
   mark packets according to their service class so that the network can 
   easily recognize packets that need to be treated preferentially. 
    
3. Use cases 
3.1 content resource sharing across ISP network 
    
   The Internet audio and video transmission usually uses the CDN 
   technology and cache technology to provide service for users and the 
   CP will deploy the CDN or cache nodes according to the user 
   distribution in the operator network. In order to guarantee QoE, the 
   CP will deploy CDN nodes with full resource in the network center and 
   CDN nodes with hot resource at the network edge which usually locate 
   in the operator's premises network. Each premises network operator 
   has its own IP address field and the user's IP address is allocated 
   by the premises network operator. In the current IP network, the CP 
   can find the nearest resource only according to the IP address in the 
   inquiry and then schedule the corresponding CDN node to serve the 
   user, if the edge CDN node has no the resource asked by the user, the 
   CP will haul the user inquiry back to the center CDN nodes with full 
   resource and schedule the corresponding resource to serve the user, 
   and this can easily form the network congestion of ISP haul-back 
   route and increase the network delay. Though the different ISP 
   premises networks have routing reachability, the content resource 
   can't be sharing among different IPS. 
    
    
   Under the audio and video scheduling mechanism based on the IP 
   address, IP address will fragment the network resource and the same 
   content will have many IP address or URL, thus CP or ISP have to use 
   large storage resource to deploy the same hot content. IP address and 
 
 
Zhang                  Expires - September 2019               [Page 3] 
                   draft-zhang-icn-uscamulsertag-00         March 2019 
 
 
   URL are all the network address information independent of the 
   content and the operator can't share the content through the address 
   information. 
    
    
   In ICN, we can use the multi-service tag naming scheme to realize the 
   content resource sharing among ISPs and form larger content resource 
   sharing pool, thus all user can acquire the content in the pool and 
   it breaks the IP-ISP resource closed mechanism. The multi-service tag 
   assembly modular can acquire all ISP network resource information and 
   the user can use this information to find the relevant content. 
    
    
3.2 cache according to the content naming information 
    
   The cache technology is always one of the main technological means 
   for decreasing inter-network settlement charge and enhancing QoE. The 
   maximal challenge which the traditional cache technology faces is 
   that the repetitive contents waste the cache resource. The core 
   technology of the traditional cache is to obtain URL contents and 
   store them locally by monitoring the hot program's URLs through DPI. 
   But the URL is not stable and the same contents may have different 
   URLs. Though we can use DPI to decode the content and acquire partial 
   content characteristics to compare, it has major limitations at 
   decreasing the repetitive contents and greatly increases the 
   computation complexity, what is more, the begin of the content is 
   often advertisement or station caption and this makes content 
   comparison different to work well. The multi-service tag contains the 
   attribute information of carried content which is one-to-one 
   correspondence to the content, then the cache system can use the tag 
   as the base of comparison so as to quickly discover the repetitive 
   contents and raise cache efficiency. 
    
    
3.3 Media transmission for different latency levels 
   In some organizations, such as audio station or television station, 
   there are both unscheduled non-real-time traffic and different levels 
   of time-sensitive media traffic, which have different transmission 
   priorities. With the DiffServ method [RFC3260], the device uses the 
   appropriate DSCP value to flag the outgoing traffic, but note that 
   DiffServ is a coarse-grained QoS architecture that handles traffic 
   traffic by category rather than individual traffic. As in an audio 
   and video stream, the priority of audio and video streams should be 
   consistent, different media streams, audio and video media streams 
   (such as multicast) with low transmission delay requirements, and 
   media streams required for normal transmission delays (such as media 
   streams migration in different unit). The QoS level of the migration 
   needs to be distinguished by the name service to avoid the low 
   transmission delay audio and video media stream cannot meet the 
 
 
Zhang                  Expires - September 2019               [Page 4] 
                   draft-zhang-icn-uscamulsertag-00         March 2019 
 
 
   transmission delay requirement due to the same service priority media 
   profile. 
    
    
   Multi-service tag identify traffic levels through content tag. The 
   tag value is assigned by the server that generates the traffic 
   according to certain rules. The transmission interaction device can 
   adopt multiple content transmission selection algorithms according to 
   the label value, and a more general one is a strict priority 
   algorithm. According to this algorithm, the oldest data packet is 
   selected for transmission from a non-empty queue with a higher 
   priority. Therefore, high-priority audio and video traffic will have 
   the lowest latency, while lower-priority audio and video traffic may 
   result in longer transmission delays and even timeouts. This hunger 
   state can be achieved through more complex selection algorithms, but 
   with high priority traffic latency will become higher. 
    
4. Security Considerations 
    
   This document has no security considerations. 
    
5. IANA Considerations 
 
   There is no IANA action in this document. 
 
6. References 
6.1 Normative References 
   TBD 
    
6.2 Informative References 
    [RFC7927] D. Kutscher, S., "Information-Centric Networking (ICN) 
             Research Challenges", RFC 7927, July 2016, 
             <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7927.txt> 
    
    [RFC3260] D. Grossman, "New Terminology and Clarifications for 
             Diffserv", RFC 3260, April 2002, <https://www.rfc-
             editor.org/rfc/rfc3260.txt> 
    
    
    
    
    
Author's Addresses 
    
   Zhang Wei 
   China SAPPRFT 
   Email: zhangwei@abs.ac.cn 
     
   He Jing 
 
 
Zhang                  Expires - September 2019               [Page 5] 
                   draft-zhang-icn-uscamulsertag-00         March 2019 
 
 
   China SAPPRFT 
   Email: hejing@abs.ac.cn 
    
       