





Network Working Group                                     Scott Bradner
Internet-Draft                                       Harvard University
Intended status: BCP
Updates: 4071
Expires: March 1, 2015                               September 1, 2015


            Updating the Definition of Term for IAOC Members
                    draft-bradner-iaoc-terms-04.txt

Abstract

   The start and end dates specified in BCP 101 for terms of IAOC
   members has proven to be impractical.  This memo updates BCP 101 to
   establish that the IAOC is directed to establish start and end dates
   for terms of IAOC members that will be more practical.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 22, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Bradner                                                         [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 IAOC Terms                 September 2015


1. Background

   BCP 101 says "IAOC terms normally end at the end of the first IETF
   meeting of a year". ([RFC4071] Section 4.)  Having the terms of the
   IAOC members expire at the end of the first IETF meeting of the year
   has proved impractical for the IAOC to carry out its business and to
   elect its Chair during the meeting week.  For a number of years, the
   IAOC has fudged the issue somewhat by defaulting to an informal
   process of having the transition occur during the administrative
   plenary (as the IESG does). This informal arrangement violates the
   letter of BCP 101.  But even this arrangement is problematic if the
   transfer happens after the IAOC's face-to-face meeting that happens
   during the week. For a number of years, the IAOC's meeting has been
   on the morning of the administrative plenary so the incoming IAOC
   members, while present, are not seated even with the informal
   arrangement.

   Having the new IAOC members take office after the face-to-face
   meeting has caused difficulties in the chair selection and voting
   processes during the IAOC's face-to-face meeting held during the same
   week. There has been confusion over who should vote in the chair
   election and on any business actions that require a vote of the
   Trustees. If the incoming members are not seated then they should not
   vote, for example, to select a chair for the next year yet they, more
   than the outgoing members, should have a say in the chair selection.
   There is also confusion over who is eligible to be elected as chair -
   if the term of an IAOC member has not yet started could that IAOC
   member be elected chair (since the chair is selected from among the
   members).  Having the terms expire at the end of the week also risks
   the IAOC not being able to raise a quorum if outgoing members decide
   to not come to the meeting.  Since the IAOC members are the Trustees
   of the IETF Trust the same issues arise with the IETF Trust and its
   ability to carry out its business and elect a Chair during the
   meeting week

   An additional issue with BCP 101 is the current definition of the
   term of the IAOC Chair.  BCP 101 says "The term of the IAOC chair
   shall be one year from the time of selection or the remaining time of
   his or her tenure on the IAOC, whichever is less".  Since the dates
   for the first IETF meeting of the year vary from year to year the
   current BCP 101 text could result in there being no IAOC chair in
   weeks before the a meeting or in overlapping terms for IAOC Chairs.

2. BCP 101 Update

   This memo updates Section 4 of BCP 101 to remove the sentence "IAOC
   terms normally end at the end of the first IETF meeting of a year"
   and to add the following requirements:



Bradner                                                         [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 IAOC Terms                 September 2015


   1. that the IAOC and the IETF Trust each hold a regular meeting close
      to the time of, or during, the first IETF meeting of the year; and

   2. that the IAOC and the Trust select their chairs as the first order
      of business in their individual meetings in a manner of their
      choosing; and

   3. that the IAOC determine the beginning and end of the normal terms
      of its members relative to the above mentioned IAOC meeting, such
      terms must start and end close to the time of this meeting, unless
      those determinations are made by the appointing bodies,

   A regular meeting has proper notice, with minutes posted, and may be
   held as face-to-face, teleconference, or as a combination of the two.

3. Security Considerations

   This memo relates to IETF process, not any particular technology so
   it does not impact the security of the Internet.

4. References

4.1. Normative References

   [RFC4071] Austein, R and B. Wijnen, "Structure of the IETF
      Administrative Support Activity (IASA)", BCP 101, RFC 4071, April
      2005.

IANA Considerations

   This memo requires no action by the IANA.  [this section should be
   removed for publication]

5. Editor's Addresses

   Scott Bradner
   Harvard University
   8 Story St.
   Cambridge MA, 02138
   Phone: +1 617 495 3864
   EMail: sob@harvard.edu

6. changes between versions
   This section to be removed by the RFC Editor before publication

ver 00 -> ver 01
   add "or teleconference" in 2nd paragraph of section 2
   clarified last paragraph of section 2



Bradner                                                         [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 IAOC Terms                 September 2015


   fixed typo and punctuation

ver 01 -> ver 02
   replaced section 2 to allow the IAOC to (re)define its procedures
   when needed
   removed reference to the Trust Agreement

ver 02 -> ver 03
   reword abstract
   reformat section 2

ver 02 -> ver 03
   updated 1st paragraph of section 2 to quote the sentence being
   removed
   added text to 2.3 to say that the term ends need to be neat the time
   of the 1st ietf meeting of the year



































Bradner                                                         [Page 4]
