Network Working Group                           Christian Martin
INTERNET DRAFT                          Verizon Global Networks,
Inc
Expiration Date: October, 2001                                                                   April 2001


                
                        Administrative Tags in IS-IS
                    <draft-martin-isis-admin-tags-00.txt>


Status

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


1.0 Abstract

   This document describes an extension to the IS-IS protocol to add
   operational capabilities that allow for easier management of and
   control over IP prefix distribution within an IS-IS domain.  The 
   IS-IS protocol is specified in [1], with extensions for supporting 
   IPv4 specified in [2] and further enhancements for Traffic Engineering[4]
   in [3]. 

   This document enhances the IS-IS protocol by extending the
   information that a Intermediate System (IS) [router] can place in
   Link State Protocol Data Units (LSPs) as specified in [2].  This
   information may be of use to operators who must control the way
   IP prefix information is distributed throughout a multi-level, large
   scale IS-IS topology.

2. Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [4]. 


3.0 Introduction

   As defined in [2] and extended in [3], the IS-IS protocol may be used
   to distribute IP prefix reachibility information throughout an IS-IS
   domain.  The IP prefix information is encoded as TLV type 130 in [2], 
   with additional information carried in TLV 135 as specified in [3].
   In particular, the extended IP Reachibilty TLV (135) contains support
   for a larger metric space, an up/down bit to indicate redistribution
   between different levels in the hierarchy, the IP prefix, and one or
   more sub-TLVs that can be used to carry specific information about the
   prefix.  As of this writing no sub-TLVs have been defined; however, this
   draft proposes two new sub-TLVs that may be used to carry administrative
   information about an IP prefix.

   This document is a publication of the IS-IS Working Group within the
   IETF, and is a contribution to ISO IEC JTC1/SC6, for eventual
   inclusion with ISO 10589.


4.0  Sub-TLV Additions

   This draft proposes a new "Administrative Tag" sub-TLV to be added 
   to TLV 135.  This TLV specifies a 32 bit unsigned integer that may be
   associated with an IP prefix.  One use for this tag would be for 
   controlling redistribution between areas, different routing protocols, 
   or multiple instances of IS-IS running on the same router.  The methods
   for which their use is implemented is beyond the scope of this document
   and is left to the operators of IS-IS networks to decide. It is assumed,
   however, that vendors will provide tools to match and set these tags
   in routing policy configuration tools.  The encoding of this new TLV is 
   as follows:

4.1  Sub-TLV <?>: Administrative Tag

   This sub-TLV shall be used to associate an integer value with an IP 
   prefix such that it may be used in routing policy to control the 
   distribution of routing information within an IS-IS domain.  The 
   Administrative Tag shall be encoded as a 4 octet unsigned integer.


5.0 Security Considerations

   This document raises no new security issues for IS-IS, as any annotations
   to IP prefixes should not pass outside the administrative control of the
   network operator of the IS-IS domain.  Such an allowance would violate
the 
   spirit of Interior Gateway Protocols in general and IS-IS in particular.


6.0 Acknowledgments

   The author would like to thank Henk Smit for clarifying the best place to
   describe this new information, and Tony Li for useful comments on this 
   draft.


7.0 References

   [1] ISO 10589, "Intermediate System to Intermediate System Intra-
   Domain Routeing Exchange Protocol for use in Conjunction with the
   Protocol for Providing the Connectionless-mode Network Service (ISO
   8473)" [Also republished as RFC 1142]

   [2] RFC 1195, "Use of OSI IS-IS for routing in TCP/IP and dual
   environments", R.W. Callon, Dec. 1990

   [3] draft-ietf-isis-traffic-02.txt, "IS-IS extensions for Traffic 
   Engineering", T. Li, H. Smit, Sep. 2000

   [4] RFC 2702, "Requirements for Traffic Engineering Over MPLS," D.
   Awduche, J. Malcolm, J. Agogbua, M. O'Dell, and J. McManus, September
   1999.


9.0 Author's Address

   Christian Martin
   Verizon Global Networks, Inc.
   1880 Campus Commons Dr
   Reston, VA 20191
   Email: cmartin@verizongni.com
   Voice: 1 (703) 2954394
   Fax: 1 (703) 2954279


Expiration Date: October, 2001   

