

Internet Draft                                               H. Kitamura
<draft-kitamura-ipv6-ephemeral-address-00.txt>           NEC Corporation
                                                                  S. Ata
                                                   Osaka City University
                                                               M. Murata
                                                        Osaka University
Expires June 2009                                       October 20, 2008

                       IPv6 Ephemeral Addresses
            <draft-kitamura-ipv6-ephemeral-address-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   This document describes a new address type that is called
   "Ephemeral Addresses". Ephemeral Addresses are designed to be used
   as clients' source addresses of TCP / UDP sessions. An idea
   Ephemeral Addresses is simple enough. They are achieved by deriving
   existing "ephemeral ports" specifications. In other words, they are
   achieved by naturally upgrading their concept from the port space
   to the address space. Since Ephemeral Addresses functions are
   implemented only in the kernel side of the OS, we can use the
   Ephemeral Addresses functions in current exiting enormous client
   applications without modifying them. Ephemeral Addresses functions
   can contribute to various types of security enhancements that
   include privacy protections etc.



H. Kitamura        Expires June 2009                            [Page 1]

Internet Draft     IPv6 Ephemeral Addresses


1. Introduction

   In current communication style, IP communication sessions are
   multiplexed at two different layers (Network and Transport). In the
   IPv4 era when one node owns one IP address, this communication
   style was reasonable. However, we are moving to the IPv6 era that
   it has become normal for one node to own multiple IP addresses.
   This communication style is getting less optimized. It must be time
   to reconsider current communication style and to find suitable
   communication style for the IPv6 era.

   As a first step, this document proposes a new address type that is
   called "Ephemeral Addresses". Ephemeral Addresses are designed to
   be used as clients' source addresses of TCP / UDP sessions. An idea
   Ephemeral Addresses is simple enough. They are achieved by deriving
   existing "ephemeral ports" specifications. In other words, they are
   achieved by naturally upgrading their concept from the port space
   to the address space. Since Ephemeral Addresses functions are
   implemented only in the kernel side of the OS, we can use the
   Ephemeral Addresses functions in current exiting enormous client
   applications without modifying them. Ephemeral Addresses functions
   can contribute to various types of security enhancements that
   include privacy protections etc.

2. Definitions and Characteristics of Ephemeral Addresses

   Definitions of Ephemeral Addresses are deprived from those of
   ephemeral ports. They are almost same as definitions of ephemeral
   ports. Only the differences are located in which layer they are
   used. Ephemeral ports are used as ports on the transport layer. On
   the other hand, Ephemeral Addresses are used as addresses on the
   network layer.

2.1 Where Ephemeral Addresses are used

   Since ephemeral ports are used as clients' source ports of TCP /
   UDP sessions on client nodes, Ephemeral Addresses are used as
   clients' source addresses of TCP / UDP sessions on client nodes.

2.2 When Ephemeral Addresses are generated, assigned and disposed.

   Since ephemeral ports are generated and assigned at when sessions
   are initiated on client nodes to communicate with server nodes,
   Ephemeral Addresses are generated and assigned at when sessions are
   initiated on client nodes to communicate with server nodes.

   Since ephemeral ports are disposed on client nodes at when the
   sessions are closed, Ephemeral Addresses are also disposed on



H. Kitamura        Expires June 2009                            [Page 2]

Internet Draft     IPv6 Ephemeral Addresses


   client nodes at when the sessions are closed.

2.3 Effects to current applications and their programming styles

   In typical client applications, source ports and addresses for
   their sessions are not specified.

   When client applications do not specify source ports, the OS on the
   client node picks up and assigns appropriate source ports for their
   sessions automatically. (Such ports are called "ephemeral ports".)

   If the kernel of the OS implemented Ephemeral Address functions and
   client applications do not specify source address (typical cases),
   the OS on the client node picks up and assigns appropriate source
   addresses for their sessions automatically. Such addresses are
   called "Ephemeral Addresses".

   Important things in above descried issued that: client applications
   do not specify source address for their session and there is no
   programming codes to specify source addresses.

   It means that we can introduce Ephemeral Addresses features without
   modifying current existing enormous applications.

3. Comparison of Ephemeral Addresses and Temporary Addresses

   In [RFC4941], "Temporary Addresses" are defined in order to enhance
   the privacy protection. Compared with Ephemeral Addresses,
   Temporary Addresses have the following similar functions.

    1. The addresses are only used for client nodes addresses.
    2. The addresses have lifetime, and theirs usable period is
   limited.
    3. The addresses can enhance the privacy protection.

   Therefore, we compare them in detail as follows.

3.1. Comparison from Abstract Function Viewpoints

    [Temporary Address]:

   A client uses a Temporary Address to access MULTIPLE services that
   are provided by multiple servers. The address is basically RE-USED
   when the client accesses a new service.

   Timings when the address is created and abolished are not clearly
   defined. Therefore, in the worst case, the following situation may
   happen. When the lifetime of the Temporary Address expires and the



H. Kitamura        Expires June 2009                            [Page 3]

Internet Draft     IPv6 Ephemeral Addresses


   address becomes invalid, a session may be suddenly terminated even
   if the session is still active. Temporary Address includes the
   above potential problems.

    [Ephemeral Address]:

   A client uses an Ephemeral Address to access a SINGLE service. Of
   course, it is provided by a single server. The address is basically
   NOT RE-UESD for other sessions. Timings when the address is created
   and disposed are very clearly defined, because their definitions
   are derived from "ephemeral ports" specifications, and no problems
   are reported on "ephemeral ports" functions now. Thus, it never
   happens that the session is suddenly terminated when the lifetime
   of the Ephemeral Addresses expire.

   Temporary Addresses are basically designed for long period lifetime
   usages. As a result, it is designed as a "RE-USE" type address.
   Since its design is NOT carried through a "one-time" policy, it has
   potential problems. On the other hand, the design of Ephemeral
   Address is carried through a "one-time" policy. An Ephemeral
   Address do not have the same types of problems that Temporary
   Addresses have.

   Since the lifetime value of an Ephemeral Address becomes
   comparatively shorter than that of Temporary Address, it entails
   the following features. It is difficult for crackers to attack
   sessions or nodes that have such short lifetime addresses. Since
   this feature is good from a security viewpoint, it becomes
   additional benefit of Ephemeral Addresses.

 3.2. Comparison from Address Creation Rule Viewpoints

   Since Temporary Address is basically created by using simple random
   numbers, there is no relationship among series of created
   addresses.  Thus, it is almost impossible to tell which Temporary
   Address comes from which node. With this specification, Anonymity
   is provided, but this becomes an unwelcome feature for
   administrators who would like to manage address information.

   On the other hand, in the case of Ephemeral Address, it is
   necessary to include "port equivalent" info into the address. By
   putting some rules in a method including such "port equivalent"
   info, it becomes possible to have some relationships among series
   of created addresses. In other words, it becomes possible for
   administrators who know such including rules to manage Ephemeral
   Addresses (this feature is called Pseudonymity). The Ephemeral
   Address can provide not only an Anonymity feature but also a
   Pseudonymity feature.



H. Kitamura        Expires June 2009                            [Page 4]

Internet Draft     IPv6 Ephemeral Addresses


   We can also say that Ephemeral Addresses specification is superior
   to Temporary Address specification on this viewpoint.

4. Future Work

   A definition which address values are used for Ephemeral Addresses
   is not clarified in this document. It will be clarified a future
   issued document.  Ephemeral Addresses are categorized into a
   dynamically generated addresses type. When we use Ephemeral
   Addresses, we will meet the same type of problems that dynamically
   generated addresses have. We can not easy to omit or avoid the DAD
   operation time. It takes time to start using Ephemeral Addresses.
   Optimistic DAD [RFC4429] will not become the perfect solution to
   solve above described problems.  In future documents, we will
   discuss the relationships between dynamically generated addresses
   and DAD operations and provide a kind of clear solution to meet
   this problem.

5. Security Considerations

   Security Considerations of Temporary Addresses [RFC4941] can also
   be applied to Ephemeral Addresses. Since Ephemeral Addresses can
   provide Pseudonymity features, it becomes much easier to administer
   them than to administer Temporary Addresses.

6. IANA Considerations

   Address space for Ephemral Addresses may be assigned by the IANA





Appendix A. Implementations

   The Ephemral Address specification has been implemented under the
   following environments, and its basic functionaries have been
   verified

     OS:     FreeBSD6.2R (32bit / 64bit)
     CPU:    i386 / amd64


Acknowledgement

   A part of this work is supported by the program: SCOPE (Strategic
   Information and Communications R&D Promotion Programme) operated by
   Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications of JAPAN.



H. Kitamura        Expires June 2009                            [Page 5]

Internet Draft     IPv6 Ephemeral Addresses


References

  Normative References

   [RFC1078] M. Lottor, "TCP Port Service Multiplexer (TCPMUX),"
              RFC1078 (Proposed Standard), November 1988

   [RFC4941] T. Narten, R. Draves, S. Krishnan, "Privacy Extensions
              for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in IPv6," RFC
              4941, September 2001

  Informative References

   [RFC4429] N. Moore, "Optimistic Duplicate Address Detection (DAD)
              for IPv6",RFC4429, April 2006

   [RFC4861] T. Narten, E. Nordmark, W. Simpson, and H. Soliman,
              "Neighbor Discovery for IP Version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 4861,
              September 2007

   [RFC4862] S. Thomson, T. Narten, and T. Jinmei, "IPv6 Stateless
              Address Autoconfiguration", RFC 4862, September 2007

Authors' Addresses

   Hiroshi Kitamura
   Common Platform Software Resarch Labratories, NEC Corporation
   (Igarashi Building 4F) 11-5, Shibaura 2-Chome,
   Minato-Ku, Tokyo 108-8557, JAPAN
   University of Electro-Commmunciations
   5-1 Chofugaoka 1-Chome, Chofu-shi, Tokyo 182-8585, JAPAN
   Phone: +81 3 5476 9795
   Fax:   +81 3 5476 1005
   Email: kitamura@da.jp.nec.com

   Shingo Ata
   Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka City University
   3-3-138, Sugimoto, Sumiyoshi-Ku, Osaka 558-8585, JAPAN
   Phone: +81 6 6605 2191
   Fax:   +81 6 6605 2191
   Email: ata@info.eng.osaka-cu.ac.jp

   Masayuki Murata
   Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Osaka Univ.
   1-5 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, JAPAN
   Phone: +81 6 6879 4542
   Fax:   +81 6 6879 4544
   Email: murata@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp



H. Kitamura        Expires June 2009                            [Page 6]

Internet Draft     IPv6 Ephemeral Addresses


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr @ ietf.org.











H. Kitamura        Expires June 2009                            [Page 7]
