





Network Working Group                                     Scott Bradner
Internet-Draft                                       Harvard University
Intended status: BCP
Obsoletes: TBD                                                T. Narten
Updates: TBD                                                        IBM
Expires: April 22, 2015                                October 22, 2014


                            IETF Liaisoning
                  draft-bradner-ietf-liaisoning-00.txt

Abstract This document details the processes by which the IETF interacts
   with peer organizations.  In some cases this involves establishing
   long lasting formal liaison relationships and in other cases the
   processes are less formal and of shorter duration.  The document is
   designed to be useful to both IETF participants and to the
   participants in the other organizations with which the IETF
   interacts. The document also includes information and pointers to
   information about the IETF and its operation that may be of use to
   participants in such peer organizations.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December xx, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Bradner & Narten                                                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              IETF Liaisoning                 October 2014


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents
   TBD

   1. Introduction
   Standards development organizations (SDOs), including the IETF, often
   find it useful to engage in direct, and often formal, communication
   with each other convey information relevant to a standards
   development effort in a SDO or to coordinate related standards
   development efforts.

   For example, as a standards development organization (SDO) working in
   the Internet area, the IETF finds it increasingly necessary to
   communicate and coordinate their activities involving Internet-
   related technologies with other SDOs working in the same area.  This
   is useful in order to avoid accidental overlap in work efforts and to
   manage interactions between their groups.  In cases where the mutual
   effort to communicate and coordinate activities is formalized, these
   relationships are generically referred to as "liaison relationships".

   In addition, the IETF interacts with Internet-related organizations
   that are not directly involved in standards development, such as
   Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), the
   regional Internet registries (RIRs), and the Internet Governance
   Forum (IGF).  These interactions sometimes require that the IETF
   provide formal communications on a topic but do not require the
   ongoing coordination that a liaison relationship implies.

   This document addresses both situations.


2. IETF Background
   This section provides a very quick overview of the IETF for the
   benefit of people in other organizations who may not be familiar with
   the IETF. Some of this information is from the Tao of the IETF [Tao],
   where a fuller picture of the IETF and how it works can be found.

2.1. IETF Scope
   The IETF is concerned with all protocols, procedures, and conventions
   that are used in or by the Internet, whether or not they are part of
   the TCP/IP protocol suite.  [RFC2026]

2.2. IETF History
   The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) was formed in 1986 as an



Bradner & Narten                                                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              IETF Liaisoning                 October 2014


   expansion of US government sponsored activities aimed at the
   development of Internet related technology.  Although the IETF
   received US Government support until 1997, the IETF became a self-
   directed activity before 1990. Since then, support for the IETF has
   come from meeting fees and, since the late 1990s, from the Internet
   Society.

   The IETF holds face-to-face three times a year but most of the work
   of the IETF takes place on mailing lists.  Attendance at the face-to-
   face meetings grew from 21 at the first meeting to over 28 hundred at
   the height of the Internet boom in 2010.  Meeting attendance has been
   between 1,000 and 1,500 for most of the last decade.


2.3. Internet Research Task Force
   The Internet Research Task Force (IRTF) includes research groups that
   work on topics that are not yet ready for standardization.  As with
   IETF working groups, the main work of IRTF research groups is done
   over mailing lists, but IETF research groups occasionally meet during
   an IETF face-to-face meeting.

2.4. Internet Society
   The IETF has no separate legal existence, it has been operating as an
   organized activity of the Internet Society since 1966.

   The mission of the Internet Society (www.internetsociety.org/) is "to
   promote the open development, evolution, and use of the Internet for
   the benefit of all people throughout the world". The Internet Society
   sees support for the IETF as a part of fulfilling its mission.

2.5. IETF Participants
   The IETF does not have any members or membership agreements.
   Individuals participate in the activities of the IETF on their own
   behalf and are judged by the quality of their ideas not on what
   company they might work for. Participation can be in person at face-
   to-face meetings, by remote participation at such meetings, via email
   discussion lists or by publishing IETF documents.

2.6. IETF Structure
   The work of the IETF is done in working groups.  The scope and goals
   of each working group is defined in a charter.  Working groups have
   one or more chairs, who are responsible for the proper functioning of
   the working group and for judging consensus on topics discussed
   within the working group.

   IETF working groups are grouped together into Areas for managerial
   efficiency. Each IETF Area has two Area Directors (ADs) who are
   responsible for the proper functioning of the Area, for the creation



Bradner & Narten                                                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              IETF Liaisoning                 October 2014


   and termination of working groups within the area and for serving on
   the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG).

   The IESG is the standards approval body of the IETF and is
   responsible for approving the creation of working groups and for the
   technical management of IETF activities and for the Internet
   standards process.  The IESG gets advice on the creation of working
   groups from the Internet Architecture Board (IAB).

   In addition to providing advice to the IESG on creation of working
   groups, the IAB is responsible for all IETF relationships with other
   groups (the subject of this memo) and for providing general
   architectural guidance to the IETF and its working groups.

2.7. The IETF Trust
   The IETF Trust (trustee.ietf.org/) is a legal entity set up in 2005
   to hold whatever intellectual property rights the IETF accumulates
   during its work.

2.8. IETF Documents
   IETF documents and mailing lists are publically available, other than
   a few internal mailing lists and parts of some contracts.

2.8.1. Internet Drafts
   IETF Internet Drafts are IETF working documents.  Most Internet
   Drafts are submitted by individuals and represent the opinions of the
   people listed on the face of the Internet Draft.  The publishing
   process for Internet Drafts is automated.  As long as the document is
   formatted correctly and includes the proper boilerplate it will get
   published.  The mere publication of an Internet Draft should not be
   taken as an indication that anyone participating in the IETF, other
   than the authors, have knowledge of or support the document. Some
   other Internet Drafts are working group documents and are assumed to
   represent the consensus of the working group, at least to some level.

   The Internet Draft's filename can be used to determine its status.
   Internet Drafts whose filename starts with draft-ietf- are working
   group documents.  Internet Drafts whose filename begin with draft-
   iab- or draft-iesg- are IAB or IESG working Documents.  Other
   Internet drafts are the work of their authors. Internet Draft
   filenames include a version number at the end.

2.8.2.  RFCs
   RFCs are the archival publications of the IETF.  Once published, the
   contents of an RFC is not changed.  There are many types of RFCs.
   Some RFCs are standards track, some informational, some historic and
   some are jokes. The type and current status of a RFC can be found in
   the RFC index.



Bradner & Narten                                                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              IETF Liaisoning                 October 2014


2.9.  IETF Standards Process
   As mentioned above, most of the work of the IETF is done in working
   groups.  The normal development process for a RFC, standards track or
   informational, involves one or more people developing an Internet
   draft.  The Internet Draft can be offered to a working group as long
   as the topic is covered by the working group's charter.  Internet
   Drafts can also be created at the direction of a working group.  The
   working group will then discuss the Internet Draft and, in response
   to the discussions, the authors will create a succession of versions
   if the Internet Draft until the working group is satisfied with it.
   The working group then sends a request to publish the Internet Draft
   as a RFC to their AD.  The AD does a careful technical and editorial
   review of the document.  If the AD is satisfied he or she then
   forwards the publication request to the IESG.  The IESG issues an
   IETF-wide "last-call" asking that anyone interested to review the
   Internet Draft and send their comments, if any, to the IESG.  Then
   each of the IESG members has the opportunity to review the document.
   If the ADs, as a body, support the publication a request is sent to
   the RFC Editor to publish the document as a RFC.  The document can be
   sent back to the working group at any time in the review process if
   it is not deemed reedy for publication.

   There is a similar process involving a longer last-call period that
   can be used to publish a RFC without the requirement of a working
   group.

   In addition there is an independent submissions process that can be
   used to publish non standards-track RFCs.

   2.10. IETF Process Documents.
   Te IETF standards process is documented in BCP (Best Current
   Practice) 9 (currently RFC 2026 [RFC2026] and updates).  The IETF
   copyright rules are documented in BCP 78 (currently RFC 5378
   [RFC5378]) and the IETF patent-related rules are documented in BCP 79
   (currently RFC 3979 [RFC3979]).

3. Liaison Relationships

3.1 General
   In general, formal liaison relationships are justified for the IETF
   when there are areas of technical development of mutual interest in
   the IETF and in another SDO.  For the most part, SDOs would rather
   leverage existing work done by peer organizations than recreate it
   themselves (and would like the same done with respect to their own
   work).  Establishing a liaison relationship can provide the framework
   for ongoing communications to prevent inadvertent duplication of
   effort, without obstructing either organization from pursuing its own
   mandate and to provide authoritative information concerning the



Bradner & Narten                                                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              IETF Liaisoning                 October 2014


   status of work within a SDO or concerning one organization's
   dependencies on work being done in a different SDO.

3.2.  Establishing a Liaison Relationship with the IETF
   Within the IETF, the Internet Architecture Board (IAB) has been
   chartered to establish and manage liaison relationships.  Consistent
   with its charter [IABCharter], the IAB acts as the representative of
   the interests of the IETF and of the Internet Society in technical
   liaison relationships with other organizations concerned with
   standards as well as technical and organizational issues relevant to
   the worldwide Internet.  Liaison relationships are kept as informal
   as possible and must be of demonstrable value to the IETF's technical
   mandate.

   A liaison relationship is set up when it is mutually agreeable and
   needed for some specific purpose, in the view of the peer
   organization, the IAB, and the IETF participants conducting the work.

   In setting up the relationship, the IAB expects that the setup
   process will include a mutual exchange of views and discussion of the
   best approach for undertaking new standardization work items.  Any
   IETF work items will be undertaken in the usual IETF procedures,
   defined in [BCB 9].  Other SDOs often have organizational structure
   and procedures that are different than the IETF.  Cooperation in the
   face of often quite different structures and procedures often
   requires some flexibility on the part of both organizations.  The IAB
   expects that each organization will use the relationship carefully,
   allowing time for the processes it requests to occur in the peer
   organization, and will not make unreasonable demands.

3.2.1. Requesting a Liaison Relationship
   Contact the IAB if you believe that the IETF should establish a
   Liaison Relationship with another organization.  Include in your
   request the reasons you believe that such a relationship would be
   beneficial to the IETF and to the other organization.

   There is no set form or process for this; the IETF participants
   and/or the peer organization representatives approach the IAB,
   generally by contacting the IAB Chair or by sending email to the IAB
   mailing list (iab@ietf.org).

3.2.2. Appointment of a Liaison Manager
   Once the liaison relationship is established, the IAB appoints a
   Liaison Manager to act as the IETF-side point of contact. (See
   section xx.)  For this role, the IAB will be looking for people who
   have both a good technical understanding of the work being carried
   out and effective personal relationships within the IETF and the peer
   organization.



Bradner & Narten                                                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              IETF Liaisoning                 October 2014


   Ongoing face-to-face interactions between the IETF liaisons and
   members of the peer organization are seen as critical to the
   effective functioning of the role.  These interactions should allow
   the liaisons to keep the IETF abreast, and preferably ahead, of
   matters of mutual interest or potential conflict.  When the liaison
   is working effectively, it should facilitate the IETF and the peer
   organization working synergistically and reduce the chance of
   unrealistic expectations about the work of the two organizations and
   the chance of overlapping or conflicting standards being created.

3.2.3. Terminating a Liaison Relationship
   Liaison Relationships are terminated when they no longer provide
   useful functions in the collective opinion of the IAB and
   representatives of the peer organization.

3.3. Listing Existing Relationships
   The IAB maintains a list of existing liaison relationships and the
   Liaison Managers responsible for each one on the IAB web site at
   http://www.ietf.org/liaison/managers.html.

4. Liaison Statements
   Standards Development Organizations (SDOs) frequently use liaison
   statements to communicate with each other.  Liaison statements (or
   liaisons for short) are simply documents that have been prepared by
   one organization for consumption by another and that carry the
   authority of having been formally approved by the sending
   organization.  That is, a liaison reflects the formal and official
   views of the sending organization and will have gone through an
   internal approval process in the sending organization. Liaisons can
   cover almost any topic, but typically ask questions about specific
   technology being worked on by the target of a liaison, bring
   attention to work the sending organization is working on that may be
   of interest to the target organization or to ask for help in
   extending technology developed by the target organization that is
   being considered for use by sending organization.

   A liaison  is a business letter sent by one standards organization to
   another.  These organizations may be at any level (WG, Area, etc.)
   Generally, the sender and receiver are peer organizations.  A liaison
   may have any purpose, but generally the purpose is to solicit
   information, make a comment or request an action.

   The IETF regularly sends liaisons to other SDOs, either in response
   to a received liaison, or to initiate a dialog.  In most cases,
   communication is very specific to technology under discussion and
   thus originates from a specific (or small number of) IETF Working
   Groups.




Bradner & Narten                                                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              IETF Liaisoning                 October 2014


   Aside from the personal contacts between liaisons and the peer
   organization, extensive communication may occur between the IETF and
   the peer organizations through written materials.  Much of this
   communication is through liaison statements that typically contain
   plans, new developments, references to documents or documents
   themselves and time schedules of which one party believes that the
   other party should be aware.  Frequently the liaison will include
   specific questions that the sending organization would like answered.

   Frequently liaisons include documents as attachments for information
   or for comment.  It should be noted that all liaison statements
   received by the IETF are publically posted
   (https://datatracker.ietf.org/liaison/),along with any attachments
   the statement may include.

   See Appendix A for information about the format of liaisons.

5. New-Work email list
   The IETF maintains a mailing list for the distribution of proposed
   new work items among standards development organizations.  (new-
   work@ietf.org) On the IETF side, many such items can be identified in
   proposed Birds-of-a-Feather (BOF) sessions, as well as in the draft
   charters for proposed working groups.  The intent of the list is to
   enable SDOs to monitor the new work items for possible overlap or
   interest to their organization.  This mailing list receives a few
   messages per month.

   Each group with which the IETF has a liaison relationship should
   ensure that at least one person is subscribed to the new work list
   and has been tasked with the responsibility to distribute relevant
   information from the list within the organization and to post
   information on new or proposed work that might be of interest to
   other SDOs.

6. - Liaison Relationship to IETF
   This section provides information to the IETF on how to deal with
   liaisons from groups that have an existing liaison relationship with
   the IETF and information for groups that desire or have a liaison
   relationship to IETF.  It is designed to provide information on how
   the IETF deals with such relationships and the messages that are
   exchanged within such a relationship, with the people from such
   groups when they are participating in IETF activities and with
   messages addressed to the IETF or its working groups received from
   such groups.

6.1 How liaisons are treated in the IETF
   One topic that deserves special consideration is how the IETF handles
   liaisons (both people serving as a liaison and liaison messages) from



Bradner & Narten                                                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              IETF Liaisoning                 October 2014


   other organizations.  The IETF has a long tradition of considering
   itself a meritocracy, where everyone participates as an individual
   and a person's position or affiliation does not automatically bestow
   special weight to his or her views.  From that perspective, giving a
   liaison statement special weight, just because it is a liaison from
   another organization, is potentially problematical.  Indeed, IETF
   processes on liaison handling specify that liaisons must be treated
   exactly the same as submissions (e.g. an Internet draft) from anyone
   else. From that perspective, in theory, liaison statements do not
   require special consideration by the IETF.  In practice, however,
   they of course should and do. While a liaison may not by itself carry
   any special weight, it is in the IETF's own best interest to handle
   liaisons with special care, giving liaisons proper and careful
   consideration, and above all being respectful in all interactions
   with other organizations and the handling of liaisons.

   The Liaison Manager should be aware of these written communications
   and assist both parties to see that appropriate action is taken in
   relation to liaison statements passing in both directions.

   For example, when a peer organization needs to reference material
   that is under development in the IETF: the final reference in the
   peer organization's documents needs the permanent identifier (RFC
   number) that will be assigned to an Internet Draft when it is
   approved and published.  To meet the publication schedule of the peer
   organization, a liaison statement is often sent to the IETF
   requesting that an RFC number be assigned within the required
   timeframe.  In response, the IETF can, when justified and when the
   IETF document is sufficiently mature that the RFC publication is
   imminent, provide the RFC number or explain why it is not possible to
   provide this within the timeframe requested.

   An alternative situation that involves more specific action by the
   Liaison Manager also involves requests for this kind of expedited
   action on RFCs.  For example, 3GPP/3GPP2 and the Open Mobile
   Alliance(OMA) provide the IETF with an updated lists of their
   dependencies between their documents and IETF documents on a regular
   basis, indicating what documents are needed and the required
   timeframe.  In this case, the liaison manager tracks the dependency
   list and, when necessary, conveys the request for expedited
   assignment to the appropriate IETF Area Director (AD) or working
   group.

6.2. Liaison Tool
   See Appendix B for information about the IETF Liaison Tool used to
   send liaisons to the IETF.





Bradner & Narten                                                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              IETF Liaisoning                 October 2014


6.3. IETF processing incoming liaison statements
   In practice, when handling liaison statements, the following
   considerations apply:

         o Listen carefully to what is being asked, take extra steps to
      understand what is being asked (and why), and be aware that if the
      IETF doesn't respond helpfully and constructively, the other SDO
      may not get the relevant input it needs from the IETF and
      inadvertently take steps that are not in the IETF's own best
      interest.  How the IETF responds can make the difference between a
      positive collaboration and a situation where poorly informed
      decisions are made that require active follow up actions later by
      the IETF to repair the damage.

         o A liaison represents an official/consensus view of the
      sending organization (or a particular portion of the organization,
      such as a working group).  Ignoring it or otherwise not responding
      constructively could be interpreted as a slap in the face, making
      it harder to work together on any future issue.

         o The sending organization may not understand the IETF culture
      well (and vice versa).  Poorly chosen words or language can easily
      be misinterpreted as much more negative or condescending than is
      helpful.  Often there is a longer story behind a liaison
      statement, and it is advisable to understand the bigger story in
      order to have a full context in which to respond to a liaison
      statement.

         o Giving liaisons special consideration does not mean that the
      contents of a liaison carry more weight than input from other
      IETFers, but it does mean the IETF needs to exercise extra due
      diligence in evaluating and responding to input and carefully
      considering how a response will be received and what the possible
      next steps would be.

6.4.  Liaison Managers Representing Peer Organizations
   Liaised organizations may appoint a person to act as a liaison
   manager for "their side" of the relationship.  This is the person hat
   will speak authoritatively, within the IETF, on the activities within
   the other organization.  The other organization needs to make this
   person known to the IETF.  This person might request a slot on a
   working group agenda to discuss developments and plans of the liaised
   organization.

   Opinions expressed by a liaison manger of other SDOs, other than
   reports on work within the liaised organization, are given equal
   weight with opinions expressed by other working group participants.




Bradner & Narten                                               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              IETF Liaisoning                 October 2014


   The mandates of liaison managers from other organizations are
   recognized by the IETF to the extent needed to understand the
   information received from the liaison manager.  In all other respects
   he or she participates in IETF activities under the same conditions
   and rules as any other IETF participant.  It is important that the
   IETF Liaison Manager understands the extent to which the peer liaison
   manager is mandated or delegated to speak on behalf of the peer
   organization, and to inform the relevant part of the IETF if the peer
   liaison manager appears to be stepping outside the role or stance
   given to him or her by the peer organization.

   IETF Liaison Managers should work to include the liaison manager from
   the liaised organization within their contact network, and to
   understand the positions being communicated by the peer liaison
   manager.

6.5. Informing the IETF of proposed & new work in other SDOs
   The new-work mailing can also be used to inform the IETF, and the
   other SDOs subscribed to the list, about proposed and new work in
   other SDOs.

   Each group with which the IETF has a liaison relationship is
   requested to send information relating to new work within that group
   to the new-work lists as soon as the distribution of such information
   is possible within their process.

7. Liaison Relationship from IETF
   This section is for the information to IETF participants.  It is
   designed to provide information on the IETF procedures for dealing
   with such relationships including how people from the IETF should act
   when participating in the activities of a group with which the IETF
   has a Liaison Relationship as a IETF liaison and how liaison messages
   should be developed, approved and transmitted.

7.1. IETF Liaison Manager
   When the IAB establishes a liaison relationship with peer
   organization it designates a person from the IETF to manage that
   liaison relationship; the person is generally called the "IETF
   Liaison Manager" to the peer organization.  When the liaison
   relationship is expected to encompass a complex or broad range of
   activities, more people may be designated to undertake some portions
   of the communications, coordinated by the liaison manager.  Often,
   the peer organization will similarly designate their own liaison
   manager to the IETF.

7.2. IETF Liaison Representative
   A Liaison Manager is, specifically, a representative of the IETF for
   the purpose of managing the liaison relationship.  There may be



Bradner & Narten                                               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              IETF Liaisoning                 October 2014


   occasion to identify other representatives for the same relationship.
   For example, if the area of mutual work is extensive, it might be
   appropriate to name several people as Liaison Representatives to
   different parts of the other organization.  Or, it might be
   appropriate to name a Liaison Representative to attend a particular
   meeting.

   Liaison Representatives are selected by the IAB and work in
   conjunction (and close communication) with the Liaison Manager. In
   some cases, this may also require communication and coordination with
   other Liaison Managers or representatives where concerned technical
   activities overlap.  The specific responsibilities of the Liaison
   Representative will be identified at the time of appointment.

   The Liaison Manager and Liaison Representatives provide information
   to the IETF community in order to enable the IETF to make decisions
   based on the best possible information regarding the work in the peer
   organization.
7.3. Authority, Responsibilities and Duties of an IETF Liaison Manager
   Most work on topics of mutual interest will be carried out in the
   usual way within the IETF and the peer organizations. Specifically,
   by participants in each organization directly participating in the
   work of the other organization. Therefore, most communications will
   be informal in nature (for example, Working Group (WG) or mailing
   list discussions).  Liaison Managers generally deal with the cases
   where more than normal participation is required.

   An important function of the Liaison Manager is to ensure that
   communication is maintained, productive, and timely.  He or she may
   use any applicable businesslike approach, from private to public
   communications, and bring in other parties as needed.  If a
   communication from a peer organization is addressed to an
   inappropriate party, such as being sent to the WG but not copying the
   Area Director (AD) or being sent to the wrong WG, the Liaison Manager
   will help redirect or otherwise augment the communication.

   IETF Liaison Managers should also communicate and coordinate with
   other Liaison Managers where concerned technical activities overlap.

   Since the IAB is ultimately responsible for liaison relationships,
   anyone who has a problem with a relationship (whether an IETF
   participant or a person from the peer organization) should first
   consult the IAB's designated Liaison Manager, and if that does not
   result in a satisfactory outcome, the IAB itself.

7.4.  IETF Liaison Manager Communications
   In communications directed to peer organization, the mandate for IETF
   Liaison Managers is strictly limited to conveying factual information



Bradner & Narten                                               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft              IETF Liaisoning                 October 2014


   or conveying IETF consensus to the other organization.  The Liaison
   Manager must not on their own initiative send liaison statements to
   another organization on behalf of IETF, any of its areas, or any of
   its working groups.  Liaison statements are only sent following the
   process specified in [RFC4052].  Liaison statements are only sent
   with the agreement of the IETF chair, the IAB chair, IETF Area
   Directors, or IETF working group chairs.  As part of this, the
   liaison must clearly differentiate his or her own independent
   positions from those that represent IETF consensus.

7.5. Liaison Tool
   See Appendix B for information on the IETF Liaison Tool used to send
   liaisons to other organizations.

7.6.  Compensation for IETF Liaison Managers and representatives
   IETF Liaison Managers and representatives must not be compensated by
   the organization with which they liaise other than for reasonable
   travel expenses.

7.7.  IETF Liaison Manager Responsibilities
   Examples of tasks performed by the liaison manager are provided
   below.  Depending on the nature of the liaised organization, the
   tasks may vary in frequency and relative importance.

   o Attend relevant meetings and participate in conference calls or
      mailing list discussions within the other organization.  Note
      developments of interest for onward communication to the IETF.
      When required, communicate IETF consensus to the other
      organization.

   o Communicate information relevant to the liaison relationship to the
      relevant parts of the IETF; this may involve email messages or
      discussions with IETFers involved in the other organization and
      other interested parties within the IETF, e.g., working group
      chairs and ADs.

   o Understand the concerns of both the IETF and the other
      organization, while ensuring that interests of the IETF are
      maintained. Where there appear to be problems to solve or
      conflicts between approaches, work with both parties to encourage
      the development of engineering solutions within the appropriate
      organization.

   o It is the responsibility of the liaison manager to ensure that the
      peer organization communicates its requirements to the IETF in a
      timely fashion and that the IETF consensus is clearly understood.
      This is particularly important in situations where the IETF and
      the liaised organization differ substantially in their positions.



Bradner & Narten                                               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft              IETF Liaisoning                 October 2014


      In this situation, the liaison manager needs to facilitate prompt
      communication so that the IETF and the liaised organization can
      stay in close communication and avoid misunderstandings.

   o Oversee the proper handling of liaison statements addressed to the
      IETF.  This includes ensuring that liaison statements are
      delivered to the appropriate destinations within the IETF, as well
      as shepherding the timely creation of responses by the IETF.

   o Work with the other organization to ensure that the IETF's liaison
      statements are clear and are appropriately directed and responded
      to in a timely fashion.

   o Communicate and coordinate with other IETF Liaison Managers where
      the activities or interests of two or more liaised organizations
      overlap.

   o Assist with the preparation and delivery of IETF liaison statements
      based on IETF consensus.

   o Prepare reports giving updates on developments in the other
      organization as requested by the IAB or other interested parties
      in the IETF.

   o From time to time, Liaison Managers will have to report to the IETF
      on the status of the liaison relationship.  For this purpose, they
      will need to keep track of outstanding work and issues.

7.8. Consensus Requirements
   Liaison statements and other messages sent to a peer organization
   must be based on rough consensus within the IETF or one of its
   working groups or areas.  Though the Liaison Manager is not
   responsible for determining consensus, it is important that the
   Liaison Manager participate in the process and makes his or her
   expertise and knowledge available.

   How consensus is arrived at may vary according to the circumstances.
   Some issues are new, and in these cases an open discussion on a
   mailing list should be undertaken.  For some issues, consensus has
   already been arrived at or the liaison statement is a mere statement
   of facts (e.g., to inform the liaised organization that an IETF Last
   Call had started on a document it had previously expressed interest
   in) and in these cases the liaison statement can be written and sent
   (such as by a working group chair), possibly involving the Liaison
   Manager.

7.9.  Incoming Liaison Statements
   When the IETF receives a liaison statement or other communication



Bradner & Narten                                               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft              IETF Liaisoning                 October 2014


   from an organization with which it has a liaison relationship that
   includes a request for a response to the communication, the IETF is
   committed to providing a timely response.  This means that the IETF
   will respond within the time requested and provide information as
   accurately as possible.

   This commitment does not mean that the IETF will uncritically accept
   the content in the incoming liaison statement.  To the extent that
   the liaison contains requirements on IETF technology or protocols,
   they will be taken into consideration based on their technical merit.

7.9.1.  Ambiguous Incoming Liaison Statements
   Sometimes the IETF, an IETF area, or an IETF working group receives
   liaison statements from a liaised organization that are sent to the
   wrong destination.  At other times, the liaison statement is sent to
   working groups that are not chartered to do the work that the liaison
   statement addresses.  In some cases, it might be the situation that
   no working group is chartered to do the work.

   In such cases, the liaison manager should assist in finding the
   appropriate recipient within the IETF that might respond to the
   incoming liaison statement.  Sometimes this might require that the
   intended response is made available for review on one of the IETF
   mailing lists.

7.10.  Informing others of new or revised IETF work
   The IETF forwards all draft charters for all new and revised working
   groups and BOF session announcements to the IETF new-work mailing
   list.

   Organizational representatives may provide comments on proposed IETF
   working group charters and BOF descriptions by responding to the IESG
   mailing list at iesg@ietf.org clearly indicating their organization's
   position and the nature of their concern.  Plain-text email is
   preferred on the IESG mailing list.

   Organizational representatives may provide comments on proposed IETF
   working group charters and BOF descriptions by responding to the IESG
   mailing list at iesg@ietf.org clearly indicating their organization's
   position and the nature of their concern.  Plain-text email is
   preferred on the IESG mailing list.

7.11. Speaking for IETF (in messages & in person)
   The IETF operates based on rough consensus, which means that the
   right to speak for the IETF cannot be delegated.  The Liaison Manager
   speaks on behalf of the IETF on the subject matter of the liaison,
   but only after making sure that he or she understands the IETF
   consensus on the topic.



Bradner & Narten                                               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft              IETF Liaisoning                 October 2014


7.12. What Hat to Wear When Acting as a Liaison
   *******we need a discussion here - when should someone have "IETF" or
   "ISOC" "on their badge" when communication to a peer organization or
   attending a meeting vs having a company or national delegation
   badge*****

8. Intellectual property rights
   The IETF's copyright-related rules for are detailed in BCP 78. The
   IETF's patent-related rules are detailed in BCP 79.  All people
   submitting material to the IETF should be aware of these rules. Any
   organization with which the IETF enters a liaison relationship should
   take care to ensure that they have informed the IETF of any of their
   intellectual property rights (IPR) rules that could impact any
   messages the IETF sends or submissions the IETF makes.

8.1 Copyright
   The IETF rules on copyright in submitted documents are documented in
   BCP 78.  By submitting an Internet Draft for publication the authors
   of the Internet Draft are agreeing to those rules.  Please see BCP 78
   for the detailed rules but the following is a brief summary.

   The IETF copyright-related rules are quite simple. The IETF Trust
   obtains the non-exclusive perpetual right to publish Internet Drafts
   and RFCs from the authors of those documents. Unless a specific
   notice is included in the submission, the IETF Trust also obtains the
   right to publish the Internet Draft as a RFC and the right to produce
   derivative works based on the material in the submission. The IETF
   Trust has licensed the content of all such submissions to IETF
   participants to produce derivative works within the IETF processes.
   The IETF Trust, in theory, can license others to produce derivative
   works outside the IETF standards process (e.g., in books, educational
   materials, other standards groups, etc.) but this is a rare
   occurrence, and only done in consultation with the IETF community.

   Document authors retain all other rights.  Document authors are free
   to do anything else they wish to with their material.


8.2 Patent and patent applications
   The IETF rules relating to non-copyright intellectual property rights
   (within the IETF processes are documented in BCP 79.  By submitting
   an Internet Draft for publication the authors of the Internet Draft
   are agreeing to those rules.  Please see BCP 79 for the detailed
   rules but the following is a brief summary.

   The work of the IETF and its working groups frequently involves
   making choices about which technology to use in a particular
   situation.  Understanding all aspects of a technology, including any



Bradner & Narten                                               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft              IETF Liaisoning                 October 2014


   intellectual property rights related impacts on the use of a
   technology, is an important part of deciding what technologies to
   support.  Thus, it is important for the IETF and its working groups
   to be informed of any intellectual property rights claimed in regards
   to technologies under consideration. Thus, participants in the IETF
   process are required to disclose any of their own IPR they personally
   know about in any contribution to the IETF.

   In this context, a participant is someone who makes a contribution to
   the IETF (this includes submitting an Internet Draft, sending email
   to an IETF mailing list, and speaking during a discussion in an IETF
   working group) or otherwise doing something designed to effect the
   discussion about a technology.

   Also, in this context, "their own IPR" means any patent or patent
   application that they, their employer or their sponsor could
   potentially assert against the technology under discussion.


9. Limitation of Liability
   The IETF makes no representations with respect to and does not
   warrant the accuracy of any information or any document. Without
   limiting the foregoing, each party of liaison relationship a agrees
   to accept the terms of and reproduce any warranty disclaimers or
   limitations of liability that are included in any reproduction of
   published material made available to it under this cooperation
   framework.


10. IANA Considerations
   This document makes no requests of the IANA. [this section to be
   removed before publication]

11. Security Considerations This type of process document does not have
   any direct effect on the security of the Internet.

12. References

12.1. Normative references




12.2. Informative References
   RFCs consulted

   RFC 3113 - 3GPP-IETF Standardization Collaboration.
   RFC 3131 - 3GPP2-IETF Standardization Collaboration



Bradner & Narten                                               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft              IETF Liaisoning                 October 2014


   RFC 3975 - OMA-IETF Standardization Collaboration
   RFC 4052 - IAB Processes for Management of IETF Liaison Relationships
   RFC 4053 - Procedures for Handling Liaison Statements to and from the
      IET
   RFC 4441 - The IEEE 802/IETF Relationship
   RFC 4691 - Guidelines for Acting as an IETF Liaison to Another
      Organization
   RFC 4965 - CableLabs - IETF Standardization Collaboration
   RFC 6756 - Internet Engineering Task Force and International
      Telecommunication Union - Telecommunication Standardization Sector
      Collaboration Guidelines

   Other documents
   [Tau] The Tau of the IETF, https://www.ietf.org/tao.html

   13. Author's addresses

   Scott Bradner
   Harvard University
   8 Story St.
   Cambridge MA 02138
   USA

   email: sob@harvard.edu
   phone: +1 617 495 3864

   Thomas Narten
   IBM

   email: narten@us.ibm.com

Appendix A - Format of a liaison

A.  Contents of a Liaison Statement
   Liaison statements may be very formal or informal, depending on the
   rules of the body generating them.  Any liaison statement, however,
   will always contain certain information, much as an business letter
   does.  This information will include the following:

A.1.  Envelope Information
   The following fields detail properties of the liaison statement.

A.1.1.  From:
   The statement will indicate from what body it originates; for
   example, it may be from, an IETF WG or Area, an ITU-T Study Group,
   Working Party, or Question, etc.  In this document, this body is the
   "sender".




Bradner & Narten                                               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft              IETF Liaisoning                 October 2014


A.1.2.  To:
   The statement will indicate to which body it is.  In this document,
   his body is the "addressee".

A.1.3.  Title:
   The statement will contain a short (usually single line) statement of
   its context and content.

A.1.4.  Response Contact:
   The sender will indicate the electronic mail address to which any
   response should be sent.

A.1.5.  Technical Contact:
   The sender will indicate one or more electronic mail addresses
   (persons or lists) that may be contacted for clarification of the
   liaison statement.

A.1.6.  Purpose:
   A liaison statement generally has one of three purposes and will
   clearly state its purpose using one of the following labels:

   For Information: The liaison statement is to inform the addressee of
   something, and expects no response.

   For Comment: The liaison statement requests commentary from the
   addressee, usually within a stated time frame.

   For Action: The liaison statement requests that the addressee do
   something on the sender's behalf, usually within a stated time frame.

   In Response: The liaison statement includes a response to a liaison
   statement from the peer organization on one or more of its documents
   and expects no further response.

A.1.7.  Deadline:
   Liaison statements that request comment or action will indicate when
   he comment or action is required.  If the addressee cannot accomplish
   the request within the stated period, courtesy calls for a response
   offering a more doable deadline or an alternative course of action.

A.2.  Liaison Content
   The following fields are the substance of the liaison statement.
   IETF participants use a wide variety of systems, thus document
   formats that are not universally readable are problematic.  As a
   result, documents enclosed with the body or attachments should be in
   PDF, W3C HTML (without proprietary extensions), or ASCII text format.
   If they were originally in a proprietary format such as Microsoft
   Word, the file may be sent, but should be accompanied by a generally



Bradner & Narten                                               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft              IETF Liaisoning                 October 2014


   readable file.

A.2.1.  Body:
   As with any business letter, the liaison statement contains
   appropriate content explaining the issues or questions at hand.

A.2.2.  Attachments:
   Attachments, if enclosed, may be in the form of documents sent with
   he liaison statement or may be URLs to similar documents including
   Internet Drafts.

Appendix B - The IETF Liaison Tool

B.  Tools for Handling Liaison Statements
   Some tools have been developed for the IETF.  Development is expected
   to continue.  This section describes the basic tool and its intended
   use.

B.1.  Liaison Statements from Other SDOs, Consortia, and Fora to IETF
   The process of handling a liaison statement is more weighty than
   handling a business letter because it is important to a relationship
   with another SDO established by the IAB.  To manage liaison
   statements, the IETF will offer three electronically accessible
   facilities: a form for submission of liaison statements, a mechanism
   organizing their contents and making them accessible, and a tracking
   system.  Initially, the tracking system will be a manual procedure
   used by the liaison manager; in the future, this should be automated.

B.1.1.  Liaison Statement Submission
   The IETF Secretariat will provide an electronic method for submission
   of liaison statements.

   The liaison statement submission mechanism is a form that requests
   the information listed in Section 2.2.1 from the user.

   Submission of that information results in the following actions:

   o  creation of a display mechanism containing the envelope data in
      Section 2.2.1.1 and URLs pointing to the items from Section
      2.2.1.2, an indication whether the liaison statement has been
      replied to, and if so, on what date,

   o  the addition of a URL to the "outstanding liaison statements"
      summary mechanism,

   o  when an automated tracking system has been implemented, a tickler/
      status entry in the tracking system, assigned to the relevant
      chair or AD,



Bradner & Narten                                               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft              IETF Liaisoning                 October 2014


   o  an email to the assignee copying

      *  the liaison statement's technical contacts

      *  The supervisor of the assignee (if it is to a WG, the relevant
         ADs; if to an AD, the IETF Chair),

      *  The liaison manager for the sending SDO,

      *  an alias associated with the assignee (WG/BOF or other open
         mailing list, Area Directorate, IESG, IAB, etc.)

   This email should contain the URL to the liaison statement mechanism,
   text indicating that the liaison statement has arrived, requests
   appropriate consideration, and if a deadline is specified, a reply by
   the deadline.

   The assignee has the capability of interacting with the liaison
   manager and the tracking system (once implemented), including
   replying, changing dates, reassignment, closing the liaison statement
   process, etc.

   The liaison manager or tracking system's "tickle" function
   periodically reminds the assignee by email that the liaison statement
   has not yet been closed.  This tickle email copies all of the above
   except the associated mailing alias.

   B.1.2.  Mechanism for Displaying Liaison Statements

   The IETF site contains a section for current liaison statement
   activity.  This consists of:
   o  A submission mechanism,

   o  A status/management mechanism for each active or recently closed
      liaison statement, and zero or more associated files.

   The status/management mechanism contains a simple frame, showing the
   title of the liaison statement, the URL for its mechanism, and the
   organizations it is from and to.

   The display for liaison statement itself contains:

   o  the liaison statement envelope information (Section 2.2.1),

   o  direct content (Section 2.2.1),

   o  URLs for the various associated files




Bradner & Narten                                               [Page 21]

Internet-Draft              IETF Liaisoning                 October 2014


   o  current status of the liaison statement: to whom it is assigned,
      its due date, and its status,

   o  pointer to the liaison manager and tracking system entry for the
      liaison statement.

   o  reply-generation mechanism (see Section 3.2.2.4)












































Bradner & Narten                                               [Page 22]
