

    Internet Draft                                 Walter Weiss 
    Expiration: October 2000                           Lucent 
    File: draft-durham-nim-req-00.txt              David Durham 
                                                       Intel 
                                              Andrea Westerinen 
                                                       SNIA 
    
    
    
    
    
    
                  Network Information Model Requirements 
    
                           Last Updated: 3/9/00 
 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC-2119].










  
Weiss et al.                                                  [Page 1] 

Internet Draft  Network Information Model Requirements      March 2000 
 
 
    
   Status of this Memo................................................1 
   Conventions used in this document..................................1 
   Abstract...........................................................3 
   1. Introduction....................................................3 
   2. Motivation......................................................5 
   3. Specific Requirements for a Network Information Model:..........5 
   4. Glossary of Terms..............................................12 
   5. References.....................................................13 
   6. Author Information and Acknowledgments.........................14 











































  
Weiss et al.             Expires October 2000                 [Page 2] 

Internet Draft  Network Information Model Requirements      March 2000 
 
 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   Recently, a diverse set of technologies has been deployed to manage 
   networking products. With some technologies, such as web-based 
   management or proprietary text scripts, the data structures are 
   defined in the absence of standards. With other technologies, such 
   as MIBs, PIBs, or LDAP schemas, data structures are often defined 
   many times over for the same application. For example, MIBs and LDAP 
   schemas are being defined for DHCP, and for DiffServ, data 
   structures are being defined in the form of MIBs, PIBs, and LDAP 
   Schema. The problem is that this set of specifications often 
   competes with itself and other methods that are used to manage 
   devices. What is required is a common representation of data (an 
   "information model") from which technology-specific data models can 
   be derived to suit application-specific needs. Irrespective of the 
   number of technologies that are deployed to manage networking 
   devices, the industry would benefit from a more consistent 
   specification of data structures across these technologies and the 
   IETF would benefit from a reduction in the costs associated with 
   defining these data structures. 
    
   This document describes the requirements of an information model 
   suitable for the modeling of network management constructs. The 
   purpose of an information model is to represent data in a manner 
   that is independent of technology and implementation. An Information 
   model is used to unambiguously describe and define information, as 
   well as the relationships between the entities that it defines. From 
   this idealized information model, implementation-specific data 
   models (which are bound to specific types of repositories and data 
   storage and retrieval mechanisms, protocols, APIs, etc.) can be 
   derived so as to avoid divergence of management information 
   definitions between implementations.  
    
   This document will describe requirements for the construction of an 
   information model and the representation of basic constructs and 
   data. These requirements are generally described in the areas of 
   reusability, extensibility, associability, class naming, instance 
   naming, expressiveness of data definitions through constraints, 
   inheritance, etc. The purpose of this document is to ensure that the 
   subsequent documents that describe the conventions for the 
   information model and the information model itself are complete and 
   consistent with the requirements stated herein. 
    
1. Introduction 
    
    
   As the Internet has grown and flourished, new technologies have been 
   developed and deployed at a feverish pace. In the traditional IETF 
   operations and management model, the working group developing the 
   technology has also defined the data elements (usually in the form 
   of MIBs) necessary to monitor and manage the technology. While this 
  
Weiss et al.             Expires October 2000                 [Page 3] 

Internet Draft  Network Information Model Requirements      March 2000 
 
 
   has been very successful, it has also led to a divergence of 
   definitions and structures. In many cases, similar management 
   elements that are to be applied to a specific technology have been 
   completely reinvented in different working groups because of a lack 
   of awareness. In other cases, duplication has occurred because of a 
   subtle variation in the definition of the element or because the 
   relationship between the data element and other elements is new or 
   different. Divergence of management definitions and structures has 
   resulted in an environment where programming effort is spent in the 
   repetitive correlation, translation and data organization associated 
   with each data management technology, instead of in doing actual 
   management. 
    
   There are three major benefits of an information model. First, it 
   has a unique ability to consistently describe and organize various 
   network management concepts and data for reuse across different 
   applications. Second, it unifies information describing different 
   aspects of managed objects (e.g., configuration and statistical 
   data).  
    
   In order to realize the benefits of an information model, each 
   addition to the model needs to be scrutinized to ensure that the 
   data being added is either new, or represents a refinement of 
   existing data that have already been defined in the model. As such, 
   the primary objective of this document is to specify the 
   requirements for an information model that organizes information to 
   achieve maximum reusability, as well as providing consistency in the 
   information represented across various protocols and services. 
    
   It is the goal of a network information model to act as a 
   synchronizing root for other groups that are defining network 
   management information so that consistency and reusability can be 
   obtained across working groups. Just as MIB-I and MIB-II 
   successfully standardized well-known constructs in the SNMP data 
   model, this document will define the requirements for a more broadly 
   applicable information model. This information model can then be 
   expanded and exploited by a variety of other working groups within 
   the IETF, and adapted to their transport-specific requirements. This 
   will in turn produce domain-specific data models that are all 
   derived from a common network information model. A key property of 
   an information model is its universal applicability. Once the 
   information model is established, standardized mappings can be 
   developed for transforming the information model into specific data 
   models, potentially including LDAP schema, MIBs, PIBs, and 
   technology specific models used to implement low-level policies.  
     
    
   This document only describes the requirements for the definition of 
   common attributes, mechanisms and conventions for their organization 
   into reusable data structures, and mechanisms for representing the 
   attribute's relationships to other attributes and structures. The 
   overall goal is to allow these attributes to be equally applicable 
   to protocols, programmatic interfaces, and repositories. 
  
Weiss et al.             Expires October 2000                 [Page 4] 

Internet Draft  Network Information Model Requirements      March 2000 
 
 
    
    
2. Motivation 
    
   1. Problem: With the exception of the Policy Framework's Core 
   Information Model [PFCIM], no high-level network configuration 
   information model exists in the IETF that is implementation-
   independent. Implementation independence yields a model that simply 
   represents network constructs and data, relationships between 
   constructs, and data constraints without regard to a particular data 
   model, protocol, or repository.  
    
   2. Problem: The Distributed Management Task Force's (DMTF's) CIM 
   (Common Information Model) [CIM] is not the optimal choice for a 
   network information model. CIM provides no mechanism for defining 
   class/model level constraints or for performing secure operations. 
   CIM also has dictated a naming scheme that cannot be mapped into all 
   implementations. Finally, the DMTF does not have the subject matter 
   experts in networking, as does the IETF. Nevertheless, there is 
   value in the modeling work done in the DMTF in terms of the 
   definition of high-level constructs.  Thus, CIM should be viewed as 
   a starting point for development of a network information model 
   within the IETF. 
    
   3. Problem: Current modeling representations are insufficient due to 
   a lack of available tools, lack of a textual representation for ease 
   of data exchange, or the expressiveness of the representations. In 
   addition, for some or all of these representations, there is no 
   constraint language, no suitable class naming conventions, no 
   support for attribute level bindings, no ability to effectively 
   create implementation-specific models, no ability to model 
   associations, etc.  Unfortunately, some are also dependent on 
   proprietary or high-level graphical tools. It will be up to the 
   working group to determine what tool set would be most appropriate 
   in meeting the set of specific requirements listed below. 
    
3. Specific Requirements for a Network Information Model: 
    
   1. The information model will need conventions for uniquely 
   identifying the classes (constructs) and attributes (properties or 
   data) that it defines, as well as complimentary classes developed by 
   other working groups. Class naming and the ability to uniquely 
   identify defined attributes is an important part of any information 
   model. It is important that attribute naming conventions be 
   developed that can be used equally effectively for reuse as well as 
   to extend existing classes. The requirements will develop mechanisms 
   that are complimentary to object-oriented naming conventions while 
   not requiring the use of a central naming authority. There is a need 
   to name class/attribute DEFINITIONS (as opposed to instances) 
   uniquely without the need for a central naming authority (i.e., one 
   mechanism might be to use GUIDs to identify classes/attributes). 
    

  
Weiss et al.             Expires October 2000                 [Page 5] 

Internet Draft  Network Information Model Requirements      March 2000 
 
 
   2. Experience has shown that different technologies (and even 
   different implementations of the same technology) use different 
   mechanisms for binding attribute groups to keys, instance 
   identifiers, indexing schemes, or other data instance naming 
   mechanisms. This model will avoid defining keys or rules for key 
   bindings, unless no other alternative for interoperable operation 
   can be defined.  Mechanisms will be provided for supporting keys for 
   mappings to various technologies, as the need for instance 
   identification is universal. Instance naming needs to be flexible as 
   implementations vary. That is, keys can be created in a number of 
   ways, we assume they exist, and uniqueness within a context is 
   required, but we will not force a particular keying mechanism.  It 
   will however, be important to understand how a particular 
   implementation defines its keys and thereby names instances.  
   Without this information, mapping between implementations will be 
   difficult or impossible.  
    
   3. Exclusively using graphical models such is not suitable as there 
   is a need for textual representations. Graphical models are also not 
   easy for a computer to parse and require expensive tools. Thus, it 
   is necessary that this information model chooses a textual 
   representation suitable for representing an information model, 
   completely & unambiguously, and is readily parseable by a computer 
   program. Graphical methods can always be used to visualize this 
   result. Ideally, the textual representation also has some tools 
   associated with it. It should be up to the WG to decide the most 
   appropriate data definition language based on these requirements. 
    
   4. To facilitate reuse, all data elements (attributes) of the 
   information model must be clearly defined in terms of 
   characteristics, scope and relationships to other attributes. This 
   can be achieved through data types and value bounding which should 
   be explicitly defined for attributes, classes, and associations 
   between NIM constructs.  Also, the ability to specify constraints is 
   needed.  When complete, the resulting model must be completely 
   unambiguous.  
    
   Constraints refer to the ability to completely specify the 
   characteristics of one attribute/class/association or a set of these 
   and how these constructs interact with and relate to others within 
   the model. If a concept is defined in a broad or high-level manner 
   in the information model, then it is more likely that different 
   implementations that define their own mappings of it will be 
   inconsistent. This undermines the basic benefit of the information 
   model. 
    
   The subsequent list of constraints, while not necessarily complete, 
   is a minimal set of elements required for a more complete 
   specification of attributes. 
    
   Where the data modeling language is not capable of specifying the 
   constraint, the information model is required to provide the most 
   precise specification of attributes possible. Further, when a 
  
Weiss et al.             Expires October 2000                 [Page 6] 

Internet Draft  Network Information Model Requirements      March 2000 
 
 
   specific mapping of the information model to a specific data model 
   is defined and the target data modeling language has a less robust 
   mechanism for expressing constraints, additional documentation 
   should accompany the data model to minimize confusion. If an 
   information model representation is not capable of expressing a new 
   kind of constraint, then this new constraint should be added to the 
   information model in a well-defined manner. 
    
   Need for data-level constraints:  
        * Constraints for attributes. E.g., Attribute X is an integer 
   that can have values in the range 10-100 and 234-235. 
        * Constraints for classes.  E.g., Class A should be created 
   when Class BÆs attribute x is "OK".  
        * Constraints for class/attribute associations. Allow instance 
   class A to be associated with instance of class B only if not 
   already associated with class C. 
        * Constraints for attribute transactions, attribute A and 
   attribute B have transactional dependencies (need to be modified 
   together under a given context).  
        * Another common characteristic of an attribute is its ability 
   to be modified. While the majority of attributes can be retrieved 
   and altered, for some attributes, such as counters or hard wired MAC 
   addresses, it is only possible to retrieve the value but not to 
   alter it. There may even be instances where an attribute value can 
   be altered, but not retrieved. To facilitate consistent 
   interpretation, each attribute definition must specify whether the 
   attribute is read-only, read-write, or write-only. 
        * There are many situations where an attribute is not required 
   for the complete definition of the class. In other cases, an 
   attribute is crucial for the definition of the service. Therefore, 
   each attribute in the information model must specify whether an 
   attribute is optional or required. 
        * In some cases, there are attributes within the same class 
   that have interdependencies. For example, two attributes together 
   may define a x/y coordinate. There may be more extreme forms of 
   relationships where one attribute may affect the value or range of 
   values for another attribute. One such relationship exists in IPSEC, 
   where the type of security algorithm determines the range of 
   possible values for other attributes such as the corresponding key 
   size. The most extreme form of multi-attribute relationships is a 
   set of attributes that are dependent on each other for consistency. 
   For example, a class may have two attributes, one expressing a date 
   and the other expressing a day of the week. When the day of the week 
   is changed the date should change simultaneously, and visa versa to 
   prevent inconsistencies. Irrespective of the complexity of the 
   relationship between attributes, the information model must express 
   the relationship between attributes.   
 
    
   5. Need for an association mechanism.  Associations describe 
   relationships between classes.  Some examples are dependency or 
   whole-part relationships.  There are a few things to note about 
   associations: 1) relationships are primarily between only two class 
  
Weiss et al.             Expires October 2000                 [Page 7] 

Internet Draft  Network Information Model Requirements      March 2000 
 
 
   instances; 2) the same relationship may be repeated for a particular 
   instance, associating that instance with others; and 3) since 
   relationships are usually implemented as classes, they can sometimes 
   have data as well as methods. An example of each of the previous 
   points is that a device has various types of software associated 
   with its configuration, operational and instrumentation software are 
   just a few examples.  So, software can be "associated" with one or 
   more devices, and devices can have one or more pieces of software.  
   The use of the software for the device can be described as part of 
   the association. [Note: While at the information model level 
   associations should be modeled as separate classes, some data models 
   may only support associations as inline references that are part of 
   a data class. It is noted that separate association classes force 
   data classes to be maximally reusable, as the data class then makes 
   no assumptions about how it can be related to other classes.] 
    
   6. Inheritance model: Inheritance allows the information model to 
   avoid redundant data definitions among peer constructs, and define 
   appropriate levels of abstraction and complexity.  Single 
   inheritance is recommended to optimize the model and its processing 
   requirements. It is not required that the entire information model 
   be derived from a single root. Those data models that require a 
   single root, and a key binding consistency relative to the root, 
   should provide for these requirements in the mapping of the 
   information model to the specific data model.  
  
   7. The information model will define a general mechanism for 
   representing possible access rights to attributes, classes or groups 
   of these. The information model will not define what set of access 
   rights a given class or attribute should have. These should be 
   defined in the context of specific applications. In addition, some 
   mappings of the information model to specific data models may not 
   support access rights. For example, while CIM does not support 
   read/write semantics and MIBs have no semantics for user rights, 
   LDAP schemas can support both. Therefore, it is up to the mapping of 
   the information model to a specific data model to determine what, if 
   any, security rights are appropriate. 
    
   8. Mechanisms for describing the fundamental data types of 
   attributes, as well as describing arrays of these fundamental types, 
   are required. Possibly, the binary representation of the attributes 
   may be specified.   
    
   9. Arbitrary groupings and combinations. There is a requirement that 
   data be defined completely and unambiguously within the information 
   model, utilizing the representation, constraint and encapsulation 
   mechanisms discussed earlier. The concept of general containers, 
   bags, groups, etc. are still allowed as arbitrators, but they must 
   always encapsulate completely defined (meaning constrained) data.  
   10. When hundreds of classes may be defined in the information 
   model, there is a need to create "standard" combinations of classes 
   and associations, describing common scenarios or data models.  It 
   should be possible to define these combinations of classes and 
  
Weiss et al.             Expires October 2000                 [Page 8] 

Internet Draft  Network Information Model Requirements      March 2000 
 
 
   associations in the information model.  And, for efficiency, the 
   combinations should be instantiated, retrieved or manipulated as a 
   whole.  These standard combinations would be useful in reducing the 
   arbitrariness of which classes to use, to solve a particular 
   management modeling problem.  
    
   11. In an object-oriented implementation, a class' methods describe 
   the actions or behaviors that are appropriate for, and can be 
   invoked against, an instance.  Methods allow the specification of 
   return codes and input/output parameters, further influencing the 
   specific action or behavior. 
    
   In an information model, these concepts may be described as 
   "signatures" or as fully-defined methods.  (The correct approach 
   must be determined as work on the Network Information Model 
   proceeds.) The word, "signature", means the specification and 
   grouping of attributes within an object, while "method" means a 
   specific and predefined format and syntax. The goal of either a 
   method or signature is to describe and invoke well-defined behaviors 
   -describing the intent of the behavior, return code/status and 
   parameters. 
    
   Note that this is not a requirement for get/set or 
   constructor/destructor methods, which are very much implementation 
   dependent. It is a requirement to allow the definition of 
   input/output parameters and return codes for behaviors and actions, 
   and then specifically invoke their execution. Examples are 
   "save/restore configuration" or a "reset" request issued to a 
   network device. The ability to pass parameters, establish well-known 
   return codes ("0" for successful, "1" for error or "2" for not 
   supported)and invoke a behavior at a particular point in time are 
   invaluable. 
    
   In reality, few signatures or methods may be defined.  This is 
   because any specified action/behavior must be well-understood and 
   consistently defined, in order to be abstracted and standardized in 
   the information model. 
    
   12. It is assumed that the information model will model both static 
   and infrequently changing data, as well as highly dynamic and state-
   dependent attributes.  Since data update is assumed to occur, the 
   model should be capable of defining subscriptions to subsets of the 
   information.  In this way, either data push or data pull may occur 
   to acquire updated information.  
    
   13. As this information model will likely be mapped to a variety of 
   data models and implementations, it is necessary that mechanisms be 
   provided that ensure compliance to the information model. [Note: The 
   specific requirement for this assurance is TBD and will be 
   addressed, or removed, after further team discussion.]  
    
   14. As the information model will be deployed across a variety of 
   implementations, it is recognized that not all implementations will 
  
Weiss et al.             Expires October 2000                 [Page 9] 

Internet Draft  Network Information Model Requirements      March 2000 
 
 
   be capable of supporting the model completely. Divergences from the 
   model should be expressed in the form of a capability set that 
   describes exactly what subset of the model is supported by a 
   particular implementation or system. Further, as capability 
   distribution is a service, the information model must specify a 
   mechanism that allows for a consistent representation of 
   capabilities across various management technologies.  
    
   15. The information model must allow classes to contain the 
   attribute (property) set of other classes. This will maximize reuse 
   and allow data to be completely described with minimum redundancy. 
   For example, Class XYZ can contain as attributes Class ABC and Class 
   DEF.  The result would be that Class XYZÆs attribute set would be a 
   superset of Classes ABC and DEF.  
     
   Class containment should act as a mechanism for easily defining and 
   describing class aggregations. LDAP schema definitions currently 
   have the opposite behavior and instead constitute attribute merging. 
   An information model should not have this same limitation. For 
   example, in NIM, one may create a class called IPADDRESSMASK that 
   defines and constrains IP subnetting. Using NIM, one then could 
   create a new Filter Class that looks something like this: 
    
   class Filter: 
   { 
        IPADDRESSMASK   SourceIP; 
        IPADDRESSMASK   DestinationIP; 
        PORTRANGE       SourcePort; 
        PORTRANGE       DestinationPort; 
        PROTOCOLID      Protocol; 
   }; 
    
   Where IPADDRESSMASK is defined as follows: 
    
   Class IPADDRESSMASK: 
   { 
        UINT32          IPAddress; 
        UINT32          SubnetMask; 
   }; 
    
   Here the IPADDRESSMASK classes are not to be merged into one 
   attribute, but remain two individually identifiable "contained" 
   classes, one useful for defining the source, another for defining 
   the destination of traffic in the context of the new class called 
   Filter.  
    
   It is important that all data models have standard mappings of this 
   strictly definitional model into their data model-specific forms.  
    
   16. There are some attributes that, when changed, only take effect 
   when the service is brought down or the system is rebooted. There 
   are also mechanisms deployed that depend on polling to cause a 
   modification of an attribute value to take effect. The model must 
  
Weiss et al.             Expires October 2000                [Page 10] 

Internet Draft  Network Information Model Requirements      March 2000 
 
 
   fundamentally distinguish between the retrieval of attributes from 
   the assignment of attributes, as these functions can often be 
   asynchronous depending on the data and the technology being used to 
   manipulate it. 
    
   17. The information model must allow for forward and backward 
   compatibility as the model evolves. In addition, the model must 
   support the ability to be extended for specific implementations in a 
   manner that will allow multiple different extensions to coexist both 
   from a programmatic and storage perspective. 
    










































  
Weiss et al.             Expires October 2000                [Page 11] 

Internet Draft  Network Information Model Requirements      March 2000 
 
 
    
4. Glossary of Terms 
    
   NIM: Network Information Model. 
    
   CIM:  Common Information Model proposed by the Distributed Mangement 
   Task Force (DMTF). 
    
   Constraint: A mechanism for bounding an attribute or class value to 
   allowed values/ranges/targets/bitmaps etc. 
    
   Data Type: A mechanism for identifying the binary representation of 
   an atomic (as opposed to composite) attribute. 
    
   Definition Name: Unique name used to identify an attribute or class 
   definition. 
    
   Instance Name: Key: Index: Name used to identify an instance of an 
   attribute or class (recognized but not explicitly defined by this 
   WG). 
    
   NIM Attribute: An atomic or composite data type that is fully 
   described, typed, uniquely named, and bounded via constraints. 
    
   NIM Class: Synonymous with attribute although typically refers to an 
   aggregation or set of attributes which can also inherit properties 
   from parent classes to optimize data definitions. 
    
   Information Model: Universally applicable model for representing and 
   describing information that is not perverted by the shortcomings of 
   a specific implementation.  
    
   Data Model: An implementation specific or implementation constrained 
   derivation of an information model. One information model can be 
   used to develop multiple consistent data models. 
    
    
    
    














  
Weiss et al.             Expires October 2000                [Page 12] 

Internet Draft  Network Information Model Requirements      March 2000 
 
 
 
5. References 
    
    
   [IANA]  http://www.isi.edu/in-notes/iana/assignments/port-numbers 
    
   [CIM]   http://www.dmtf.org/spec/cims.html 
    
   [PFCIM] Moore, B., and E. Ellesson, J. Strassner, "Policy Framework 
           Core Information Model", draft-ietf-policy-core-info-model-
           02.txt, October 1999. 










































  
Weiss et al.             Expires October 2000                [Page 13] 

Internet Draft  Network Information Model Requirements      March 2000 
 
 
6. Author Information and Acknowledgments 
    
   Special thanks to John Strassner for his many helpful comments and 
   significant edits to this document.  
    
    
   Walter Weiss 
       Lucent Technologies 
       300 Baker Ave. 
       Concord, MA. 01742 
       Phone: +1-978-287-9130 
       Fax: +1-978-287-9050 
       E-mail: wweiss@lucent.com 
    
   David Durham 
       Intel 
       2111 NE 25th Avenue 
       Hillsboro, OR 97124 
       Phone:  503.264.6232 
       David.Durham@intel.com  
    
   Andrea Westerinen 
       Storage Networking Industry Association 
       td@snia.org 
       425-891-8407 
       2570 W. El Camino Real 
       Mountain View, CA  94040 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



















  
Weiss et al.             Expires October 2000                [Page 14] 

