





                                                             J. Cuellar
Internet Draft                                                 M. Ersue
Document: draft-cuellar-geopriv-reqs-00.txt                  Siemens AG
Expires: 2002                                             November 2001


                          Geopriv requirements


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   Location-based services, navigation applications, emergency services,
   management of equipment in the field, and other location-dependent
   services need geographic location information about a target (user,
   resource or other entity). A protocol will be designed to securely
   transfer the location information to a location server and to
   authorize the location server to release securely the information to
   a client.

   This document describes the requirements for such a geopriv protocol,
   focusing on authorization, integrity and privacy.

   The main principle is that the owner of the target may specify which
   location information may be released to whom under which further
   conditions.


   Cuellar, Ersue          Expires May 2002                          1

                         Geopriv Requirements            November 2001

Table of Contents

   1. Overview.......................................................2
   2. Conventions used in this document..............................3
   3. Requirements...................................................3
      3.1. Entities and Data Flows...................................3
      3.2. Location..................................................6
         3.2.1. Location information formats.........................8
      3.3. Identity of Users, Clients................................8
         3.3.1. Public Identities....................................8
         3.3.2. Private Identifiers..................................8
         3.3.3. Credentials for Authentication and Authorization.....9
      3.4. Policies.................................................11
      3.5. Actions to be secured....................................11
         3.5.1. Authentication Requirements.........................11
      3.6. Transport Requirements...................................11
   4. Security Considerations.......................................12
   5. References....................................................12
   6. Author's Addresses............................................12
   7. Full Copyright Statement......................................12

1. Overview

   Some applications (called in the sequel "location service clients",
   or simply "clients") need geographic location information about an
   entity (user, mobile node, resource, etc. in the sequel called
   "target").

   Location information may be regarded, independently of any concrete
   syntax, as a tuple of information:

     (latitude, longitude, altitude [, current time, velocity, next
         position, next time, ...])

   where optional parameters (perhaps user-defined) are included in
   square brackets.

   Location information is first sent from the target to the location
   server. Then the location server filters the information and sends
   filtered location information to the clients, in agreement with the
   explicit consent of the target. The main principle behind the
   protocol to be defined is that the "owner" of the target information
   specifies which location information may be released to whom under
   which conditions. Such an assertion is called a "location information
   policy" or simply a "policy".

   For instance a target may give location information to the location
   server as a triplet (latitude, longitude, altitude) and present an
   identifier of the target (a NAI, an IP-Address, a pseudonym, etc.,
   with proper credentials) together with a policy, which describes

   Cuellar, Ersue          Expires May 2002                          2

                         Geopriv Requirements            November 2001

   which abstraction of the location information may be given to which
   clients under which conditions. In our example, the user of the
   mobile node may declare that the members of a certain group may know
   on which time zone he currently is.

2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC-2119].

   Note that the requirements specified in this document are to be used
   to discuss possible geopriv protocols. As such, the requirements
   language frequently refers to capabilities of these protocols. For
   example, requiring that the protocol support integrity is NOT the
   same thing as requiring that all protocol traffic be authenticated.

3. Requirements

3.1. Entities and Data Flows

   There are apparently two ways to securely transfer the location
   information from a target to a client. One is using a "location
   server" as an intermediate node, and the other is a direct transfer
   between target and client. We will argue that the second case is a
   special case of the first one.

   A "location server" receives location information from a target and
   policies from the owner of the target. On the other hand, the
   location server receives client requests for specific targets or for
   classes of targets. The location server implements security and
   policy enforcing functionality. He uses a private repository to
   securely store this information (location information, policies,
   requests).

   The "direct" solution may be seen as a special case of the "location
   server solution" when the location server (or agent) is located in
   the same equipment as the target. In that case, the target equipment
   (target plus location server) itself is sending the location
   information directly to the client. For this particular case, the
   interface between target and service location server MAY be a private
   interface and MAY comply with the geopriv protocol or not.

   Further, a public (open) repository may be used for signed policies,
   identifiers, and perhaps also requests.

      Target:
         The entity whose location is desired by the client. Initially,
         the location is known by the target itself or by an owner of
         the target. The protocol does not specify how the target or the
         owner learns the location information. On the other hand, the
         protocol specifies how the location information is sent from

   Cuellar, Ersue          Expires May 2002                          3

                         Geopriv Requirements            November 2001

         the target or owner to the client, via an intermediate trusted
         node, the server.

      Location Server:
         software and/or hardware entity offering Location Service
         capabilities. On one side, the Location Server receives and
         processes Location Information, policies, and identifiers from
         targets. On the other side, it accepts services requests from
         clients, and responds sending back Filtered Location
         Information of the targets. The Location Service server may
         consist of one or more Location Service components, and may be
         distributed.

      Client:
         software and/or hardware entity that interacts with a Location
         Server for the purpose of obtaining location information for
         one or more Mobile Nodes. One client may be distributed.

      Owner of the target:
         An entity that has the authorization to decide the policies
         that apply to the location information of the target (for
         instance, equipment in the field). Most frequently, the owner
         of the target is the target itself. One target may have several
         owners and one owner may have several targets. The owner is in
         possession of credentials showing that he is owner of the
         identifier of the target.

      Open repository:
         A repository where signed policies, identifiers, and perhaps
         also requests are stored. Several policy servers may use the
         same repository or the repository may be distributed or
         replicated.

   Figure 1 presents the entities of the protocol and the data flows
   between them. (The data flows MAY be one-step message exchanges, or
   multi-step sub-protocols). The data flows to be specified by the
   protocol are:

      LI (Location Information): The target (or an owner of the target)
         sends location information to the location server.

         Also some network entity, properly authenticated and authorized
         by the network, may send the Location Information to the
         Location Server. This could be some location detection function
         in the access network. The authentication /authorization
         requirements for this case are for further discussion. This
         case is different from the owner of the target, since there is
         no close relationship between this network entity and this
         particular target.

      FLI (Filtered Location Information): The location server sends
         filtered location information to the client.


   Cuellar, Ersue          Expires May 2002                          4

                         Geopriv Requirements            November 2001

      Pol (Policy): An owner of the target (or in particular, the target
         itself) sends a Policy to the location server

      PolI (Policy Information): the server informs the client which
         data type(s) are available for filtered location information
         for a given target. This mechanism MUST be able to be invoked
         by the client before he sends a LRequest.

      LRequest (Location Information Request): the client requests
         location information from a given set of targets. In this
         request the client MUST be able to select which location
         information data type it prefers. The client MUST also be able
         to specify the need for periodic position updates.




                +---------+     SPol   +-----------+
           LD   | Target  |***********>| Open      |
         ******>|         |            | Policy    |
                | Owner   |----+       | Repository|
                +---------+    |       +-----------+
                  ^       |    |            *
               LD *     LI|    |            * SPol
                  *       |    |            V
             +---------+  |    |  Pol  +---------+-----------+
        LD   |         |  |    +------>| Location| Private   |
      ******>| Target  |  V            | Server  |           |
             |         |-------------->| (Agent) | Repository|
             +---------+        LI     +---------+-----------+
                  ^                     ^ |    |
                  *             LRequest| |FLI |PolI
                  *                     | V    V
                  *                    +---------+
                  *                    |         |
                  ********************>| Client  |
                      Service          |         |
                                       +---------+


                   Figure 1: The Entities and Data Flows
           Normal arrows ("--->") MUST be part of the protocol,
                starred arrows ("***>") are probably out of
             scope of the protocol, as described in the text.

   The following data flow could be specified by the protocol:

      SPol (Signed Policy): As an alternative to Pol, the owner of the
         target may write a policy and place it in the Open Repository.
         The entities access the repository via SPol.

   The following data flows are part of the general context, but
   probably will be left out of scope of the geopriv protocol:

   Cuellar, Ersue          Expires May 2002                          5

                         Geopriv Requirements            November 2001


      LD (Location Data): the target or/and the owner of the target
         obtain the location data for the target.

      Service: (Service Information, Negotiation and Delivery): The
         target (or the owner of the target) and the client exchange
         information about the service and negotiate it. The client
         provides service delivery to the target and accounting or
         billing date, as necessary.

      Req. 1.  The protocol MUST support the model of Figure 1.

            In particular, the protocol MUST specify the following data
            flows: LI, FLI, Pol, LRequest, and PolI.

      Req. 2.  The protocol MAY specify the data flow SPol.

      Req. 3.  The protocol SHOULD NOT specify the data flow LD,
            Service.

      Req. 4.  The protocol MAY specify the data flow used for Server
            Discovery

      Req. 5.  The protocol MAY specify the format of signed policies
            and identifiers that may be passed to the location server by
            other means besides the data flow Pol. For instance, such
            signed policies may be stored in a public (open) repository.

            This repository could also be used for location information
            requests from the clients. In that case, the protocol MAY
            specify the format of signed requests.

            The protocol MAY specify the data flow SPol, used to access
            the open repository. In that case if SHOULD also specify the
            access control to the repository, in order to avoid denial
            of service attacks by erasing information of the repository.

3.2. Location

   Location has usually two or three space coordinates -- say,
   (latitude, longitude, altitude) or just (latitude, longitude). The
   units to measure location may be fixed-point arithmetic, or discrete
   (street address or time zone). It may be only 1-dimensional (distance
   to a fixed reference point, time zone) or it may contain besides the
   space coordinate(s) other different kinds of information, including
   for instance time information or velocity. Thus location information
   determines a point or a set of points in an n-dimensional space, n =
   1, 2, 3 or more.

   Location Information has a limited range of values for the same
   reason it has limited precision -- because digital systems represent
   numbers with a finite number of bits. But also the customer policies
   may insist that the location information is presented to the client

   Cuellar, Ersue          Expires May 2002                          6

                         Geopriv Requirements            November 2001

   with a low accuracy. In general, a location value is not interpreted
   as a single point in space (not even as the best approximation in a
   discrete grid of points) but as a region in space. The space regions
   determined by different location values may overlap.

   Notice that accuracy is not a component of the location. (In
   particular, notice that accuracy alone gives no information at all
   where or how an object is). Accuracy is not a location information,
   but rather a modifier of location information (telling that a point
   representation should be interpreted as a region in space).

   Location may be represented in many different ways, that is, using
   different "location data types". The definition of a location data
   type includes both syntax (format) and semantics (intended meaning),
   but we will leave any syntactic details to the protocol document.

   Basic types of location data types are:

        geodesic datum (i.e. WGS84 in a concrete representation)
        latitude, longitude, altitude
        country, state, province, city, street, street number, building,
            floor, room
        time zone

   Abstracting away from the concrete syntax, the information itself
   will be called "location information".

   Two apparently different data types may contain the same information
   if it is possible to transform one data type into the other and vice-
   versa without information loss.

   One location data type DT1 may contain more location information than
   another DT2 in at least two different senses:

      - DT1 may have the same dimensions as DT2 has, plus some extra
         ones. (For instance, DT1 contains time information, while DT2
         does not).

      - DT1 may be more accurate than DT2.

   In general, if DT1 has more information than DT2, then there is one a
   function that "translates correctly" from DT1 to DT2. This type of
   conversion will be called an "abstraction". During an abstraction,
   information can be lost, but not gained. Thus an abstraction is a
   filtering of information. For instance there are abstraction
   functions from both data types "(latitude, longitude, altitude)" and
   "(country, state, province, city)" to the data types "(country,
   state)" and "time zone", but not vice-versa.

   Notice that if the space regions determined by different location
   values of DT2 do not overlap, then there is at most one abstraction
   from DT1 to DT2. If the space regions of DT2 overlap, then usually
   there is some choice, which can be given by a (pseudo-) random

   Cuellar, Ersue          Expires May 2002                          7

                         Geopriv Requirements            November 2001

   function. Obfuscation (intentionally make the location values less
   accurate by adding randomness) together with lower accuracy, is
   exactly an example of this.

   If DT1 does not have more information than DT2, then there is no
   function that "translates correctly" from DT1 to DT2. In other words:
   there are many functions that translate from DT1 to DT2, but all
   introduce some degree of error. We believe that this kind of
   functions should be avoided. (For further discussion).

3.2.1. Location information formats

      Req. 6.  The protocol MUST define at least one location data type
            (both syntax and semantics) that MUST be supported by all
            geopriv entities.

      Req. 7.   At least one data type MUST use WGS84 geodetic datum as
            reference system.

      Req. 8.   When transmitting location information, (LI and LIF in
            Figure 1), the sender and the receiver MUST agree on the
            data type of the location information. The protocol MAY
            specify that the data type information is part of the same
            message as the location information object or that sender
            and receiver have agreed on it before the actual data
            transfer.

3.3. Identity of Users, Clients

3.3.1. Public Identities

   If A has some information about a public identifier "ID" and A
   discloses this information to B, then B may associate this
   information with the same entity as A did. In this way, B may
   accumulate information about the entity labeled by "ID".

   A public identity is a well-known label that identifies an entity for
   a (rather large) group of entities.

   A public identity may be the subscription identity at the home domain
   (if applicable), a well-known identity (name, address or Tel Number),
   etc.

   An entity may regard the disclosure of his public identity (in
   connection with some activity of him, his location or other
   attribute) as a violation of his privacy right.

3.3.2. Private Identifiers

   In order to remain anonymous, an entity may use private identifiers.
   The idea is that private identifiers convey less information than
   public identities, are meaningful to a smaller amount of entities, or
   are meaningful only for a quite short period of time. Thus if A has

   Cuellar, Ersue          Expires May 2002                          8

                         Geopriv Requirements            November 2001

   some information about a private identifier "ID" and A discloses this
   information to B, then it is quite probable that B may not associate
   this information with any identifier that he currently knows.

      One-time identifier
         an identifier that is used only for a "session". Two
         occurrences of the same one-time-identifier on different
         sessions may not correspond to the same user, and may not imply
         a relation between the two occurrences)

      Pseudonym
         an identifier chosen by an entity with the intention of using
         it on several sessions.

         If the identity and the corresponding credentials are well
         chosen, two occurrences of the same pseudonym correspond to the
         same user, or, if not, imply a relation between the two users.

   The two preceding identifiers may be used as identities, at least for
   a small period of time or by a small group of entities. The next type
   of identifier may not be used as an identity, since it applies to
   many different entities:

      Role identifier
         ("administrator", "member_of_club_A", etc.) The meaning of the
         role may be context dependent.

   Depending on its privacy policy, an entity may still regard the
   disclosure of one of his private identifiers (in connection with some
   activity of him, his location or other attribute) to be a violation
   of his privacy right.

3.3.3. Credentials for Authentication and Authorization

   People use the word authentication with different meanings. Some
   people insist that authentication associates an entity with a more or
   less well-known identity. This basically means that if A
   authenticates another entity as being "B", then the label "B" has
   also a meaning for many entities different from A.

   In many situations, including pre-paid services, token-based or role-
   based authorizations, unauthenticated key agreement, and purpose-
   based identifiers, there is no need for explicit authentication as in
   the following definition:

      Explicit Authentication
         The act of verifying a claimed identity, in the form of a pre-
         existing label from a mutually known name space, as the sole
         originator of a message (message authentication) or as the end-
         point of a channel (entity authentication).

   Nevertheless, the communication partner wants to make sure that he is
   communicating to the same entity during the whole session. Thus

   Cuellar, Ersue          Expires May 2002                          9

                         Geopriv Requirements            November 2001

   message authentication codes are used, based on "unauthenticated
   keys". To avoid confusion let us introduce the following definition:

      Purpose-built Authentication
         The act of verifying that a communication partner, as sole
         originator of a message or as the end-point of a channel, is
         the same as a previous communication partner (of the same or
         different entity).

         This is usually implemented in the following way: the claimer
         or the verifier creates an ephemeral label, a "purpose-built
         identity" that will be used to correlate the different
         appearances of the claimer. The point is that this purpose-
         built identity contains no information for anyone besides the
         involved parties.

      Authorization
         The act of determining if a particular right, such as access to
         some resource, can be granted to the presenter of a particular
         credential.

         Depending on the type of credential, authorization may imply
         explicit authentication or not.

         Authorization credentials may be used in the same way as
         authentication credentials to secure a key agreement in the
         following sense: one party is assured that no other party aside
         from the owner of the authorization credentials (and possibly
         additional identified trusted parties) may gain access to the
         agreed secret key. The resulting keys are called authorized
         keys.

   In real life this corresponds for instance to the following
   situation: at a cloakroom a person deposits his coat and receives a
   credential that he may use later to obtain back the coat.

   In a more complex example, an unauthenticated client hands in a
   certain amount of money in a bank and obtains in return a set of
   travelers cheques, that he should sign immediately with any
   "signature" that he wants to use. When presenting the cheques to
   obtain a service, the cheques may be countersigned in such a way that
   the receiver of the cheque is sure that the signer is the same as the
   one who bought the cheques. This countersignature does not only
   authenticate the user to the receiver, but also indirectly to the
   bank, when the cheque is later presented to it. Two cheques with
   corresponding signatures identify the signing customers as the same.

   For our purposes the following very similar scenario can be
   considered: an unauthenticated target buys (say, using e-money) a
   navigation service from a client. During this transaction, the client
   and the target agree on one or several pseudonyms and a set of
   credentials that the target may use later to authenticate himself to
   the server and thus indirectly also to the client.

   Cuellar, Ersue          Expires May 2002                         10

                         Geopriv Requirements            November 2001


3.4. Policies

   A location privacy policy is an assertion that a certain amount of
   information (identity or identifier plus location) may be released to
   a certain entity (or group of entities) under a certain set of
   conditions.

      Req. 9.  The protocol MUST specify a policy language. This policy
            language MAY be an existing one, an adaptation of an
            existing one or a new policy language.

      Req. 10.  The policy language MUST be strong enough to express
            policies of the form: a group G of clients are allowed to
            know a certain abstraction A of the location L of a target
            together with a given identifier I of the target.

      Req. 11.  The policy language MUST be strong enough to express
            conditions on G and A as follows:
            G, the group of clients SHOULD be characterized by the
            possession of (identifiers, credentials) with a certain
            syntactic property.
            A, the abstraction function MAY be specified by data type of
            the expected filtered location information.

      Req. 12.  Within the constraints of the last two requirements, the
            policy language SHOULD be as simple as possible, or it
            SHOULD be an existing policy language.

      Req. 13.  When a location server accepts a policy from a target or
            target owner, the target (or owner) MUST prove the ownership
            of I, the claimed identifier.

3.5. Actions to be secured

      Req. 14.  The protocol MUST allow that following message flows be
            secured (unilateral or mutual end-point authentication, data
            object integrity, data object confidentiality, replay
            protection): LI, Pol, LIF, LRequest, and PolI. This SHOULD
            be achieved with IPSec but it MAY be achieved with methods
            defined by the protocol itself.

3.5.1. Authentication Requirements

      Req. 15.  The protocol MUST allow different authentication schemes

      Req. 16.  The protocol MUST allow authorization without explicit
            authentication.

3.6. Transport Requirements

   There are many possible requirements that one could foresee. For
   instance, as in [Rosen]: The protocol SHALL support UDP transport

   Cuellar, Ersue          Expires May 2002                         11

                         Geopriv Requirements            November 2001

   with retry timers for reliability. The protocol SHOULD support TCP as
   an optional transport and it MAY support RTP and/or SCTP as optional
   transports. Another possibility would be that the protocol is
   transport "agnostic", that is, the protocol MUST allow use of
   different transports.

   tbd

4. Security Considerations

   The purpose of the geopriv protocol is to allow a policy-controlled
   disclosure of location information for location services. Only the
   information carried by this protocol is secured in a way compliant
   with the privacy and security policies of the target. This does not
   mean that geopriv secures the target against general traffic analysis
   attacks or other forms of privacy violations.

   The Location Server is assumed to be trustworthy.

5. References

   [RFC-2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
      Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997
   [Rosen] Rosen, et. al.: Geolocation/Privacy Object Requirements,
      draft-rosen-geopriv-requirements-00.txt, work in progress

6. Author's Addresses

   Jorge R Cuellar
   Siemens AG
   Otto-Hahn Ring 6                            
   81730 Munich                   
   Germany
   Email:  jorge.cuellar@mchp.siemens.de

   Mehmet Ersue
   Siemens AG
   Hofmannstr. 51                              
   81359 Munich                     
   Germany
   Email:  Mehmet.Ersue@icn.siemens.de

7. Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing

   Cuellar, Ersue          Expires May 2002                         12

                         Geopriv Requirements            November 2001

   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

   Cuellar, Ersue          Expires May 2002                         13