

                                                          Himanshu Shah 
                                                            Prabhu Kavi 
   PPVPN Working Group                                   Tenor Networks 
   Internet Draft 
   Draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-01.txt                     Eric Rosen 
                                                          Cisco Systems 
   October 2002                                                         
   Expires: April 2003                                Waldemar Augustyn 
                                                             Consultant 
                                                                        
   Sunil Khandekar                                          Giles Heron 
   Vach Kompella                                     PacketExchange,Ltd 
   TiMetra Networks                                                     
                                                      Arun Vishwanathan 
   Toby Smith                                          Force10 Networks 
   Laurel Networks                                                      
                                                      Ashwin Moranganti 
   Steven Wright                                   Appian Communication 
   Bell South                                       
                                                           Andrew Malis 
   Vasile Radoaca                                       Vivace Networks 
   Nortel Networks                                    
    
                                                                        
 
    
 
             ARP Mediation for IP Interworking of Layer 2 VPN 
                                      
 
 
1.0 Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
    
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
     
   Shah, et al.           Expires April 2003                         1 
   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
                                    
    
2.0 Abstract 
    
   This draft addresses an issue in a particular kind of Layer 2 VPN, 
   which provides point-to-point connectivity for IP traffic only.  In 
   this kind of VPN it is possible to form heterogeneous point-to-point 
   links, where the two ends of the link use different technologies, 
   e.g., one end is Ethernet and the other is Frame Relay or ATM.  If 
   two IP systems are connected via a heterogeneous point-to-point link, 
   each may be using different address learning techniques, for 
   instance, one using ARP on Ethernet and the other using Inverse ARP 
   on Frame Relay. It is up to the Provider Edge routers to make these 
   different techniques inter-work.  This draft specifies the procedures 
   which the Provider Edge (PE) routers should perform in order to allow 
   correct operation across heterogeneous point-to-point links. 
    
2.1 ID Summary 
    
   SUMMARY 
    
   This ID describes a mechanism by which PE devices learn the IP 
   address of each locally attached CE device and distributes these to 
   other PEs in order to mediate between the address resolution 
   mechanisms used by the Customer Edge (CE) devices. The ID also 
   points out difficulties, and in some cases, the inoperability of 
   IGPs on the CE devices when interconnected by PE devices using IP L2 
   interworking VPN solution. 
    
   RELATED DOCUMENTS 
   Draft-kompella-ppvpn-l2vpn-01.txt 
   draft-ietf-ppvpn-l2vpn-arch-00.txt 
   draft-rosen-ppvpn-l2-signaling-02.txt 
   draft-ietf-pwe3-control-protocol-00.txt 
   draft-heinanen-inarp-uni-01.txt  
    
   WHERE DOES IT FIT IN THE PICTURE OF THE SUB-IP WORK 
    
   Belongs in PPVPN 
    
   WHY IS IT TARGETED AT THIS WG 
    
   This document describes a mechanism to assist in Provider-
   Provisioned Layer 2 VPNs. 
    
   JUSTIFICATION 
    
   The IP L2 Interworking VPN solution described in [L2VPN-Kompella] 
   introduces the concept of Layer 2 IP Interworking between disparate 
   Layer 2 media (e.g., Ethernet and Frame Relay). However, it does not 
   address how address resolution protocols should be handled between 
   these disparate media types.  This document describes how the PEs 
   should mediate between the different address resolution protocols 
   that each CE device uses. Also, there are issues when IGP on a 
     
   Shah, et al.           Expires April 2003                         2 
   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
                                    
    
   point-to-point link CE is interconnected with IGP on a multi-
   access/broadcast link CE. This document outlines these issues.    
    
3.0 Overview 
    
   A heterogeneous circuit is defined as a virtual circuit between two 
   CE devices that consists of two disparate Attachment Circuits (AC) 
   as the endpoints of a pseudowire. For example, a CE device on 
   Ethernet is attached to a pseudowire whose other end point is a CE 
   device on Frame Relay. The Attachment Circuit in this example could 
   then be a VLAN tag on Ethernet interface emulated to the Attachment 
   Circuit of a Frame Relay DLCI on the other end. Any attempt to make 
   use of such heterogeneous circuits faces the following problems: 
    
     1. Different encapsulations may be used on the two Attachment 
        Circuits. Frames from one Attachment Circuit can not just be 
        forwarded unchanged on the other; rather the frames must be 
        processed by some sort of interworking function. 
     2. A CE device may execute procedures which are specific to a 
        particular type of Attachment Circuit (AC), and it may 
        presuppose that the CE at the other end of the CE-CE circuit is 
        executing those same procedures. Therefore, if the two CEs are 
        attached via different types of Attachment Circuits, and are 
        executing different AC-specific procedures, some means of 
        mediating between those different procedures is needed. 
    
   The [L2VPN-Kompella] specifies procedures for dealing with problem 
   1, above. In the proposed scheme, the interworking functions strip 
   the Layer 2 header of the data packet at ingress and prepend the 
   appropriate Layer 2 header at the egress. 
    
   However, [L2VPN-Kompella] draft does not specify any procedures for 
   dealing with the problem 2 above. For example, if a CE1 is an 
   Ethernet-attached router, it expects to learn the IP address of its 
   neighbor from a multicast routing control packet, and then expects to 
   do ARP to learn the MAC address.  However, if CE2 is attached via 
   Frame Relay or ATM, it may use Inverse ARP to learn the IP address of 
   its neighbor. Similarly, if CE2 is attached to PPP, it may seek the 
   IP address of its neighbor during IPCP negotiations. Note that in 
   either case, CE2 is seeking the IP address of its neighbor (i.e., 
   CE1) while CE1 is seeking MAC address of its neighbor (i.e., CE2) for 
   the IP address learned via other means. For CE1 and CE2 to interwork 
   correctly, PE1 and PE2 must mediate the address-learning and 
   resolution process. 
    
   One option is to require each CE to have a static configuration of
   the IP addresses of all remote CEs.  However, this is unwieldy and 
   should be avoided whenever possible.  A better approach is to have 
   the service provider network automatically mediate between the 
   various address resolution messages.  In this document, we propose 
   that the PE devices capture the address resolution protocol messages 
   sent by the CE, and use this information to perform a mediation 
   function between different address resolution procedures.  The 
     
   Shah, et al.           Expires April 2003                         3 
   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
                                    
    
   methods of performing this mediation function are described in this 
   document.  In some cases, this mediation may not be possible, and 
   these situations are also detailed in this document. 
    
   Note that the PEs are capturing the CE∆s IP address information so 
   that address resolution information can be passed to the CE. Under 
   no circumstances does the PE make forwarding decision based on the 
   Layer 3 addressing information. 
    
    
4.0 Introduction 
    
   In the traditional Layer 2 VPNs, the customer-facing links are 
   required to be of the same data link type for each ÊÊcircuit∆∆. The PE 
   device is only responsible for shuttling the data traffic from the 
   link connecting to the local CE, over an MPLS core, and to the link 
   connecting to the remote CE. This requirement of homogenous data 
   link type is somewhat restrictive in building various network 
   topologies. In [L2VPN-Kompella], it is observed that if all the 
   traffic is known to be IP traffic, it is possible to relax this 
   restriction by decapsulating the IP packet from one data link 
   encapsulation, and simply reencapsulating it in the other.  
    However, [L2VPN-Kompella] does not address all the issues. For 
   example, consider a situation in which the service provider network 
   creates a ÊÊcircuit∆∆ between an Ethernet VLAN tag and a Frame Relay 
   DLCI.  Unless static ARP is used, the CE router connected to the 
   Frame Relay interface precedes its IP activity with   discovery of 
   its neighbor∆s IP address using the inverse ARP protocol [INVARP]. 
   Similarly, the CE router on an Ethernet precedes its direct IP 
   communication by binding its neighbor∆s MAC address to its IP 
   address via the ARP protocol [ARP].  However, the Inverse ARP on a 
   point-to-point link is seeking disjoint information from an ARP on a 
   broadcast link.   
 
   The PE router is a logical place to perform a mediation function 
   between these related, but incompatible, address resolution 
   protocols.  Performing this function in the PE simplifies the 
   operation of the CE, and keeps pseudowire interworking transparent 
   to the CE.   
      
   For each IP Layer 2 interworking circuit, there are three logical 
   steps to performing this address mediation: 
    
     1. Have the PE discover the attached CE∆s IP address (details in 
        section 5.0). 
     2. Distribute this IP address to the PE at the remote end of the 
        circuit (details in section 6.0). 
     3. Notify the attached CE about the remote CE∆s IP address 
        (details in section 7.0). 
       
   It is important to note that the dynamic learning and distribution 
   of the attached CE∆s IP address is possible only for some data link 
     
   Shah, et al.           Expires April 2003                         4 
   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
                                    
    
   technologies. For other data links, static configuration cannot be 
   avoided.  However, ARP Mediation addresses the most common methods 
   of creating Layer 2 VPNs, and therefore should be widely useful.  
    
5.0 How the PE Discovers the Address of the Local CE Device 
    
   For each Layer 2 IP interworking circuit, the PE creates and fills
   in a tuple consisting of the following: 
    
     1. Attached CE∆s IP address 
     2. Circuit Information 
     3. Remote CE∆s IP address 
    
   This information is gathered using the mechanisms described below. 
    
   The rest of this section describes how the IP address of the locally 
   attached CE is learned. Section 6 describes how the learned IP 
   address may be distributed to the remote PE using the signaling 
   mechanisms of either [L2VPN-KOMPELLA] or [PWE3-CONTROL]. Section 7 
   describes how the remote PE processes the received cross-connect 
   information for IP address resolution. 
    
5.1 Ethernet Data Link 
    
   We are assuming a Virtual Private Wire Service (VPWS) as described 
   in [L2VPN-FW] for the CE/PE Attachment Circuit as an Ethernet 
   containing only that CE and that PE. 
    
   In order to learn the IP address of the CE device for a given 
   Ethernet Attachment Circuit, the PE device may execute Router 
   Discovery Protocol [RFC 1256] whereby a Router Discovery Request 
   (ICMP -         - router solicitation) message is sent using a source IP 
   address of zero. The IP address of the CE device is extracted from 
   the Router Discovery Response (ICMP -                                       - router advertisement) message 
   from the CE.  
    
   The use of the router discovery mechanism by the PE is optional. The 
   alternatives could include gleaning the source address field of any 
   broadcasts to IP multicast/broadcast address and making sure that 
   only one router on the local LAN is sending such broadcasts. It is 
   also possible to simply wait for the CE to generate the ARP request 
   for its neighbor or send gratuitous ARP on startup. The Ethernet 
   address and protocol address can then be gleaned from the request. 
   Once the PE learns the IP address of the CE, the CE∆s address is 
   signaled to remote PE (section 6.0). 
    
   The PE could periodically generate the ARP request message to the 
   CE∆s IP address as a means to verify the continued existence of the 
   CE∆s IP address and its binding to the Ethernet MAC address. The 
   absence of a response from the CE device for a given number of 
   retries could be used as a cause for a withdrawal of the IP address 
   advertisement to the remote PE and entering into the address 
   resolution phase to rediscover the attached CE∆s IP address. Note 
     
   Shah, et al.           Expires April 2003                         5 
   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
                                    
    
   that such ÊÊheartbeat∆∆ scheme is needed only for broadcast links such 
   as Ethernet, as a loss of CE may otherwise be undetectable. 
    
5.2 Frame Relay Data Link 
    
   A Frame Relay attached CE device generates an Inverse ARP request to 
   obtain the IP address of the neighbor when the associated DLCI 
   becomes active. Traditionally, a DLCI becomes active when the DCE 
   signals LMI status active message as a result of the associated PVC 
   path becoming operational.  
    
   A PE device attached to a CE, connected either directly or through a 
   set of Frame Relay switches, plays the role of an intermediate 
   network node for cross-connect purposes. To a Frame Relay endnode 
   (i.e. a CE), the presence of any intermediate Frame Relay switches, 
   a pair of PEs and the fact that the remote CE may be Ethernet-
   attached, is all transparent. As far as Frame Relay CE is concerned, 
   the Ethernet CE appears as the remote end point of the Frame Relay 
   PVC path. 
    
   However, for IP L2 interworking VPN purposes, the Ethernet CE and 
   the Frame Relay CE are two IP end stations and it becomes necessary 
   for the PE to play a role in address resolution to keep both end 
   stations unaware of data link address resolution inconsistencies. 
    
   When a PE processes the Frame Relay Inverse ARP request for a DLCI, 
   it responds with an Inverse ARP reply containing the remote CE∆s IP 
   address, if the address is known. If the PE does not yet have the 
   remote CE∆s IP address, it does not respond, but notes the IP 
   address of the local CE and the DLCI information. Subsequently, when 
   the IP address of the remote CE becomes available, the PE may 
   initiate the Inverse ARP request as a means to notify the local CE, 
   the IP address of the remote CE. 
    
   Also, note that the PE continues to learn the IP address of the CE 
   from any multicast/broadcast IP packet that CE may generate 
   irrespective of Inverse ARP protocol execution. 
    
    
5.3 ATM Data Link 
    
   A CE device attached to ATM data link can be configured to treat 
   each PVC as an IP subnet. The PE participates in RFC 2225 defined 
   inverse ATM ARP. When processing an Inverse ATM ARP request for a 
   PVC, if the PE does not have the IP address associated with the 
   cross-connect from the remote PE, it does not respond, but notes the 
   IP address of the ATM attached CE and the PVC information. If the 
   remote IP address is available, it responds with the Inverse ATM ARP 
   reply. Subsequently, when the IP address of the remote CE becomes 
   available, the PE may initiate the Inverse ATM ARP request as a 
   means to notify the local CE the IP address of the remote CE. 
    
     
   Shah, et al.           Expires April 2003                         6 
   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
                                    
    
   Also note that the PE continues to learn the IP address of the CE 
   from any multicast/broadcast IP packet that the CE may generate 
   irrespective of Inverse ARP protocol execution.  
    
5.4 PPP Data Link 
    
   A CE device attached to a PPP data link participates in IPCP [RFC 
   1332] to obtain the neighbor∆s IP address. If the PE device has the 
   cross-connect and the IP address of the remote CE, it responds to 
   the IPCP Configure-Request. However, if the PE does not have the 
   remote CE∆s IP address, it does not respond to the local CE∆s IPCP 
   request but simply notes its IP address. Subsequently, when the IP 
   address of the remote CE becomes available, the PE generates IPCP 
   Configure-Request to the local CE. 
    
   Also, the PE must deny configurations such as header compression and 
   encryptions in the NCP packets with such options. 
     
    
6.0 IP Address Distribution Between PE 
    
   There are two cross-connect information distribution mechanisms 
   defined in [L2VPN-Kompella] and [PWE3-Control] respectively. The 
   following sections discuss how these signaling protocols are 
   extended to distribute the associated IP address information. 
    
6.1 When To Distribute IP Address 
    
   A PE device advertises the IP address of the attached CE only when 
   the encapsulation type of the VPN is IP L2 interworking. It is quite 
   possible that the IP address of a CE device is not available at the 
   time the VC labels are advertised. For example, in Frame Relay the 
   CE device dispatches inverse ARP request only when the DLCI is 
   active; if the PE signals the DLCI to be active only when it has 
   received the cross-connect information from the remote PE, a chicken 
   and egg situation arises. In order to avoid such problems, the PE 
   must be prepared to advertise the cross-connect information before 
   the CE∆s IP address is known. When the IP address of the CE device 
   does become available, the PE re-advertises the cross-connect 
   information with an updated IP address field value. 
    
   Similarly, if the PE detects invalidation of the CE∆s IP address (by 
   methods described above) the PE must re-advertise the cross-connect 
   information with a CE IP address field of zero to denote the 
   withdrawal of the CE∆s IP address. The receiving PE may then wait 
   for the IP address information from the remote PE before enabling 
   the unicast IP traffic flow.  
    
   If two CE devices are locally attached to the PE where, one CE is 
   connected to an Ethernet data link and the other to a Frame Relay 
   interface, for example, the IP addresses are learned in the same 
     
   Shah, et al.           Expires April 2003                         7 
   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
                                    
    
   manner described above. However, since the CE devices are local, the 
   distribution of IP addresses for these CE devices is a local step. 
    
    
6.2 BGP Based Distribution [L2VPN-Kompella] 
    
   The [L2VPN-Kompella] draft defines the MP-BGP NLRI for the L2VPN 
   cross-connect information. The NLRI contains the label block offset, 
   the label base and the size (i.e., the length of the circuit status 
   vector sub-TLV) tuple that provides a set of contiguous labels 
   starting from the label base to correspond to a set of remote CE-IDs 
   starting from the label block offset.  
    
   We propose an IP address sub-TLV for this NLRI that accompanies this 
   tuple. The type value is TBD. The length is the same as the length 
   of the circuit status vector sub-TLV. The value field contains the 
   length number of 4-byte fields where each field is an IP address 
   that corresponds one-to-one with the labels represented by the label 
   base and the length field. The PE device should note the label to IP 
   address association by iterating through each IP field value in 
   order. 
    
    
6.3 LDP Based Distribution [PWE3-CONTROL] 
    
   The [PWE3-CONTROL] uses LDP transport to exchange Layer-2 cross-
   connect information for a given VPN. The cross-connect information 
   is represented as a VC FEC element that the LDP protocol distributes 
   to the remote peer in downstream-unsolicited mode. This document 
   proposes extensions to VC FEC element to support the IP L2 
   interworking as a new VPN type and to include the IP address 
   information. 
    
6.3.1 IP L2 Interworking Signaling 
     
   The IP L2 interworking VPN type is advertised in the VC-Type field   
   of the VC FEC as the value 0x000C. 
    
   The ÊÊinterface parameter∆∆ field in the VC FEC is defined in [PWE3-
   CONTROL] as follows. 
    
       0                   1                   2                   3 
       0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
      |  Parameter ID |    Length     |    Variable Length Value      | 
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
      |                         Variable Length Value                 | 
      |                             "                                 | 
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    
    
      The parameter ID is defined as follows: 
    
     
   Shah, et al.           Expires April 2003                         8 
   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
                                    
    
      Parameter   ID Length    Description 
    
          0x01         4       Interface MTU in octets. 
          0x02         4       Maximum Number of concatenated ATM cells. 
          0x03   up to 82      Optional Interface Description string. 
          0x04         4       CEM [8] Payload Bytes. 
          0x05         4       CEM options. 
           
    
   The Length field is defined as the length of the interface parameter 
   including the parameter ID and the length field itself. 
    
   We propose an additional parameter for the parameter ID. 
    
          0x06         4       IP address of CE 
    
   The IP address interface parameter contains the IP address 
   associated with the advertised VC-ID. If the IP address is not 
   known, this interface parameter may not be present in the 
   advertisement. If present, it may contain the IP address value as 
   0.0.0.0. In either case, the receiving PE processes the information 
   as IP address association unknown for the advertised VC-ID. 
    
   We recommend two options for signaling such ÊÊVC associated 
   information∆∆ that are currently present as the interface parameter 
   field in the VC FEC.  
     1. The entire ÊÊinterface parameter∆∆ field is either removed or 
        duplicated from the VC FEC to the ÊÊoptional parameter∆∆ field of 
        the LDP∆s Label Mapping Message. 
     2. A new VC Status FEC is introduced that accompanies the VC FEC 
        in the LDP∆s Label Mapping Message. The ÊÊinterface parameter∆∆ 
        field of the VC FEC is then either removed or duplicated from 
        the VC FEC to the VC Status FEC. 
      
   We intend to work with authors of [PWE3-Control] and [Rosen-
   Signaling] to find the most suitable solution for extensions (such 
   as IP address, IP address and MAC address, interface status, etc.) 
   that are generic, in a backward compatible fashion. 
    
7.0 How CE Learns The Remote CE∆s IP address 
    
   Once the PE has received the remote CE∆s IP address information from 
   the remote PE, it will either initiate an address resolution request 
   or respond to an outstanding request from the attached CE device. 
    
7.1 Ethernet Data Link 
    
   When the PE learns the remote CE∆s IP address from the Layer 2 VPN 
   advertisement (as described above), it may or may not know the local 
   CE∆s IP address. If the local CE∆s IP address is not known, the PE 
   must wait for the arrival of an IGP broadcast packet, a RDP response 
   packet or an ARP request packet from the local CE. If, however, 
   local CE∆s IP address is already known, the PE may choose to 
     
   Shah, et al.           Expires April 2003                         9 
   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
                                    
    
   generate an unsolicited ARP message to notify the local CE about the 
   binding of the remote CE∆s IP address with the PE∆s own MAC address. 
    
   In either case, whenever an ARP request is generated by the local 
   CE, the PE must proxy ARP response using its own MAC address as the 
   source hardware address and remote CE∆s IP address as the source 
   protocol address. The PE must respond only to those ARP requests 
   whose destination protocol address matches the remote CE∆s IP 
   address. 
    
7.2 Frame Relay Data Link 
    
   If a PE has received new cross-connect information from the remote 
   PE, the corresponding local DLCI may not yet be active. The PE 
   should use the cross-connect information to activate the DLCI via 
   LMI and schedule an inverse ARP request. The PE may choose to delay 
   the generation of the Inverse ARP request in order to allow the 
   attached CE to generate the request first. However, it is possible 
   that the PE may never receive the Inverse ARP request, nor the 
   response to its own request. This could occur for a number of 
   reasons, 
     1. The IP protocol is not enabled on the CE device at the time 
        when the DLCI was activated. This is not an issue since the 
        cross connect information exchange is not predicated on 
        learning of the CE∆s IP address. When the IP protocol is 
        enabled on the CE device, an inverse ARP request will be 
        generated. 
     2. No Inverse ARP request is generated if the CE is already 
        configured with the remote CE∆s IP address, hence there is no 
        need to generate the request. Since the PE does not know of 
        this situation, it must generate an Inverse ARP request using 
        the remote CE∆s IP address. The response from the CE enables 
        the PE to learn its IP address. 
     3. The CE router does not support the Inverse ARP protocol or the 
        Inverse ARP protocol is disabled. We have found through 
        experimentations that most implementations do respond to the 
        Inverse ARP Request even when Inverse ARP protocol is disabled 
        (it seems that disabling of protocol only means that request 
        generation is disabled). However, if the Inverse ARP Protocol 
        is not supported, the PE needs to be configured with the IP 
        address of the attached CE. This facilitates distribution of 
        the IP address to the remote PE. 
    
7.3 ATM Data Link 
    
   The PE device should generate an Inverse ATM ARP request when the IP 
   address of the remote cross-connected CE device becomes available. 
   The role of the PE device in handling address resolution for the IP 
   L2 interworking cross-connect for ATM VCs is similar to the behavior 
   described above for Frame Relay VCs.  
    
   As always, static configuration of the local CE∆s IP address is an 
   available option, when all else fails. 
     
   Shah, et al.           Expires April 2003                        10 
   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
                                    
    
    
7.4 PPP 
    
   The PE device should respond to the local CE∆s IPCP Configure-
   Request with the remote CE∆s IP address. However, if the IP address 
   is not available, the PE should postpone the response. When the 
   remote CE∆s IP address becomes available, the PE must initiate the 
   Configure-Request using the remote CE∆s IP address. As noted 
   earlier, all other configuration options related to compression, 
   encryptions, etc., should be rejected. 
    
8.0 Data Forwarding  
    
   The IP L2 Interworking permits only IP data packets to be exchanged 
   over the pseudowire. The following description from [L2VPN-Kompella] 
   shows how data packets are handled by the ingress and egress PE.  
    
   At the ingress PE, an L2 frame's L2 header is completely stripped off 
   and is carried over as an IP packet through a tunnel to the egress 
   PE.  The forwarding decision is still based on the L2 circuit 
   information of the incoming IP frame.  At the egress PE, the IP 
   packet is encapsulated back in an L2 frame and transported over to 
   the destination CE.  The forwarding decision at the egress PE is 
   based on the VC label as discussed in [MARTINI-ENCAP].  The L2 
   technology between egress PE and CE is independent of the L2 
   technology between ingress PE and CE. 
    
   The PE should observe the following forwarding rules when processing 
   IP data packets for interworking circuits. 
    
     1. If the PE has not learned the IP address of the local CE and the 
        IP packet received from the local CE is multicast or a 
        broadcast, the PE should learn the source IP address and forward 
        the packet to the corresponding pseudowire. If the Attached 
        Circuit is Ethernet, it should also learn the MAC address of the 
        CE device. The PE must forward multicast/broadcast IP packet 
        from the Attachment Circuit to the pseudowire irrespective of 
        the status of the remote CE∆s IP address. 
     2. If the PE has not learned the IP address of the local CE, the PE 
        should forward the multicast/broadcast IP packet from the 
        pseudowire to the local Attachment Circuit. If the Attachment 
        Circuit is Ethernet, PE must translate IP multicast/broadcast 
        destination to appropriate MAC DA.  
     3. If a PE has the local and the remote CEs∆ IP addresses, all IP 
        packets are forwarded in both directions between the Attachment 
        Circuit and the pseudowire. When the Attachment Circuit is 
        Ethernet, a unicast IP packet from the pseudowire is prepended 
        with the Ethernet MAC header using the MAC DA of the CE 
        (obtained during the learning phase) and the MAC SA of the PE. 
     4. All Unicast IP packets received from the Attachement Circuit and 
        the pseudowire are dropped until the local and remote CEs∆ IP 
        addresses are known. 
    
     
   Shah, et al.           Expires April 2003                        11 
   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
                                    
    
    
9.0 Use of IGPs with IP L2 Interworking VPNs 
    
   In an IP L2 interworking VPN, when an IGP on a CE connected to a 
   broadcast link is cross-connected with an IGP on a CE connected to a 
   point-to-point link, there are routing protocol related issues that 
   must be addressed. The link state routing protocols are cognizant of 
   the underlying link characteristics and behave accordingly when 
   establishing neighbor adjacencies, representing the network 
   topology, and passing protocol packets.  
    
    
9.1 OSPF 
    
   The OSPF protocol treats broadcast link type with a special 
   procedure that engages in neighbor discovery to elect a designated 
   and a backup designated router (DR and BDR respectively) with which 
   it forms adjacencies. However, these procedures are neither 
   applicable nor understood by OSPF running on a point-to-point link. 
   By cross-connecting two neighbors with disparate link types, an IP 
   L2 interworking VPN has the potential to experience connectivity 
   issues.  
    
   Additionally, the link type specified in the router LSA will not 
   match for two routers that are supposedly sharing the same link 
   type. Finally, each OSPF router generates network LSAs when 
   connected to a broadcast link such as Ethernet, receipt of which by 
   an OSPF router on the point-to-point link further adds to the 
   confusion. 
    
    
   Fortunately, the OSPF protocol provides a configuration option 
   (ospfIfType), whereby OSPF will treat the underlying physical 
   broadcast link as a point-to-point link.  
    
   It is strongly recommended that all OSPF protocols on CE devices 
   connected to Ethernet interfaces use this configuration option when 
   attached to a PE that is participating in an IP L2 Interworking VPN. 
    
9.2 IS-IS 
    
   The IS-IS protocol sends a LAN Hello PDU (IIH packet) with the MAC 
   address and the IP address of the intermediate system (i.e., CE 
   device) when attached to Ethernet links. The CE device expects its 
   neighbor to insert its own MAC and IP address in the response. If 
   the neighbor is connected via a point-to-point link type, the LAN 
   Hello PDU will be silently discarded. Similarly, Hello PDUs on the 
   point-to-point link do not contain any MAC address, which will 
   confuse a neighbor on an Ethernet link, if these two neighbors were 
   cross-connected via above described mechanisms. 
    
   Thus, use of the IS-IS protocol on CE devices presents problems when 
   interconnected by disparate data link types in an IP L2 interworking 
     
   Shah, et al.           Expires April 2003                        12 
   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
                                    
    
   VPN environment.  There are some mechanisms defined in draft-ietf-
   isis-igp-p2p-over-lan-00.txt to accommodate point-to-point behavior 
   over broadcast networks. The feasibility of such techniques to solve 
   this problem is under review. 
    
   It is important to note that the use of the IS-IS protocol in 
   enterprise networks (i.e., CE routers) is less common. The IS-IS 
   related difficulties for IP L2 Interworking VPNs, hence are 
   minimized. 
    
9.3 RIP 
    
   RIP protocol broadcasts RIP advertisements every 30 seconds. If the 
   group/broadcast address snooping mechanism is used as described 
   above, the attached PE can learn the advertising (CE) router∆s IP 
   address from the IP header of the advertisement. No special 
   configuration is required for RIP in this type of Layer 2 IP 
   interworking VPN. 
    
    
10.0 Conclusion 
    
   The three step procedure of discovering the IP address of a local CE 
   device, distributing the CE∆s IP address to the remote PE and 
   notifying the local CE of the remote CE∆s IP address, as described 
   in this document provides for reduced configuration of the PE 
   devices used for IP L2 Interworking VPNs. 
    
   There are cases where the manual configuration of the CE∆s IP 
   address is unavoidable. These cases include the use of interfaces 
   that support address resolution but do not have address resolution 
   enabled, such as unnumbered interfaces on the CE device.  
    
   It is also important to note that IP address changes on the CE 
   devices may require manual intervention (e.g., soft reset of the 
   attached port) on the PE device. 
    
   For most common interface types, however, the procedures described 
   in this document enhance the IP interworking solution of [L2VPN-
   Kompella] by reducing the amount of configuration required on the PE 
   devices. 
    
11.0 Acknowledgements 
    
   Authors would like to thank Bruce Lasley and other folks within 
   Tenor who participated in discussions related to this draft. 
    
12.0 Security Considerations 
    
   The security aspects of this solution will be discussed at a later 
   time. 
    
     
   Shah, et al.           Expires April 2003                        13 
   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
                                    
    
13.0 References 
    
   [L2VPN-Kompella] Kompella et al., ÊÊMPLS based Layer 2 VPNs∆∆, draft-
   kompella-ppvpn-l2vpn-01.txt, November 2001. 
    
   [L2VPN-ENCAP] Martini et al., ÊÊEncapsulation Methods for Transport 
   of Layer 2 Frames over MPLS∆∆, draft-martini-l2circuit-encap-mpls-
   04.txt, November 2001, (work in progress). 
    
   [PWE3-CONTROL] Martini et. Al., ÊÊTransport of Layer 2 Frames Over 
   MPLS∆∆, draft-ietf-pwe3-control-protocol-00.txt, August 2002 (work in 
   progress) 
    
   [L2VPN-Signaling] Rosen et al., ÊÊLDP-based Signaling for L2VPNs∆∆,  
   draft-rosen-ppvpn-l2-signaling-02.txt, September 2002 
    
   [L2VPN-FW] "PPVPN L2 Framework", Andersson et. al., draft-ietf- 
   ppvpn-l2-framework-00.txt, August 2002 
    
   [L2VPN-TERM] "PPVPN Terminology", Andersson, Madsen, draft- 
   andersson-ppvpn-terminology-01.txt, June 2002 
    
   [INVARP] T.Bradley et al., ÊÊInverse Address Resolution Protocol∆∆, 
   RFC2390, September 1998. 
    
   [ARP] Plummer, D., "An Ethernet Address Resolution Protocol:  Or 
   Converting Network Protocol Addresses to 48.bit Ethernet        
   Addresses for Transmission on Ethernet Hardware", STD 37, RFC 826, 
   November 1982. 
    
   [PROXY-ARP] Postel, J., "Multi-LAN Address Resolution", RFC 925, 
   October 1984. 
    
14. Intellectual Property Considerations 
 
   Tenor Networks may seek patent or other intellectual property 
   protection for some of all of the technologies disclosed in this 
   document.  If any standards arising from this document are or become 
   protected by one or more patents assigned to Tenor Networks, 
   Tenor intends to disclose those patents and license them on 
   reasonable and non-discriminatory terms. 
 
    
Author's Address 
    
   Himanshu Shah 
   Tenor Networks 
   100 Nagog Park 
   Acton, MA 01720 
   Email: hshah@tenornetworks.com 
    
   Prabhu Kavi 
   Tenor Networks 
     
   Shah, et al.           Expires April 2003                        14 
   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
                                    
    
   100 Nagog Park 
   Acton, MA 01720 
   Email: Prabhu_kavi@tenornetworks.com 
    
   Eric Rosen 
   Cisco Systems 
   300 Apollo Drive, 
   Chelmsford, MA 01824 
   Email: erosen@cisco.com 
    
   Waldemar Augustyn 
   Email: waldemar@nxp.com 
    
   Giles Heron 
   PacketExchange Ltd. 
   The Truman Brewery 
   91 Brick Lane 
   LONDON E1 6QL 
   United Kingdom 
   Email: giles@packetexchange.net 
    
   Sunil Khandekar and Vach Kompella 
   TiMetra Networks 
   274 Ferguson Dr. 
   Mountain View, CA 94043 
   Email: sunil@timetra.com 
   Email: vkompella@timetra.com 
    
   Toby Smith 
   Laurel Networks 
   Omega Corporate Center 
   1300 Omega drive 
   Pittsburgh, PA 15205 
   Email: jsmith@laurelnetworks.com 
    
   Arun Vishwanathan 
   Force10 Networks 
   1440 McCarthy Blvd., 
   Milpitas, CA 95035 
   Email: arun@force10networks.com 
    
   Ashwin Moranganti 
   Appian Communications 
   35 Nagog Park, 
   Acton, MA 01720 
   Email: amoranganti@appiancom.com 
    
   Andrew G. Malis 
   Vivace Networks, Inc. 
   2730 Orchard Parkway 
   San Jose, CA 95134 
   Email: Andy.Malis@vivacenetworks.com 
    
     
   Shah, et al.           Expires April 2003                        15 
   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
                                    
    
   Steven Wright 
   Bell South Corp 
   Email: steven.wright@bellsouth.com 
    
   Vasile Radoaca 
   Nortel Networks 
   Email: vasile@nortelnetworks.com 
    
     
   Shah, et al.           Expires April 2003                        16 