





INTERNET-DRAFT      SIP Security Requirements             Michael Thomas
                                                          Cisco Systems
                                                          12 November
2001






                       SIP Security Requirements

                    draft-thomas-sip-sec-req-00.txt



Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   The SIP security requirements identifies a range of possible threats
   that a SIP message in transit might be subject to and defines a set
   of requirements that must be addressed by the SIP working group.



1.  Introduction

   SIP, because of its many trust boundaries and modes of operation pro-
   vides a challenge for the effective application of security mechan-
   isms that address the various threats. It should be noted from the



Thomas              draft-thomas-sip-sec-req-00.txt             [Page 1]





INTERNET-DRAFT         SIP Security Requirements        12 November 2001


   outset that there is no such thing as "absolute" security.  There are
   different levels of risk that various deployments are willing to
   tolerate given the spectrum of risk versus operational and deployment
   ease. Adding to the confusion, there are many existing security
   mechanisms with overlapping functionality.  This draft identifies a
   number of threats which SIP is subject to, and a set of requirements
   which any proposed solution must satisify.


1.1.  Definitions


   Crypto-System
             In this memo, crypto-system refers to the general security
             scheme which provides cryptographic services which are
             available with that scheme. These services may include
             privacy, message integrity, replay protection, etc. Typical
             crypto-systems including CHAP/RADIUS, Kerberos, IPsec/IKE,
             etc.

   Message-Integrity
             A message integrity check is means of insuring that a mes-
             sage in transit was not altered. In combination with a key,
             a message integrity check (or checksum, or keyed hash)
             insures that only the holders of the proper keying materiel
             will be able to modify a message in transit without detec-
             tion.

   Authentication
             Authentication is means of identifying another entity.
             There are many ways to authenticate another entity, but the
             typical computer based methods involve digitally signing a
             set of bytes using a keyed hash. Authentication usually
             relies on either direct knowledge of the other entity (say,
             a shared symmetric key or possession of the other person's
             public key), or third party schemes such as Kerberos and
             X.509 Certificate Authorities.

   Authorization
             Once indentification of a correspondent is achieved, a
             decision  must be made as to whether that identity should
             be granted access for the requested services. This is the
             act of authorization

   Confidentiality
             Cryptographic confidentiality means that only the intended
             recipients will be able to determine the contents of the
             confidential area. This is typically done using encryption



Thomas              draft-thomas-sip-sec-req-00.txt             [Page 2]





INTERNET-DRAFT         SIP Security Requirements        12 November 2001


             algorithms such as DES and AES.

   Keyed-Hash
             A keyed hash is a means of providing message integrity by
             use with a strong one-way hash over the message body and a
             secret. Keyed hashes may be used with both symmetric and
             asymmetric keys to provide message integrity.

   Main-Level-SIP-Headers
             In the context of the SIP security requirements, the term
             "mail level SIP headers" refers to the SIP headers which
             are not contained within attachments, and are typically
             where volatile headers such as VIA's go.

   Challenge
             A challenge is a means of requesting that an entity prove
             its identity using a particular crypto-system.

   Transform
             A Transform is a generic cryptographic operation, be it a
             one-way hash such as SHA-1 or an encryption/decryption
             algorithm such as AES.

   Credentials
             Credentials are identifying information which are typically
             cryptographically protected by a third party. Kerberos
             tickets and X.509 certficates issued by a certificate
             authority are examples of credentials.

   Realm
             A realm defines the boundary of trust from one administra-
             tive domain to another.

   Security-Association
             A security association refers to the existence of shared
             cryptographic state between two or more entities. Security
             associations are typically installed to mitigate the compu-
             tational and message overhead of cryptographic operations
             which could otherwise be performed without any prior state.


   2.  Threats



   SIP deployments are expected to run the gambit of exposure to
   threats. They may be deployed into relatively safe environments where
   equipment is all mutually trustworthy and physical security is



Thomas              draft-thomas-sip-sec-req-00.txt             [Page 3]





INTERNET-DRAFT         SIP Security Requirements        12 November 2001


   argueably sufficient, all the way to the hostile environment of the
   Internet where no assumptions should be made.

   We consider threats to be one of two kinds. Outside threats are the
   broad spectrum of threats which can be perpetrated by attackers who
   are not in any way party to the SIP transaction at hand. Inside
   threats, on the other hand, are comprized of attacks where at least
   one party who is part of a particular transaction is not entirely
   trustworthy.

   In this draft, we use the term "transaction" to mean a (possibly
   forked) SIP message and responses it elicits. A transaction may
   traverse many SIP entities before a final response is given to the
   initiator.



2.1.  Outside Threats



   Outside threats are of the type where a SIP message may traverse an
   untrustworthy segment of the network where exposure to uninvolved
   third parties is both possible and likely. The threats involved for
   SIP are essentially the same as the threats for any other protocol
   such as HTTP and SMTP which can traverse the network as plain text.
   The following list is not intended to be a comprehensive list of
   attacks; we list them only to reenforce the notion that the Internet
   is a hostile medium.

2.1.1.  Authentication

   In order to mitigate man in the middle attacks from outside parites,
   authentication may be required.

2.1.2.  Confidentiality

   If eavesdropping by third parties is possible, confidentiality of the
   SIP signaling may be required.

2.1.3.  Integrity

   In order to mitigate tampering attacks by third parties, integrity
   protection may be required. Additionally, detection of replays of old
   message sequences may be required.






Thomas              draft-thomas-sip-sec-req-00.txt             [Page 4]





INTERNET-DRAFT         SIP Security Requirements        12 November 2001


2.1.4.  Authorization

   Even if a party can successfully authenticate, it may not be author-
   ized for some or all of the services that are being requested, and as
   such will need authorization checks.


2.2.  Outside Attacks

   The following mechanisms may be used to mount an attack on a SIP node
   from a node which is not in any way party to the session.

2.2.1.  Replay

   If an unprotected SIP message is snooped, an attacker could poten-
   tially gain services for which it is not authorized, cause the dis-
   closure sensitive information, and possibly disrupt an ongoing ses-
   sion.

2.2.2.  Modification

   An intercepted SIP message could allow an attacker to construct new
   SIP messages which could lead to registration hijacking, hangup, take
   over, insertion as a man in the middle, identity spoofing, and many
   other mid-call attacks.

2.2.3.  Forgery

   SIP messages which are not authenticated and authorized could lead to
   registration hijacking, user impersonation, and all of the other
   attacks listed above. That is, interception of a SIP message may be
   useful for an attacker, but is not strictly necessary to mount vari-
   ous attacks.

2.2.4.  Disclosure

   Potentially confidential information may be containted witnin SIP
   messages, such as user location, media encryption keys, user iden-
   tity, out of band IVR signaling, sensitive internal routing topology,
   etc.

2.2.5.  Denial of Service (DoS)

   There are many potential denial of service attacks available to an
   outside attacker, such as flooding attacks, memory exhaustion attacks
   which are mounted by the attacker flooding SIP nodes with otherwise
   legitimate messages which cause it to retain state (ala SYN flooding
   in TCP). There are potential CPU complexity attacks if an attacker



Thomas              draft-thomas-sip-sec-req-00.txt             [Page 5]





INTERNET-DRAFT         SIP Security Requirements        12 November 2001


   can for little CPU effort cause a SIP node to perform many complex
   operations (disk IO, modular arithmetic, etc) without first identify-
   ing itself to the SIP node.  A third line of attack is the ability to
   set up a packet reflector where for low cost of CPU and/or bandwidth
   an attacker leverages SIP hosts to bombard unsuspecting hosts with
   data which requires a proportionally higher amount of work/storage
   than the attacker requires. This is also known as an amplification
   attack.


2.3.  Inside Threats



   Inside threats are threats which can be mounted by one or more of the
   participants of a particular transaction. Of inside and outside
   threats, inside threats pose a harder set of security problems. The
   reason lies in the fact that a participant to a transaction must be
   trusted to some degree, but not wholely trusted. For example, a UA
   may be trusted to hang up a phone to stop a billing timer to which it
   is cryptographically bound to, but may not be trusted to not try to
   assume the identity of another subscriber. SIP further complicates
   matters by allowing both end to end transactions as well as transac-
   tions which pass through intermediate proxies. The trust relationship
   between each pair of hosts in the overall transaction may be dif-
   ferent.



2.3.1.  Authentication



   Between any two hosts involved in a transaction, an attacker could
   forge the identity of a legitimate user of the service. For example,
   unless some entity checks, there is nothing to prevent a UA to forge
   a legitimate From: address in an INVITE. Likewise, it may be possible
   for a host involved in the transaction to spoof a legitimate server
   in the transaction.



2.3.2.  Confidentiality



   In a particular transaction, various parts of the messages may reveal
   confidential information to eavesdroppers. An obvious example is that



Thomas              draft-thomas-sip-sec-req-00.txt             [Page 6]





INTERNET-DRAFT         SIP Security Requirements        12 November 2001


   confidential information such as media encryption keys may be
   revealed to intermediate proxies thus allowing the operator of the
   proxy to decrypt media streams.  Another example is that certain
   pieces of SIP headers may reveal confidential information such as
   internal network topology, etc.



2.3.3.  Privacy



   Running SIP over an IP network provides the opportunity for a user or
   intermediary to reveal information which would like to be kept confi-
   dential. An example is that some services require that the identity
   of a participant of a session must be kept confidential (eg, caller
   ID blocking).



2.3.4.  Integrity



   It is possible that a party to a transaction could tamper with vari-
   ous parts of the transaction, perhaps acting as a malicious man in
   the middle. Another threat is a replay attack where a man in the mid-
   dle could replay a legitimate portion of a previously received mes-
   sage (perhaps encrypted), for which the end receiver could not dis-
   cern the difference between a legitimate piece of information and a
   replay.




2.3.5.  Authorization



   Even if the participants in a transaction are properly identified,
   there are threats where the requestor is not authorized to perform
   the action. Likewise, a responder may be not be authorized to perform
   the action which was requested. Given the vagueries of proxy routed
   traffic, forking, etc, this threat with SIP requires more provision
   than a simplistic "don't request something from somebody you don't
   trust".





Thomas              draft-thomas-sip-sec-req-00.txt             [Page 7]





INTERNET-DRAFT         SIP Security Requirements        12 November 2001


2.4.  Inside Attacks

   The following mechanisms may be used to mount an attack on a SIP node
   from a node which is either part of a current session, or who could
   be part of a SIP session which would accepted by another SIP node.
   That is, an otherwise authenticated user may still not be trusted to
   act responsibly.

2.4.1.  Replay

   An attacker might cut and paste various parts of other snooped SIP
   messages to hijack other SIP sessions, misidentify itself to other
   SIP nodes, inserting inappropriate signaling into other sessions, as
   well as inappropriately insert SIP headers which are not appropriate
   for thier function.

2.4.2.  Modification

   An intercepted SIP message could allow an attacker to construct a new
   SIP message which could lead to registration hijacking, hangup, take
   over, insertion as a man in the middle, identity spoofing, and many
   other mid-call attacks. In addition, an attacking interior node could
   insert or delete various headers which are not detectable by the node
   which expects that the headers not to be tampered with.

2.4.3.  Forgery

   SIP messages which are not authenticated and authorized could lead to
   registration hijacking, user impersonation, and all of the other
   attacks listed above. That is, interception of a SIP message may be
   useful for an attacker, but is not strictly necessary to mount vari-
   ous attacks.  In addition, an attacker inside node could modify pass-
   ing messages to place itself in the middle of a session for both the
   signaling as well as any potential media, as well as change identi-
   ties, invoke signaling which should have only originated on a user
   agent, etc.

2.4.4.  Disclosure

   Potentially confidential information may be containted witnin SIP
   messages, such as user location, media encryption keys, user iden-
   tity, out of band IVR signaling, sensitive internal routing topology,
   etc. In addition, unscrupulous intermediaries may disclose sensitive
   information for either active or passive attacks on the signaling or
   media.






Thomas              draft-thomas-sip-sec-req-00.txt             [Page 8]





INTERNET-DRAFT         SIP Security Requirements        12 November 2001


2.4.5.  Denial of Service (DoS)

   All of the denial of service attacks available to an outside attacker
   are available to an inside attacker.  If the outside signaling is
   protected in some way, an inside attacker would still have all of the
   same avenues upon since there would be no way to differentiate a leg-
   itimate user from a legitimate user who is bent on abusing the ser-
   vice.

   [XXX need more help here/mat]


3.  Proxy Routed Message Interfaces



   SIP brings to the fore many different trust boundaries which need to
   be considered. It should be noted that "trust" is a relative term,
   situational, and not necessarily symmetric. For example, a UA may
   trust its first hop proxy to route INVITE's expeditiously, but it may
   not trust its proxy to not expose media encryption keys to third par-
   ties. We introduce the concept of a trust boundary. Simply put, a
   trust boundary is the edge of where trust policies and considerations
   change. This draft considers each of the various trust boundaries and
   what the security implications are for each of them.

   SIP trapezoid is typically modeled as a trapezoid where there is a
   UAC and UAS with two intermediate proxies for initial INVITE's. This
   model reenforces the notion that SIP may go through multiple proxies
   as well suggesting that the notion that UA's may associate with prox-
   ies which are trusted to some degree. This is a good start for SIP in
   general, but not entirely adequate for modeling the various threats
   that can arise with proxy routed INVITE's. The reason is that an
   INVITE may pass through a proxy for which neither the UAC or UAS have
   no direct trust relationship at all. For this reason, we model the
   SIP trust boundaries as a pentagon instead. To differentiate it from
   the SIP trapezoid, we will call this the SIP JITB (Jack in the Box).

               I
              / \
            /     \
           /       \
          /         \
         H           J
          \         /
           \       /
            M-----B




Thomas              draft-thomas-sip-sec-req-00.txt             [Page 9]





INTERNET-DRAFT         SIP Security Requirements        12 November 2001


3.0.1.  M->H, B->J (UA to first hop proxy)

   In many cases, the UA will be set up with an outbound proxy which
   provides it services such as call routing, media QoS authorization,
   etc. There may or may not be a trust boundary here, but in the gen-
   eral case, the UA may not be trustworth to the proxy, though one gen-
   erally assumes that the UA wouldn't be talking to a proxy it does not
   trust (assuming a reasonable degree of certainty about the presented
   identities, of course).

3.0.1.1.  Authentication

   The Proxy and UA may require mutual authentication. This may require
   operation with many different crypto systems and may be required at
   the transport layer, application layer or both. For example, a proxy
   may demand that a UA identify itself to the proxy. Another example is
   that a proxy may want to provide a cryptographically signed version
   of some identifying header which the UA could determine is from a
   trusted source in the proxy routed path.

3.0.1.2.  Confidentiality

   The Proxy and UA may require message confidentiality for their mes-
   sages. It is possible that they may want to protect their traffic
   both with transport layer mechanisms for direct communication, or
   within the proxy routed traffic itself. One use of confidentiality is
   the use of encrypted state tokens which the proxy can give to the UA
   for later retrieval as described in [SIPSTATE].

3.0.1.3.  Integrity

   The Proxy and UA may require message integrity and freshness proof
   for their messages. It is possible that they may want to protect
   their traffic both with transport layer mechanisms for direct commun-
   ication, or within the proxy routed traffic itself.

3.0.1.4.  Authorization

   Once authenticated, the Proxy may require authorization to services
   desired during the session. Additionally, the proxy may want to pre-
   authorize the UA for various other services as in [MEDIAAUTH].

3.0.2.  M->I, B->I, M->J, B->H (UA to Intermediate proxy)

   UA's may be challenged by intermediate proxies that are not neces-
   sarily their first hop proxies, or within the same administrative
   domain is the UA itself. A typical example of this may be a situation
   where a user agent is attached to its local proxy which provides it



Thomas              draft-thomas-sip-sec-req-00.txt            [Page 10]





INTERNET-DRAFT         SIP Security Requirements        12 November 2001


   various services, but needs to pass a firewall proxy at the edge of a
   corporate network. The important thing to take from this is that the
   UA may be challenged at many points along the proxy routed path in
   many different domains and that the security solution MUST NOT make
   any assumption about the number or kind of places that the UA will be
   required to be challenged.

3.0.2.1.  Authentication

   The UA's and Intermediate Proxy may require mutual authentication.
   This may require operation with many different crypto systems and is
   required at the application layer.

3.0.2.2.  Confidentiality

   The UA's and Intermediate Proxy may require message confidentiality
   for their messages. It is possible that they may want to protect
   their traffic with within the proxy routed traffic itself.

3.0.2.3.  Integrity

   The UA's and Intermediate Proxies may require message integrity and
   freshness proof for their messages. It is possible that they may want
   to protect their traffic within the proxy routed traffic itself.

3.0.2.4.  Authorization

   Once authenticated, the UA's and Intermediate Proxies may require
   authorization to services desired during the session.

3.0.3.  M->B (end to end UAC to UAS)

   The UAC and UAS may require end to end security services.  Typically,
   once the UAS has been found, the UA's may want to exchange informa-
   tion between one another which is confidential and/or integrity pro-
   tected. The obvious example here is media encryption keys contained
   within an SDP announcement.

3.0.3.1.  Authentication

   The UAC and UAS may require mutual authentication. This may require
   operation with many different crypto systems and may be required at
   the transport layer, application layer or both.

3.0.3.2.  Confidentiality

   The UAC and UAS may require message confidentiality for their mes-
   sages. It is possible that they may want to protect their traffic



Thomas              draft-thomas-sip-sec-req-00.txt            [Page 11]





INTERNET-DRAFT         SIP Security Requirements        12 November 2001


   both with transport layer mechanisms for direct communication, or
   within the proxy routed traffic itself.

3.0.3.3.  Integrity

   The UAC and UAS may require message integrity and freshness proof for
   their messages. It is possible that they may want to protect their
   traffic both with transport layer mechanisms for direct communica-
   tion, or within the proxy routed traffic itself.

3.0.3.4.  Authorization

   Once authenticated, the UA's may require authorization to services
   desired during the session.

3.0.4.  H->I, J->I (Proxy-Proxy traffic)

   Proxy-proxy traffic may or may not cross a trust boundary. As usual,
   "trust boundary" depends on what action/service is or isn't trustable
   at the next hop, where there may be complex shades trust grayness
   where the next hop is trustable for action X, but untrustable for
   service Y. As such, proxy-proxy traffic may exhibit many of the same
   characteristics as UA/Proxy traffic that crosses a trust boundary.

3.0.4.1.  Authentication

   The Proxies may require mutual authentication. This may require
   operation with many different crypto systems and may be required at
   the transport layer, application layer or both. It is also possible
   that they may want to create digitally signed pieces of information
   to be forwarded back along the proxy routed path which could vouch
   for certain headers, etc.

3.0.4.2.  Confidentiality

   The Proxies may require message confidentiality for their messages.
   It is possible that they may want to protect their traffic both with
   transport layer mechanisms for direct communication. It is also pos-
   sible that they may want to be able to send and receive information
   that they, or one of their charges desires to be kept confidential
   but must be forwarded (cf call trace).

3.0.4.3.  Integrity

   The Proxies may require message integrity and freshness proof for
   their messages. It is possible that they may want to protect their
   traffic both for transport layer mechanisms for direct communication,
   or within the proxy routed traffic itself.



Thomas              draft-thomas-sip-sec-req-00.txt            [Page 12]





INTERNET-DRAFT         SIP Security Requirements        12 November 2001


3.0.4.4.  Authorization

   Once authenticated, the proxies may require authorization to services
   desired during the session. One piece of authorization worth singling
   out here is that proxy-proxy authorization across administrative
   domains is typically where settlement would take place, be it of
   third party kind (ie OSP clearinghouse), or using bilateral settle-
   ment agreements. SIP is typically interested in the former as the
   latter is outside of the scope of SIP.

3.0.5.  H->J, J->H (Maybe Bogus Combination)

   For completeness, we list non-adjacent proxies. SIP has no real con-
   cept of communication across non-adjacent proxies to this author's
   knowledge as of now. Maybe somebody brighter than the author of this
   memo could elucidate him should this combination need to be con-
   sidered.


3.1.  Redirect and Registration Interface Requirements


   As far as the author can tell, there aren't any unique requirements
   for redirect and registration servers. Registration and redirect
   servers appear to have the same security requirements as the UA/Proxy
   interface.



4.  Requirements



   o    Authentication -- the recepient of a SIP message MUST be able to
        demand authentication from the initiator. There MUST be mechan-
        isms which provide for end to end authentication as well as
        authentication to intermediate proxies.

   o    Mutual Authentication -- a SIP host which is challenged to
        authenticate itself to another SIP host MUST be able to demand
        mutual authentication.

        [XXX/mat: is it worth while considering the case where
         a client wants the server to authenticate itself, but the
         server doesn't care, ala TLS/Web?]


   o    Privacy -- SIP Messages MUST be able to be transported



Thomas              draft-thomas-sip-sec-req-00.txt            [Page 13]





INTERNET-DRAFT         SIP Security Requirements        12 November 2001


        confidentially hop by hop. SIP MUST also provide a means of
        transporting portions of SIP messages that are not required for
        hop-by-hop processing privately between arbitrary SIP nodes in
        the proxy routed path.

   o    Replay protection -- Both hop by hop solutions and point to
        intermediate proxy routed point MUST be able to detect replays
        and reject them. It MUST NOT be possible for a snooper to replay
        a sequence of bits which is not detectable.

   o    Transport -- A SIP host MUST be able to transport entire SIP
        messages securely (eg, private, replay proof, integrity
        checked...)  for TCP and UDP. SCTP SHOULD be supported as well.

   o    The solution SHOULD allow for multiple different authentication
        schemes to be added in time (eg, PKI-based, Kerberos based, AAA,
        etc). The solution MUST provide a solution for direct pre-shared
        keys.

   o    Considering the difficulty of deploying strong cryptographic
        based solutions, the solution MUST provide a means to prevent
        source spoofing attacks which does not rely on strong authenti-
        cation, and SHOULD provide authentication security on the order
        guessing a large number in the absense of active snooping. This
        solution MUST be mandatory to execute when strong authentication
        is not available.

   o    Proxied authentication -- an intermediate SIP node MUST be able
        to assert identity for user agents which are be used in addition
        or in lieu of user agent credentials. These identities MUST have
        the ability to be support strong cryptographic authentication.

   o    Support for public key authentication -- the solution MUST pro-
        vide a means either initially or in the future to use public
        base authentication, either using direct public keys, or using
        publkc key infrastructures. It MUST also provide a means
        leveraging authentication to provide strong crypto based
        integrity and privacy.  (PKI's).

   o    Support secret key authentication -- the solution MUST provide a
        means of using direct peer to peer secret key authentication as
        well as privacy and message integrity checking. The solution
        MUST allow either initially or in the future centralized secret
        key based authentication schemes like Kerberos and AAA.

   o    Guard against hostile MITM -- In situations where traffic is
        routed through possibly untrusted intermediaries (proxies), the
        solution MUST provide a means of transporting sensitive headers



Thomas              draft-thomas-sip-sec-req-00.txt            [Page 14]





INTERNET-DRAFT         SIP Security Requirements        12 November 2001


        integrity protected as well as private to their ultimate desti-
        nation. The solution MUST NOT try to protect against attacks
        which are inherent to routing itself.

   o    The solution SHOULD consider the cost of any public key opera-
        tions which are used, and the sizes of authentication creden-
        tials. If deemed necessary, the solution SHOULD provide a means
        of caching the state of "expensive" credentials which are amor-
        tized over subsequent messaging using less expensive mechanisms.

   o    The solution SHOULD allow for the transport of 3rd party
        authentication/authorization tokens for use in conjunction with
        other protocols. (eg, DCS state blobs, OSP tokens, etc)

   o    The solution SHOULD consider the sizes of messages, and SHOULD
        provide a mechanism to first compress any encrypted portions of
        messages.

   o    The solution MUST consider denial of service attacks, and in
        particular MUST consider the ramifications of CPU and storage
        attacks from unauthenticated sources against SIP nodes. The
        solution MAY consider denial of service attacks by authenti-
        cated, but otherwise rogue nodes.

References

[SIP]     The SIP Working Group, M. Handley, H. Schulzrinne, E.
          Schooler, J. Rosenberg, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol",
          RFC 2543, March 1999

[Kerberos]The CAT Working Group, J. Kohl, C.Neuman, "The Kerberos Net-
          work Authentication Service (V5)", RFC 1510, September 1993

[IPSEC]   The IPsec Working Group, S. Kent, R. Atkinson, "Security
          Architecture for the Internet Protocol", RFC 2401, November
          1998

[IKE]     The IPsec Working Group, D. Harkins, D. Carrel, "The Internet
          Key Exchange", RFC 2409, November 1998

[SIPSTATE]SIP Working Group, W. Marshal et al, "Sip Extensions for sup-
          porting Distributed Call State", draft-ietf-sip-state-02.txt

[SIPPRIVACY]
          SIP Working Group, W. Marshal et al, "SIP Extensions for
          Caller Identity and Privacy", draft-ietf-sip-privacy-02.txt

[MEDIAAUTH]SIP Working Group, W. Marshal et al, "SIP Extensions for



Thomas              draft-thomas-sip-sec-req-00.txt            [Page 15]





INTERNET-DRAFT         SIP Security Requirements        12 November 2001


          Media Authorization", draft-ietf-sip-call-auth-01.txt

Author's Address

          Michael Thomas
          Cisco Systems
          375 E Tasman Rd
          San Jose, Ca, 95134, USA
          Tel: +1 408-525-5386
          email: mat@cisco.com









































Thomas              draft-thomas-sip-sec-req-00.txt            [Page 16]


