


MULTIMOB Group                                                    H. Liu
Internet-Draft                             Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
Expires: April 16, 2009                                        H. Asaeda
                                                         Keio University
                                                             TM. Eubanks
                                                 Iformata Communications
                                                        October 13, 2008


          Mobile Multicast Requirements on IGMP/MLD Protocols
              draft-liu-multimob-igmp-mld-mobility-req-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 16, 2009.















Liu, et al.              Expires April 16, 2009                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility     October 2008


Abstract

   This document presents the requirements for IGMP/MLD protocols to
   allow the deployment of mobile multicast service.  It is intended to
   provide useful guideline when adapting current IGMP/MLD protocols to
   support terminal mobility.













































Liu, et al.              Expires April 16, 2009                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility     October 2008


Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
   NOT","SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED","MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  The Behavior of IGMP and MLD Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.1.  IGMP Version 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.2.  IGMP Version 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.3.  IGMP Version 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.4.  Multicast Listener Discovery Protocols . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.5.  Lightweight IGMPv3/MLDv2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.  Requirements for IGMP/MLD to Support Mobile Multicast  . . . . 10
     4.1.  Functional Requirements for Mobile Multicast . . . . . . . 10
     4.2.  Requirements on Tuning IGMP/MLD Protocol Parameters  . . . 10
     4.3.  Requirements for Handover  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.4.  Requirements for Point-To-Point Link . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     4.5.  Requirements for Explicit Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     6.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     6.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 16






















Liu, et al.              Expires April 16, 2009                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility     October 2008


1.  Introduction

   IP multicast efficiently distributes data to a number of receiver
   hosts in IP networks simultaneously thereby saving network and server
   resources.  The receiver hosts use IGMP for IPv4 [2] and MLD for IPv6
   [3] to receive or to stop receiving data via multicast (using join/
   leave or a subscribe/unsubscribe requests).  The intermediate routers
   construct multicast tree between the source and receiver hosts with
   multicast routing protocols.

   IGMP and MLD protocols work on broadcast shared links and point-to-
   point links.  These protocols can also work on a wireless link.
   However, it is necessary to consider how to make a router and mobile
   hosts using IGMP and MLD protocols better fit the properties of a
   wireless link.  In this document, the requirements for IGMP and MLD
   protocols that enable mobile multicast services via a wireless link
   are discussed.  This document mainly focuses on IEEE 802.11 and
   802.16 as the target wireless link to adapt the requirements for the
   general use, whereas 3GPP or 3GPP2 might be the additional target in
   the revised version of this document.

   Receiver mobility is the target of this document, because it has more
   promising application scenarios and exhibits less deployment
   complexity.  In addition, in IP multicast the IGMP/MLD protocols
   describe the interaction between multicast receivers and their first
   hop routers, sources do not require IGMP/MLD support unless they are
   also receivers, and so there is not expected to be any IGMP/MLD
   requirements for multicast source or network mobility.

   IGMP or MLD protocol can work with any mobile protocols (e.g., MIPv6
   [9], PMIPv6 [10], NEMO [11]) independently, if these protocols
   support multicast.  However, context transfer or other procedures to
   provide seamless handover depend on the mobile protocols.  Therefore,
   this document does not assume mobile protocols that mobile hosts use,
   and only protocol-independent considerations and requirements
   regarding how mobile protocols should work with IGMP/MLD for seamless
   handover are discussed.














Liu, et al.              Expires April 16, 2009                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility     October 2008


2.  Problem Statement

   A mobile host usually accesses to a network via a wireless link.
   When a mobile host wants to join or leave an IP multicast session, it
   sends IGMP/MLD messages for the request to its upstream equipment.
   The upstream equipment may be a wireless access router (in case of
   MIPv6), a mobile router (in cast of NEMO), a gateway (in case of
   PMIPv6), or a switch or router that supporting IGMP/MLD Proxy.  In
   the following part of this document, it is expressed as an "upstream
   router" or "multicast router".

   The upstream router should maintain all group membership states
   indicating which multicast sessions mobile hosts have joined on a
   wireless LAN.  In many cases, current upstream wireless routers and
   switches do not maintain this information and flood all multicasts
   received onto each wireless LAN, which is not an efficient use of
   wireless bandwidth.

   According to the properties of a wireless link, bandwidth usage and
   packet loss should be carefully considered.  It is also necessary to
   take care of battery consumption of a mobile host.  These conditions
   encourage the minimization of exchanged data packets and control
   messages including IGMP/MLD protocol messages if possible.

   On the other hand, IGMP and MLD are asymmetric and non-reliable
   protocols; multicast routers need solicited membership reports by
   periodical IGMP/MLD Queries, in order to be robust in front of host
   or link failures and packet loss.  It is encouraged that host-and-
   router communication is effectively coordinated to support limited
   wireless or terminal resources.

   When a host receiving multicast data moves from an access link to
   another access link, the host wants to continuously receive the
   multicast data without any packet loss and session interruption, and
   the network provider wants to minimize the amount of duplicated
   multicast traffic.  This seemless handover is a necessary component
   of mobile multicast communication, which introduces additional
   requirements on IGMP/MLD protocols during handover.  Precisely, the
   moving host's membership information should be transmitted to the new
   access link as quickly as possible.  This procedure reduces the
   host's join latency.  Or, if there is no member host on the access
   link after the host moves, then the upstream router should leave from
   the multicast session quickly as well.  This contributes to releasing
   the unnecessary resources.

   In the following sections of this document, we briefly introduce the
   IGMP/MLD protocols, analyze the protocol behavior and the
   requirements of IP multicast mobile service, and discuss the



Liu, et al.              Expires April 16, 2009                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility     October 2008


   possibility of the modification or extension of the protocols if
   needed.  The illustration below will consider both IPv4 and IPv6
   networks.
















































Liu, et al.              Expires April 16, 2009                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility     October 2008


3.  The Behavior of IGMP and MLD Protocols

   A multicast receiving host using IGMP protocols to join and leave a
   multicast group on an IPv4 network, and using MLD protocols on an
   IPv6 network.

3.1.  IGMP Version 1

   IGMP Version 1 [5] defines the basic operating model between a
   multicast receiving host and its upstream router to determine group
   membership.  The router periodically sends Host Membership Queries to
   its attached network.  A host sends a Host Membership Report to the
   router when it decides to join a group, or it responds to the Queries
   passively.

   IGMPv1 introduces two specific mechanisms to avoid the implosion of
   concurrent reports when the host answers the Query - delaying
   response and report suppression.  Delaying response means when a host
   receives the Query, it does not respond with a report immediately,
   but rather waits a random period of time.  Report suppression means
   the host will withdraw its own report when it hears a report
   scheduled to be sent from other host joining the same group.  It
   contributes to minimizing the number of responses but is impossible
   for the multicast router to track per host's membership status by
   reports.

   An IGMPv1 host does not send group leave message explicitly.  It
   silently leaves the group by ignoring a Host Membership Query, which
   causes an undesirably long leave latency.

   IGMPv1 is an obsolete protocol; hence it is not recommended for
   mobile hosts to implement IGMPv1, whereas upstream routers may need
   to support IGMPv1 to keep compatibility with non-upgraded mobile
   hosts.

3.2.  IGMP Version 2

   IGMP Version 2 [6] makes a series of optimizations to improve the
   protocol behavior.  An IGMPv2 host can explicitly send a Leave Report
   when it decides to stop receiving multicast data.  This enables fast
   leave from the multicast group.  When a multicast router receives a
   leave message, it will generate a Group-Specific Query specifying the
   multicast group address in order to recognize whether there is other
   receiver for the same group on its network.  IGMPv2 also supports the
   case when multiple multicast routers are connected to the same
   network.  In this case, a single Querier is elected by ordering the
   IP addresses to take on the duty of sending Query packets.




Liu, et al.              Expires April 16, 2009                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility     October 2008


   Several timers are defined for IGMPv2 operations and these values are
   configurable.  Query Interval is the interval between General Queries
   sent by a router, which has influence on the total number of IGMPv2
   messages on a link.  Query Response Interval is the maximum response
   time of a report after a host receives the General Query.  It will
   reduce the bursty traffic of the reports on a link.  Startup Query
   Interval is the interval between the queries sent by the Querier in
   startup.  Last Member Query Interval is the maximum response time
   used by Group-Specific Queries in response to leave from session.
   This value can be tuned to modify the leave latency of the network.

   IGMPv2 also introduces timer related counters to make the protocol
   function more robust.  For example, it defines Robustness Variable to
   quantify the number of reports sent out to prevent packet loss.  Last
   Member Query count is used to set the number of Group-Specific
   Queries sent before the router assumes there is no local member.
   Startup Query Count is the number of Queries issued on startup.
   These values can be tuned according to the expected packet loss on a
   link.

3.3.  IGMP Version 3

   IGMP Version 3 [2] introduces a big enhancement to the previous two
   versions.  It defines INCLUDE and EXCLUDE filter mode on both the
   host and router side.  With the filter mode, a host can specify the
   desired or undesired source address(es) and multicast address(es) in
   IGMP report messages.

   IGMPv3 router uses filter mode to process the group record properly.
   The router also maintains a group-timer to indicate the filter mode
   switch over and a source-timer to time each valid source.  A new type
   of Source-and-Group-Specific Query is utilized to verify there are no
   receivers desiring to receive traffic from listed sources for a
   particular group, which has been requested to no longer be forwarded.

   Another modification is that IGMPv3 does not adopt the report
   suppression mechanism, because the various packet type and the
   diverse information carried in the report make it rather difficult to
   define a uniform suppression policy.  Without suppression, the number
   of report messages may increase greatly on a link.  IGMPv3 solves
   this problem by make pending reports or queries merged into a
   combined packet.

   An advantage of eliminating report suppression is that it provides
   the possibility for the router to keep track of host membership
   status on a link.  This Explicit Tracking consumes memory on the
   router, but provides feasibility to manage end users.




Liu, et al.              Expires April 16, 2009                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility     October 2008


3.4.  Multicast Listener Discovery Protocols

   MLDv1 and MLDv2 are respectively derived from IGMPv2 and IGMPv3 to be
   used for IPv6 host and router.  The important difference between MLD
   and IGMP is that MLD is a sub-protocol of ICMPv6 and its message
   types are a subset of ICMPv6 messages.  For MLDv1 parts of the
   message types are renamed to distinguish from those of IGMPv2.

3.5.  Lightweight IGMPv3/MLDv2

   IGMPv3 and MLDv2 enable the support of Source-Specific Multicast
   (SSM) communication [8] by indicating desired sources in the INCLUDE
   Group Record.  Its usage of excluding undesired sources by an EXCLUDE
   filter mode operation has little practical prototype use and no
   desired use case.  Moreover, when a host requests to join or leave
   session whose operation changes INCLUDE filter mode to EXCLUDE filter
   mode or vise versa, both the host and the upstream router cause
   complex state transition and scalability problems.

   In [4], simplified version protocols of IGMPv3/MLDv2 are defined to
   keep the INCLUDE source-filtering characteristics to support SSM
   communication and remove the EXCLUDE filter mode operation.  Not only
   are LW-IGMPv3 and LW-MLDv2 compatible with the standard IGMPv3 and
   MLDv2, but also the protocol operations made by hosts and routers or
   switches (performing IGMPv3/MLDv2 snooping) are simplified by
   reducing the complex processes and the scalability problems.  The
   number of report types are reduced, and the host-side kernel
   implementation and the router's operation are greatly simplified.
   Besides, less states need to be stored by lightweight router compared
   to their full IGMPv3/MLDv2 counterpart.  These improvements are
   especially desirable for multicast mobility, as wireless devices
   typically have limited storage and CPU processing capabilities.



















Liu, et al.              Expires April 16, 2009                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft   IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility     October 2008


4.  Requirements for IGMP/MLD to Support Mobile Multicast

4.1.  Functional Requirements for Mobile Multicast

   Any-Source Multicast (ASM) is a traditional multicast communication
   model in which receivers requests all data from a multicast address,
   which is denoted with (*,G).  A host joining a (*,G) session will
   receive data from all the sources sending to the specified multicast
   address.  On the other hand, in the SSM communication, a host
   specifies both source and multicast addresses and receives the
   traffic from the specified source(s).  The subscribed source-specific
   multicast session is denoted by an (S,G) and called a channel.

   All the versions of IGMP/MLD support the ASM communication.  It is
   not recommended to use IGMPv1 in mobile communications since it does
   not have a robust mechanism to retransmit report messages, does not
   provide fast leave, and does not support SSM, as described in
   Section 2.  IGMPv2 and MLDv1 are possible to be used in mobile
   communications, but they do not support SSM subscription.

   To enable the SSM communication, a mobile host must use IGMPv3/MLDv2
   or LW-IGMPv3/LW-MLDv2.  As described in [4], there is no functional
   difference to subscribe (S,G) channels between the full versions of
   IGMPv3/MLDv2 and the lightweight version protocols.  The lightweight
   version protocols have the advantage of simpler processing.

   IGMP/MLD protocols (except IGMPv1) implement fast join and fast leave
   functions.  When a host joins a multicast session, it sends
   unsolicited join report to its upstream router immediately.  The
   Startup Query Interval has been set to 1/4 of the General Query value
   to enable the faster join at startup.  When the host ceases from
   listening a session, it sends a request to leave the session
   immediately.  The Group-Specific or Source-and-Group-Specific Queries
   are triggered when an IGMP/MLD router knows that the reception for a
   group or a source-specific group has been terminated.  This helps the
   router acquire the multicast membership information as fast as
   possible when all the members as a whole leave a group.  The time to
   complete leaving from a session is referred to as leave latency.
   Lower leave latency (i.e. fast leave) has the advantage of quickly
   releasing the network resources.

4.2.  Requirements on Tuning IGMP/MLD Protocol Parameters

   Within each protocol's scope, the number of transmitted packets on a
   wireless link could be further decreased by tuning timer values.  For
   example, Query Interval can be set to a larger value to reduce the
   packet quantity.  The Query Response interval could be widened to
   avoid the burst of messages.



Liu, et al.              Expires April 16, 2009                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft   IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility     October 2008


   On the other hand, to cover the possibility of a State-Change Report
   being missed by one or more multicast routers, a host transmits the
   same State-Change Report [Robustness Variable] times in all [2][3].
   However, this manner does not only guarantee that the State-Change
   Report is reached to the routers, but also increases the number or
   amount of State-Change Report messages on a wireless link.  It is
   required to tune these values with the good balance of protocol
   robustness and the amount of traffic.

   As well, various IGMP/MLD timers should be configurable.  If non-
   default settings are used, they MUST be consistent among all routers
   on a single network.

4.3.  Requirements for Handover

   [12] categorized the diversified mobile IP schemes by their group
   subscription manner principally as home subscription and remote
   subscription.  These two different subscription has important
   influences on the handover behaviour.  Since different mobile and
   handover protocols may need different parameters and different
   optimizations, this document describes the possible scenarios with
   examples in MIPv6 [9] but only discussed the possible requirements
   related to the group-subscription related behavior.

   In home subscription, the IGMP/MLD message should be encapsulated and
   tunneled to the home network.  The multicast router (e.g., Home
   Agent) on home network will be responsible for joining and pruning a
   multicast tree.  When a mobile host moves to a new foreign network,
   it does not need to re-join the multicast group.

   In the remote subscription approach, a mobile host joins the group
   via a local multicast router on the foreign network.  The router
   intercepts the host's report message and joins or prunes the
   multicast tree.  After handover to another foreign network, the host
   needs to resend new reports to routers on the new network.  If the
   old multicast branches have been torn down before the new branches
   being constructed, the host will suffer from packets loss during the
   handover.

   To prevent packet loss, a make-before-break mechanism SHOULD be
   provided.  It requires a mobile host to join the group on the new
   network as soon as possible once it decides to switch to the new
   network.  The host keeps the reception of the "old" multicast data
   until the traffic from new branches arrives.  Then the host begins
   issuing leave reports to the previous attached multicast router.

   The possibility of packet loss can be reduced by predicting the
   movement of a mobile node during handover.  The handover can be



Liu, et al.              Expires April 16, 2009                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft   IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility     October 2008


   initiated either by the mobile host or by the network.  In the
   mobile-initiated handover, the host acquires the handover information
   quickly and can send early reports.  In the network-initiated
   handover, the network entity indicates the possible handover
   situation and the mobile host does not invoke any process.

   It may be possible that IGMP and MLD could be extended to carry the
   handover indication from a previous router to a new router to
   facilitate the fast join and fast leave.  Since IGMP/MLD protocol or
   message extension may require additional operational costs or
   interoperability problems, it must be carefully defined.

   IGMP/MLD hosts and routers can adjust their timer and counter values
   to make faster join/leave during handover, as described in
   Section 4.2.  The adjustment is carried out by the application
   according to the actual wireless situations and policies of the
   management.

4.4.  Requirements for Point-To-Point Link

   A wireless link assumed in this document is categorized as a shared
   link or a point-to-point (PTP) or point-to-multipoint (PMP) link.
   For a shared link, the interface state maintained by a multicast
   router on the link is the summary of the receiving state for member
   hosts on the link.

   But for a PTP link, a multicast router has to maintain the interface
   state for each link, and this condition may introduce protocol
   overhead for the router.  When a large number of receivers attach on
   the wireless link, the multicast router may introduce protocol
   overhead for the router.  Protocol simplification may give some
   benefit for the processing cost and memory usage to deal with a PTP
   link.

4.5.  Requirements for Explicit Tracking

   Since the full and lightweight IGMPv3 and MLDv2 protocols disable a
   report suppression mechanism (described in Section 3.3), multicast
   routers working with these protocols can choose to implement explicit
   tracking of mobile hosts.  The explicit tracking enables the router
   to learn the reception state of each receiver, but at the meantime
   consumes substantial memory resources on the router.

   The advantage of explicit tracking is that it provides better
   manageability of mobile receivers.  It is unnecessary to issue Group-
   Specific queries and Source-Specific Queries to stop receiving on
   subnets whose router keeps track of group and source receivers.




Liu, et al.              Expires April 16, 2009                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft   IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility     October 2008


5.  Security Considerations

   Apart from the security issue of IGMP/MLD, additional requirements
   should be considered for the features of the wireless link.  They
   will be described in the later version of this draft.














































Liu, et al.              Expires April 16, 2009                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft   IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility     October 2008


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [1]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to indicate requirement
         levels", RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]   Cain, B., Deering, S., Kouvelas, I., Fenner, B., and A.
         Thyagarajan, "Internet Group Management Protocol, Version 3",
         RFC 3376, October 2002.

   [3]   Vida, R. and L. Costa, "Multicast Listener Discovery Version 2
         (MLDv2) for IPv6", RFC 3810, June 2004.

   [4]   Liu, H., Cao, W., and H. Asaeda, "Lightweight IGMPv3 and MLDv2
         Protocols",
         draft-ietf-mboned-lightweight-igmpv3-mldv2-04.txt (work in
         progress), September 2008.

   [5]   Deering, S., "Host Extensions for IP Multicasting", RFC 1112,
         August 1989.

   [6]   Fenner, W., "Internet Group Management Protocol, Version 2",
         RFC 2236, November 1997.

   [7]   Deering, S., Fenner, W., and B. Haberman, "Multicast Listener
         Discovery (MLD) for IPv6", RFC 2710, October 1999.

   [8]   Holbrook, H. and B. Cain, "Source-Specific Multicast for IP",
         RFC 4607, August 2006.

6.2.  Informative References

   [9]   Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in
         IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [10]  Gundavelli, Ed., S., Leung, K., Devarapalli, V., Chowdhury, K.,
         and B. Patil, "Proxy Mobile IPv6", RFC 5213, August 2008.

   [11]  Devarapalli, V., Wakikawa, R., Petrescu, A., and P. Thubert,
         "Network Mobility (NEMO) Basic Support Protocol", RFC 3963,
         January 2005.

   [12]  Romdhani, I., Kellil, M., and H. Lach, "IP Mobile Multicast:
         Challenges and Solutions", IEEE Comm. Surveys 6(1), 2004.






Liu, et al.              Expires April 16, 2009                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft   IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility     October 2008


Authors' Addresses

   Hui Liu
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
   Huawei Bld., No.3 Xinxi Rd.
   Shang-Di Information Industry Base
   Hai-Dian Distinct, Beijing  100085
   China

   Email: Liuhui47967@huawei.com


   Hitoshi Asaeda
   Keio University
   Graduate School of Media and Governance
   5322 Endo
   Fujisawa, Kanagawa  252-8520
   Japan

   Email: asaeda@wide.ad.jp
   URI:   http://www.sfc.wide.ad.jp/~asaeda/


   T.M. Eubanks
   Iformata Communications
   130 W. Second Street
   Dayton, Ohio  45402
   USA

   Phone: +1 703 501 4376
   Email: marshall.eubanks@iformata.com
   URI:   http://www.iformata.com/



















Liu, et al.              Expires April 16, 2009                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft   IGMP and MLD Requirements for Mobility     October 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Liu, et al.              Expires April 16, 2009                [Page 16]


