





    
    
   CCAMP Working Group                                        Zafar Ali 
                                                           Hassan Sheikh 
   Internet Draft                                   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
                                                          Tomohiro Otani 
                                             KDDI R&D Laboratories, Inc.  
   Intended status: BCP                                   March 5, 2007 
   Expires: September 2007 
                                       
    
                                        
        Address Resolution for GMPLS controlled PSC Ethernet Interfaces 
                                        
           draft-ali-arp-over-gmpls-controlled-ethernet-psc-i-03.txt 
                                        
    

   Status of this Memo 

      By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that       
      any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is       
      aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she       
      becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of       
      BCP 79. 

      Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
      Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
      other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
      Drafts. 

      Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
      months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
      documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
      Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work 
      in progress." 

      The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
      http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

      The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
      http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

      This Internet-Draft will expire on August 5, 2007. 

   Copyright Notice 

      Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).  
    
    
                          Expires September 2007               [Page 1] 
    
   draft-ali-arp-over-gmpls-controlled-ethernet-psc-i-03.txt March 2007 
       
   Abstract 

      This document outlines some interoperability issues observed with 
      the use of ARP over GMPLS controlled Ethernet router-to-router 
      (PSC) interfaces transiting from a non-Ethernet core, e.g., FSC 
      or LSC GMPLS core. The document also recommends some procedures 
      to address these issues. The aim of this document is to 
      facilitate and ensure better interworking of GMPLS-capable Label 
      Switching Routers (LSRs), based on experience gained in 
      interoperability testing.  
       
   Conventions used in this document 

      In examples, "C:" and "S:" indicate lines sent by the client and 
      server respectively. 

      The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL 
      NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and 
      "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in 
      RFC-2119. 

   Table of Contents 
       
      1. Introduction...............................................2 
      2. Address to use for ARP Resolution..........................4 
      3. Security Considerations....................................4 
      4. IANA Considerations........................................4 
      5. References.................................................5 
         5.1. Normative References..................................5 
         5.2. Informative References................................5 
      Author's Addresses............................................5 
      Intellectual Property Statement...............................5 
      Disclaimer of Validity........................................6 
       
   1. Introduction 

      This draft addresses the scenario where edge routers are 
      connected via a non-Ethernet switch capable GMPLS core, e.g., FSC 
      or LSC core [RFC3471], [RFC3473]. Furthermore, the interfaces 
      between the router and the optical device (OXC) are Ethernet, and 
      considered as point-to-point.  
       
      When an LSP Path is established between the Ingress Router to 
      Egress Router, Ethernet interface at the two routers comes up. 
      However, before this LSP (or interface) can forward any IP                    
                        
                       Expires August 5, 2007                [Page 2] 
       
   draft-ali-arp-over-gmpls-controlled-ethernet-psc-i-03.txt March 2007 
       

      traffic, MAC address of the remote router needs to be resolved. 
      The remote MAC address learning is the same procedure used in ARP 
      resolution to be able to map and ip address to a MAC address on 
      an Ethernet segment.  
       
      End-point MAC address needs to be re-learned once the ARP cache 
      entries time-out, or every time the path taken by the GMPLS LSP 
      changes (e.g., due to re-routing or re-optimization). This 
      introduces latency that is at least equal to the round trip 
      delay. Such latency adds to the traffic switchover delay and 
      consequently traffic loss for 1:1 protected LSP without extra 
      traffic, or when LSP route changes due to re-routing 
      (restoration) or re-optimization, etc.  
       
      Interoperability issues in learning end-point MAC address using 
      ARP are also found among vendors at various Interoperability 
      events/ testing efforts. This is because different vendors use 
      different IP address for ARP resolution. Some LSR vendor uses the 
      address of the TE link at the end-point, while others adapt to 
      use tunnel interface address for ARP resolution. When both end-
      point TE link address and tunnel interface addresses are 
      unnumbered, the ARP needs to be performed using loopback 
      addresses or unique node-ids. Some LSRs do not reply to ARP 
      request sent to a loopback address unless proxy Arp is used or 
      unless there is no issues with the L3 reachability of such 
      loopback address.  When tunnel interface is protected, i.e., it 
      has working and protecting LSP-es, the ARP requested for a given 
      tunnel IF address should resolve ARP for the physical interfaces 
      along the path of working and protecting LSP. Issue associated 
      with ARP latency and traffic loss for 1:1 protected LSP without 
      extra traffic, or when LSP route changes due to due to re-routing 
      (restoration) or re-optimization, etc. could not be addressed. 
      Furthermore tunnel IF address can also be unnumbered.  
       
       
      This document provides some recommendations for the use of the 
      MAC addresses resolution (ARP resolution) for a GMPLS LSP. The 
      issue with the use of IP address for ARP can be resolved by 
      agreeing on use of the IP address used for ARP resolution for 
      GMPLS tunnels. Instead of using the TE link IP addresses for ARP 
      resolution, it is recommended that the GMPLS tunnel IP addresses 
      be used for ARP resolution. This would also address the issue 
      associated with the use of disjoint subnets used with numbered TE 
      links between the Ingress LSR and the Optical node, and the 
      Egress LSR and the optical node. If the GMPLS tunnel is 
      unnumbered then the ARP resolution can be done using Loopback 
      addresses associated with the GMPLS tunnel. The use of the GMPLS 
                        
                        
                       Expires August 5, 2007                [Page 3] 
       
   draft-ali-arp-over-gmpls-controlled-ethernet-psc-i-03.txt March 2007 
       

      tunnel IP address for ARP resolution can also be extended to the 
      case where the GMPLS tunnel is providing 1:1 protection i.e. a 
      working LSP and a protected LSP exists for the GMPLS tunnel. The 
      protected and the working LSP of the GMPLS tunnel are typically 
      using different physical interfaces with different MAC address 
      and TE link addresses. In this case, using the same GMPLS tunnel 
      IP addresses for resolving ARP for both working and the 
      protecting links would require the router to associate two 
      physical interfaces with different MAC addresses with the same 
      GMPLS tunnel IP address. The use of this implementation along 
      with the creation of such mapping would also eliminate the 
      problem of ARP cache timeout on the protecting link; and hence 
      can address the above-mentioned ARP latency issue related to 
      protection/ restoration or reoptimization case. 
    

   2. Address to use for ARP Resolution 

      An LSR SHOULD use tunnel interface address for ARP request. An 
      LSR, based on a local decision, can determine if the Interface is 
      point-to-point and SHOULD resolve APR using loopback addresses. 
      Similarly, for point-to-point interfaces, an LSR SHOULD resolve 
      APR for two or more physical interfaces using the same IP address 
      (this is to address ARP Latency issue mentioned-above). 
       
      In the case of protected tunnels, the ARP cache SHOULD NOT 
      timeout the ARP entry on both the working and the protecting 
      LSPs. To meet this requirement, an LSR MAY resolve the ARP at the 
      GMPLS tunnel setup time and MAY use an infinite ARP timeout (this 
      is to make sure that ARP entire will not timeout as long as the 
      GMPLS tunnel is UP). Alternatively, an LSR MAY implement a 
      periodic ARP refresh scheme for the GMPLS tunnel to keep the ARP 
      cache refreshed for both the working and the protected LSP.   
        

   3. Security Considerations 

      This document does not introduce new security issues. 

    
   4. IANA Considerations 

      This document does not require any IANA consideration.   




                        
                        
                       Expires August 5, 2007                [Page 4] 
       
   draft-ali-arp-over-gmpls-controlled-ethernet-psc-i-03.txt March 2007 
       

   5. References 

   5.1. Normative References 

       

   5.2. Informative References 

      [RFC3471] Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) 
         Signaling Functional Description, RFC 3471, L. Berger, et al, 
         January 2003. 
      [RFC3473] "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) 
         Signaling Resource ReserVation Protocol-Traffic Engineering 
         (RSVP-TE) Extensions", RFC 3473, L. Berger, et al, January 
         2003.  
       
   Author's Addresses 

      Zafar Ali 
      Cisco Systems Inc. 
      2000 Innovation Dr.,  
      Kanata, Ontario, K2K 3E8   
      Canada. 
      Phone: (613) 889-6158 
      Email: zali@cisco.com  
       
      Hassan Sheikh 
      C Cisco Systems Inc. 
      2000 Innovation Dr.,  
      Kanata, Ontario, K2K 3E8   
      Canada. 
      Phone: (613) 254-3356 
      Email: hassans@cisco.com  
       
      Tomohiro Otani 
      KDDI R&D Laboratories, Inc.  
      2-1-15 Ohara Fujimino-shi      
      Saitama, 356-8502. Japan      
      Phone:  +81-49-278-7357 
      Email:  otani@kddilabs.jp 
    

   Intellectual Property Statement 

      The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
      Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be 
      claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology 
                        
                        
                       Expires August 5, 2007                [Page 5] 
       
   draft-ali-arp-over-gmpls-controlled-ethernet-psc-i-03.txt March 2007 
       

      described in this document or the extent to which any license 
      under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it 
      represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any 
      such rights.  Information on the procedures with respect to 
      rights in RFC documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

      Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
      assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
      attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the 
      use of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
      specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR 
      repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

      The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention 
      any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other 
      proprietary rights that may cover technology that may be required 
      to implement this standard.  Please address the information to 
      the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

   Disclaimer of Validity 

      This document and the information contained herein are provided 
      on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
      REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
      IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
      WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
      WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
      ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR 
      FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

   Copyright Statement 

      Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 

      This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
      contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
      retain all their rights. 

       








                        
                        
                       Expires August 5, 2007                [Page 6] 
       
