


Network Working Group                                         S. Bradner
Internet-Draft                                        Harvard University
Obsoletes: 2026,3932 (if approved)                               E. Lear
Expires: March 17, 2007                               Cisco Systems GmbH
                                                      September 13, 2006


              The Internet Standards Process -- Version 4
                   draft-lear-ietf-rfc2026bis-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 17, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This memo documents the process used by the Internet community for
   the standardization of protocols and procedures.  It defines the
   stages in the standardization process, the requirements for moving a
   document between stages and the types of documents used during this
   process.





Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     1.1.  Internet Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     1.2.  The Internet Standards Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     1.3.  Organization of This Document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   2.  INTERNET STANDARDS-RELATED PUBLICATIONS  . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     2.1.  Requests for Comments (RFCs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     2.2.  Internet-Drafts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   3.  INTERNET STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     3.1.  Technical Specification (TS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     3.2.  Applicability Statement (AS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     3.3.  Requirement Levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   4.  THE INTERNET STANDARDS TRACK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     4.1.  Standards Track Levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     4.2.  Level One  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     4.3.  Level 2  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     4.4.  Non-Standards Track Maturity Levels  . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     4.5.  Experimental . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     4.6.  Informational  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     4.7.  Procedures for Experimental and Informational RFCs . . . . 17
     4.8.  Historic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   5.  BEST CURRENT PRACTICE (BCP) RFCs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     5.1.  BCP Review Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   6.  THE INTERNET STANDARDS PROCESS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     6.1.  Standards Actions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
       6.1.1.  Initiation of Action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
       6.1.2.  IESG Review and Approval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
       6.1.3.  Publication  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
     6.2.  Advancing in the Standards Track . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
     6.3.  Revising a Standard  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
     6.4.  Retiring a Standard  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
     6.5.  Conflict Resolution and Appeals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
       6.5.1.  Working Group Disputes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
       6.5.2.  Process Failures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
       6.5.3.  Questions of Applicable Procedure  . . . . . . . . . . 26
       6.5.4.  Appeals Procedure  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
   7.  EXTERNAL STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS  . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
     7.1.  Use of External Specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
       7.1.1.  Incorporation of an Open Standard  . . . . . . . . . . 28
       7.1.2.  Incorporation of Other Specifications  . . . . . . . . 29
       7.1.3.  Assumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
   8.  NOTICES AND RECORD KEEPING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
   9.  VARYING THE PROCESS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
     9.1.  The Variance Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
     9.2.  Exclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
   10. INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
   11. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34



Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


   12. SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
   13. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
   14. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
     14.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
     14.2. Informational References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
   Appendix A.  Changes from Previous Versions  . . . . . . . . . . . 38
   Appendix B.  DEFINITIONS OF TERMS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
   Appendix C.  GLOSSARY OF ACRONYMS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 43









































Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


         "We reject kings, presidents, and voting.  We believe in
          rough consensus and running code."
                                    --Professor Dave Clark
















































Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


1.  Introduction

   This memo documents the process currently used by the Internet
   community for the standardization of protocols and procedures.  The
   Internet Standards process is an activity of the Internet Society
   that is organized and managed on behalf of the Internet community by
   the Internet Architecture Board (IAB) and the Internet Engineering
   Steering Group (IESG).

1.1.  Internet Standards

   The Internet, a loosely-organized international collaboration of
   autonomous, interconnected networks, supports host-to-host
   communication through voluntary adherence to open protocols and
   procedures defined by Internet Standards.  There are also many
   isolated interconnected networks, which are not connected to the
   global Internet but use the Internet Standards.

   The Internet Standards Process described in this document is
   concerned with all protocols, procedures, and conventions that are
   used in or by the Internet, whether or not they are part of the
   TCP/IP protocol suite.  In the case of protocols developed and/or
   standardized by non-Internet organizations, however, the Internet
   Standards Process normally applies to the application of the protocol
   or procedure in the Internet context, not to the specification of the
   protocol itself.

   In general, an Internet Standard is a specification that is stable
   and well-understood, is technically competent, has multiple,
   independent, and interoperable implementations with substantial
   operational experience, enjoys significant public support, and is
   recognizably useful in some or all parts of the Internet.

1.2.  The Internet Standards Process

   In outline, the process of creating an Internet Standard is
   straightforward: a specification undergoes a period of development
   and several iterations of review by the Internet community and
   revision based upon experience, is adopted as a Standard by the
   appropriate body (see below), and is published.  In practice, the
   process is more complicated, due to (1) the difficulty of creating
   specifications of high technical quality; (2) the need to consider
   the interests of all of the affected parties; (3) the importance of
   establishing widespread community consensus; and (4) the difficulty
   of evaluating the utility of a particular specification for the
   Internet community.

   The goals of the Internet Standards Process are:



Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


   o  technical excellence;

   o  prior implementation and testing;

   o  clear, concise, and easily understood documentation;

   o  openness and fairness; and

   o  timeliness.

   The procedures described in this document are designed to be fair,
   open, and objective; to reflect existing (proven) practice; and to be
   flexible.

   o  These procedures are intended to provide a fair, open, and
      objective basis for developing, evaluating, and adopting Internet
      Standards.  They provide ample opportunity for participation and
      comment by all interested parties.  At each stage of the
      standardization process, a specification is repeatedly discussed
      and its merits debated in open meetings and/or public electronic
      mailing lists, and it is made available for review via world-wide
      on-line directories.

   o  These procedures are explicitly aimed at recognizing and adopting
      generally-accepted practices.  Thus, a candidate specification
      must be implemented and tested for correct operation and
      interoperability by multiple independent parties and utilized in
      increasingly demanding environments, before it can be adopted as
      an Internet Standard.

   o  These procedures provide a great deal of flexibility to adapt to
      the wide variety of circumstances that occur in the
      standardization process.  Experience has shown this flexibility to
      be vital in achieving the goals listed above.

   The goal of technical competence, the requirement for prior
   implementation and testing, and the need to allow all interested
   parties to comment all require significant time and effort.  On the
   other hand, today's rapid development of networking technology
   demands timely development of standards.  The Internet Standards
   Process is intended to balance these conflicting goals.  The process
   is believed to be as short and simple as possible without sacrificing
   technical excellence, thorough testing before adoption of a standard,
   or openness and fairness.

   From its inception, the Internet has been, and is expected to remain,
   an evolving system whose participants regularly factor new
   requirements and technology into its design and implementation.



Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


   Users of the Internet and providers of the equipment, software, and
   services that support it should anticipate and embrace this evolution
   as a major tenet of Internet philosophy.

   The procedures described in this document are the result of a number
   of years of evolution, driven both by the needs of the growing and
   increasingly diverse Internet community, and by experience.

1.3.  Organization of This Document

   Section 2 describes the publications and archives of the Internet
   Standards Process.  Section 3 describes the types of Internet
   standard specifications.  Section 4 describes the Internet standards
   specifications track.  Section 5 describes Best Current Practice
   RFCs.  Section 6 describes the process and rules for Internet
   standardization.  Section 7 specifies the way in which externally-
   sponsored specifications and practices, developed and controlled by
   other standards bodies or by others, are handled within the Internet
   Standards Process.  Section 8 describes the requirements for notices
   and record keeping Section 9 defines a variance process to allow one-
   time exceptions to some of the requirements in this document Section
   10 references rules to protect intellectual property rights in the
   context of the development and use of Internet Standards.  Section 11
   includes acknowledgments of some of the people involved in creation
   of this document.  Section 12 notes that security issues are not
   dealt with by this document.  Section 13 contains IANA
   considerations.
























Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


2.  INTERNET STANDARDS-RELATED PUBLICATIONS

2.1.  Requests for Comments (RFCs)

   Each distinct version of an Internet standards-related specification
   is published as part of the "Request for Comments" (RFC) document
   series.  This archival series is the official publication channel for
   Internet standards documents and other publications of the IESG, IAB,
   and Internet community.  RFCs can be obtained from a number of
   Internet hosts using anonymous FTP, rsync, World Wide Web, and other
   Internet document-retrieval systems.

   The RFC series of documents on networking began in 1969 as part of
   the original ARPA wide-area networking (ARPANET) project (see
   Appendix A for glossary of acronyms).  RFCs cover a wide range of
   topics in addition to Internet Standards, from early discussion of
   new research concepts to status memos about the Internet.  RFC
   publication is the direct responsibility of the RFC Editor, under the
   general direction of the IAB.

   The rules for formatting and submitting an RFC are defined in [3].
   Every RFC is available in ASCII text.  Some RFCs are also available
   in other formats.  The other versions of an RFC may contain material
   (such as diagrams and figures) that is not present in the ASCII
   version, and it may be formatted differently.


         *********************************************************
         *                                                       *
         *  A stricter requirement applies to standards-track    *
         *  specifications:  the ASCII text version is the       *
         *  definitive reference, and therefore it must be a     *
         *  complete and accurate specification of the standard, *
         *  including all necessary diagrams and illustrations.  *
         *                                                       *
         *********************************************************


   The status of Internet protocol and service specifications is
   summarized periodically in an RFC entitled "Internet Official
   Protocol Standards" [1].  This RFC shows the level of maturity and
   other helpful information for each Internet protocol or service
   specification (see section 3).

   Some RFCs document Internet Standards.  These RFCs form the 'STD'
   subseries of the RFC series. [2] When a specification has been
   adopted as an Internet Standard, it is given the additional label
   "STDxxx", but it keeps its RFC number and its place in the RFC



Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


   series. (see section 4.1.3)

   Some RFCs standardize the results of community deliberations about
   statements of principle or conclusions about what is the best way to
   perform some operations or IETF process function.  These RFCs form
   the specification has been adopted as a BCP, it is given the
   additional label "BCPxxx", but it keeps its RFC number and its place
   in the RFC series. (see section 5)

   Not all specifications of protocols or services for the Internet
   should or will become Internet Standards or BCPs.  Such non-standards
   track specifications are not subject to the rules for Internet
   standardization.  Non-standards track specifications may be published
   directly as "Experimental" or "Informational" RFCs at the discretion
   of the RFC Editor in consultation with the IESG (see section 4.2).


      *******************************************************
      *                                                     *
      *  It is important to note that many RFCs are NOT     *
      *  standards OR BCPs and are NOT endorsed in any way  *
      *  by the IETF, the IRTF, the IAB, or the Internet    *
      *  Society.  Such RFCs are published independently    *
      *  and are given only cursory review.                 *
      *                                                     *
      *******************************************************


2.2.  Internet-Drafts

   During the development of a specification, draft versions of the
   document are made available for informal review and comment by
   placing them in the IETF's "Internet-Drafts" directory, which is
   replicated on a number of Internet hosts.  This makes an evolving
   working document readily available to a wide audience, facilitating
   the process of review and revision.

   An Internet-Draft that is published as an RFC, or that has remained
   unchanged in the Internet-Drafts directory for more than six months
   without being recommended by the IESG for publication as an RFC, is
   simply removed from the Internet-Drafts directory.  At any time, an
   Internet-Draft may be replaced by a more recent version of the same
   specification, restarting the six-month timeout period.

   An Internet-Draft is NOT a means of "publishing" a specification in
   any permanent way; they are meant to be ephemeral.  Specifications
   are published only through the RFC mechanism described in the
   previous section.  Internet-Drafts have no formal status, and are



Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


   subject to change or removal at any time.

         ********************************************************
         *                                                      *
         *   Under no circumstances should an Internet-Draft    *
         *   be referenced by any paper, report, or Request-    *
         *   for-Proposal, nor should a vendor claim compliance *
         *   with an Internet-Draft.                            *
         *                                                      *
         ********************************************************

   Note: It is acceptable to reference a standards-track specification
   that may reasonably be expected to be published as an RFC using the
   phrase "Work in Progress" without referencing an Internet-Draft.
   This may also be done in a standards track document itself as long as
   the specification in which the reference is made would stand as a
   complete and understandable document with or without the reference to
   the "Work in Progress".

































Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


3.  INTERNET STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS

   Specifications subject to the Internet Standards Process fall into
   one of two categories: Technical Specification (TS) and Applicability
   Statement (AS).

3.1.  Technical Specification (TS)

   A Technical Specification is any description of a protocol, service,
   procedure, convention, or format.  It may completely describe all of
   the relevant aspects of its subject, or it may leave one or more
   parameters or options unspecified.  A TS may be completely self-
   contained, or it may incorporate material from other specifications
   by reference to other documents (which might or might not be Internet
   Standards).  A TS shall include a statement of its scope and the
   general intent for its use (domain of applicability).  Thus, a TS
   that is inherently specific to a particular context shall contain a
   statement to that effect.  However, a TS does not specify
   requirements for its use within the Internet; these requirements,
   which depend on the particular context in which the TS is
   incorporated by different system configurations, are defined by an
   Applicability Statement.

3.2.  Applicability Statement (AS)

   An Applicability Statement specifies how, and under what
   circumstances, one or more TSs may be applied to support a particular
   Internet capability.  An AS may specify uses for TSs that are not
   Internet Standards, as discussed in Section 7.

   An AS identifies the relevant TSs and the specific way in which they
   are to be combined, and may also specify particular values or ranges
   of TS parameters or subfunctions of a TS protocol that must be
   implemented.  An AS also specifies the circumstances in which the use
   of a particular TS is required, recommended, or elective (see section
   3.3).

   An AS may describe particular methods of using a TS in a restricted
   "domain of applicability", such as Internet routers, terminal
   servers, Internet systems that interface to Ethernets, or datagram-
   based database servers.

   The broadest type of AS is a comprehensive conformance specification,
   commonly called a "requirements document", for a particular class of
   Internet systems, such as Internet routers or Internet hosts.






Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


3.3.  Requirement Levels

   An AS shall apply one of the following "requirement levels" to each
   of the TSs to which it refers:

   (a) Required: Implementation of the referenced TS, as specified by
      the AS, is required to achieve minimal conformance.  For example,
      IP and ICMP must be implemented by all Internet systems using the
      TCP/IP Protocol Suite.  This requirement level is reserved for
      only the most critical Internet functions, and thus its use will
      be given the most scrutiny during the review process.

   (b)  Recommended: Implementation of the referenced TS is not required
      for minimal conformance, but experience and/or generally accepted
      technical wisdom suggest its desirability in the domain of
      applicability of the AS.  Vendors are strongly encouraged to
      include the functions, features, and protocols of Recommended TSs
      in their products, and should omit them only if the omission is
      justified by some special circumstance.  For example, DHCP client
      functions allow for ease of device configuration.

   (c)  Elective: Implementation of the referenced TS is optional within
      the domain of applicability of the AS; that is, the AS creates no
      explicit necessity to apply the TS.  However, a particular vendor
      may decide to implement it, or a particular user may decide that
      it is a necessity in a specific environment.  For example, the
      OSPF MIB could be seen as valuable in an environment where the
      OSPF protocol is used.

      As noted in section 4.1, there are TSs that are not in the
      standards track or that have been retired from the standards
      track, and are therefore not required, recommended, or elective.
      Two additional "requirement level" designations are available for
      these TSs:

   (d)  Limited Use: The TS is considered to be appropriate for use only
      in limited or unique circumstances.  For example, the usage of a
      protocol with the "Experimental" designation should generally be
      limited to those actively involved with the experiment.

   (e)  Not Recommended: A TS that is considered to be inappropriate for
      general use is labeled "Not Recommended".  This may be because of
      its limited functionality, specialized nature, or historic status.

   Although TSs and ASs are conceptually separate, in practice a
   standards-track document may combine an AS and one or more related
   TSs.  For example, Technical Specifications that are developed
   specifically and exclusively for some particular domain of



Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


   applicability, e.g., for mail server hosts, often contain within a
   single specification all of the relevant AS and TS information.  In
   such cases, no useful purpose would be served by deliberately
   distributing the information among several documents just to preserve
   the formal AS/TS distinction.  However, a TS that is likely to apply
   to more than one domain of applicability should be developed in a
   modular fashion, to facilitate its incorporation by multiple ASs.

   The "Official Protocol Standards" RFC (STD1) lists a general
   requirement level for each TS, using the nomenclature defined in this
   section.  This RFC is updated periodically.  In many cases, more
   detailed descriptions of the requirement levels of particular
   protocols and of individual features of the protocols will be found
   in appropriate ASs.





































Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


4.  THE INTERNET STANDARDS TRACK

   There are two levels of Internet Standards development, level one
   (L1) and level two (L2).  These two levels indicate ability of
   multiple implementations to interoperate, stability of the
   specifications, and a general consensus of the community as to how
   the specifications are accepted.

   This marks a change from the previous version of the standards
   process.  The rational for this change may be found in an appendix.
   The following mapping for documents published prior to this memo
   applies:


           Previous "Maturity"       Current Level
           ---------------------------------------
           Proposed                       L1
           Draft                          L2
           Internet Standard              L2


   The RFC Editor is requested to assign standard numbers to those L1 TS
   specifications, in consultation with the IESG so that specifications
   are grouped appropriately.

   Once a group of one or more Technical Specifications are approved for
   level L1, the group is considered an Internet Standard, and an STD
   number is assigned by the RFC Editor, once the associated RFCs are
   published.  To reach the optional level of L2, a rigorous review of
   the L1 specifications is required, as will be specified in Section 6.

   Even after a specification has been adopted at level L2, further
   evolution often occurs based on experience and the recognition of new
   requirements.  The nomenclature and procedures of Internet
   standardization provide for the replacement of old Internet Standards
   with new ones, and the assignment of descriptive labels to indicate
   the status of "retired" Internet Standards.  A description of these
   statuses is defined in section 4.2 to cover these and specifications
   other that are not considered to be on the standards track.

4.1.  Standards Track Levels

   Internet specifications go through stages of development, testing,
   and acceptance.  Within the Internet Standards Process, these stages
   are formally labeled "standards levels".  This section describes the
   levels and the expected characteristics of specifications at each
   level.




Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


4.2.  Level One

   The first stage of standardization is known as Level 1 (L1).  A
   specific action by the IESG is required to move a specification onto
   the standards track at L1 before it can advance to L2.

   An L1 Standard specification is generally stable, has resolved known
   design choices, is believed to be well-understood, has received
   significant community review, and appears to enjoy enough community
   interest to be considered valuable.  However, further experience
   might result in a change or even retraction of the specification
   before it could advance to L2.

   While neither implementation nor operational experience is strictly
   required for the designation of a specification as an L1 Standard,
   such experience is highly desirable, and will usually represent a
   strong argument in favor of advancement.

   The IESG may require implementation and/or operational experience
   prior to granting L1 Standard status to a specification that
   materially affects the core Internet protocols or that specifies
   behavior that may have significant operational impact on the
   Internet, or in cases where they believe the specification will be
   difficult to deploy.

   An L1 Standard should have no known technical omissions with respect
   to the requirements placed upon it.  However, the IESG may waive this
   requirement in order to allow a specification to advance to the L1
   Standard state when it is considered to be useful and necessary (and
   timely) even with known technical omissions.  In such cases, the
   specification will note such known omissions.

   Implementors should expect L1 Standards to change over time.  It is
   desirable to implement them in order to gain experience and to
   validate, test, and clarify the specification.  Since the content of
   L1 Standards may be changed if problems are found or better solutions
   are identified, such standards should be deployed with care in
   disruption-sensitive environments.

4.3.  Level 2

   A specification from which at least three independent and
   interoperable implementations from different code bases have been
   developed, and for which sufficient successful operational experience
   has been obtained, may be elevated to Level 2 (L2).  For the purposes
   of this section, "interoperable" means to be functionally equivalent
   or interchangeable components of the system or process in which they
   are used.  If patented or otherwise controlled technology is required



Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


   for implementation, the separate implementations must also have
   resulted from separate exercise of the licensing process.  Elevation
   to L2 is a major advance in status, indicating a strong belief that
   the specification is mature and will be useful.

   The requirement for at least two independent and interoperable
   implementations applies to all of the options and features of the
   specification.  In cases in which one or more options or features
   have not been demonstrated in at least two interoperable
   implementations, the specification may advance to Level 2 only if
   those options or features are removed.

   Typically, when a TS is to be advanced to Level 2, a working group is
   chartered for this purpose.  In such cases, the Working Group chair
   is responsible for documenting the specific implementations which
   qualify the specification for Level 2 status along with documentation
   about testing of the interoperation of these implementations.  The
   documentation must include information about the support of each of
   the individual options and features.  This documentation should be
   submitted to the Area Director with the protocol action request. (see
   Section 6)

   In those limited cases where it is felt that a working group is not
   needed, an Area Director will designate someone who will provide the
   appropriate documentation to indicate that a TS is ready to be
   advanced.

   A Level 2 Standard must be well-understood and known to be quite
   stable, both in its semantics and as a basis for developing an
   implementation.  An L2 Standard is normally considered to be a final
   specification, and changes are likely to be made only to solve
   specific problems encountered.  Generally it is reasonable for
   vendors to deploy implementations of L2 Standards into a disruption
   sensitive environment.

4.4.  Non-Standards Track Maturity Levels

   Not every specification is on the standards track.  A specification
   may not be intended to be an Internet Standard, or it may be intended
   for eventual standardization but not yet ready to enter the standards
   track.  A specification may have been superseded by a more recent
   Internet Standard, or have otherwise fallen into disuse or disfavor.
   Specifications that are not on the standards track are labeled with
   one of three "off-track" maturity levels: "Experimental",
   "Informational", or "Historic".  The documents bearing these labels
   are not Internet Standards in any sense.





Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


4.5.  Experimental

   The "Experimental" designation typically denotes a specification that
   is part of some research or development effort.  Such a specification
   is published for the general information of the Internet technical
   community and as an archival record of the work, subject only to
   editorial considerations and to verification that there has been
   adequate coordination with the standards process (see below).  An
   Experimental specification may be the output of an organized Internet
   research effort (e.g., a Research Group of the IRTF), an IETF Working
   Group, or it may be an individual contribution.

4.6.  Informational

   An "Informational" specification is published for the general
   information of the Internet community, and does not represent an
   Internet community consensus or recommendation.  The Informational
   designation is intended to provide for the timely publication of a
   very broad range of responsible informational documents from many
   sources, subject only to editorial considerations and to verification
   that there has been adequate coordination with the standards process
   (see section 4.2.3).

   Specifications that have been prepared outside of the Internet
   community and are not incorporated into the Internet Standards
   Process by any of the provisions of BCP 78 and 79 may be published as
   Informational RFCs, with the permission of the owner and the
   concurrence of the RFC Editor.

4.7.  Procedures for Experimental and Informational RFCs

   Unless they are the result of IETF Working Group action, documents
   intended to be published with Experimental or Informational status
   should be submitted directly to the RFC Editor.  All such documents
   must first exist as Internet-Drafts.  In order to differentiate these
   Internet-Drafts they will be labeled or grouped in the I-D directory
   so they are easily recognizable.  The RFC Editor will wait four weeks
   after this publication for comments before proceeding further.  The
   RFC Editor is expected to exercise his or her judgment concerning the
   editorial suitability of a document for publication with Experimental
   or Informational status, and may refuse to publish a document which,
   in the expert opinion of the RFC Editor, is unrelated to Internet
   activity or falls below the technical and/or editorial standard for
   RFCs.

   To ensure that the non-standards track Experimental and Informational
   designations are not misused to circumvent the Internet Standards
   Process, the IESG and the RFC Editor have agreed that the RFC Editor



Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


   will refer to the IESG any document submitted for Experimental or
   Informational publication which, in the opinion of the RFC Editor,
   may be related to work being done, or expected to be done, within the
   IETF community.  The IESG shall review such a referred document
   within a reasonable period of time, and recommend either that it be
   published as originally submitted or referred to the IETF as a
   contribution to the Internet Standards Process.

   If (a) the IESG recommends that the document be brought within the
   IETF and progressed within the IETF context, but the author declines
   to do so, or (b) the IESG considers that the document proposes
   something that conflicts with, or is actually inimical to, an
   established IETF effort (be that standard or experimental), or (c)
   the IESG considers that the document specifies or recommends behavior
   that could be harmful to the Internet in a deployment, the document
   may still be published at the discretion of the RFC Editor.  However,
   in such cases, the IESG may insert appropriate "disclaimer" text into
   the RFC either in or immediately following the "Status of this Memo"
   section in order to make the circumstances of its publication clear
   to readers.  The purpose of this restriction is not to prohibit
   points of view that differ from that of the IESG, but to protect
   against misleading or dangerous behavior, either by authors or by
   implementations.

   Documents proposed for Experimental and Informational RFCs by IETF
   Working Groups go through IESG review.  The review is initiated using
   the process described in section 6.1.1.

4.8.  Historic

   A specification that has been superseded by a more recent
   specification or is for any other reason considered to be obsolete is
   assigned to the "Historic" level.  (Purists have suggested that the
   word should be "Historical"; however, at this point the use of
   "Historic" is historical.)

   Note: Standards track specifications must not depend on non-standards
   track specifications, other than those referenced specifications from
   other standards bodies (See Section 7).  Furthermore, it is strongly
   recommended that L2 standards not depend on L1 standards.  Where such
   cases exist, they should be clearly noted as a risk in the L2
   specification.









Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


5.  BEST CURRENT PRACTICE (BCP) RFCs

   The BCP subseries of the RFC series is designed to be a way to
   standardize practices and the results of community deliberations.  A
   BCP document is subject to the same basic set of procedures as
   standards track documents and thus is a vehicle by which the IETF
   community can define and ratify the community's best current thinking
   on a statement of principle or on what is believed to be the best way
   to perform some operations or IETF process function.

   Historically Internet standards have generally been concerned with
   the technical specifications for hardware and software required for
   computer communication across interconnected networks.  However,
   since the Internet itself is composed of networks operated by a great
   variety of organizations, with diverse goals and rules, good user
   service requires that the operators and administrators of the
   Internet follow some common guidelines for policies and operations.
   While these guidelines are generally different in scope and style
   from protocol standards, their establishment needs a similar process
   for consensus building.

   While it is recognized that entities such as the IAB and IESG are
   composed of individuals who may participate, as individuals, in the
   technical work of the IETF, it is also recognized that the entities
   themselves have an existence as leaders in the community.  As leaders
   in the Internet technical community, these entities should have an
   outlet to propose ideas to stimulate work in a particular area, to
   raise the community's sensitivity to a certain issue, to make a
   statement of architectural principle, or to communicate their
   thoughts on other matters.  The BCP subseries creates a smoothly
   structured way for these management entities to insert proposals into
   the consensus-building machinery of the IETF while gauging the
   community's view of that issue.

   Finally, the BCP series may be used to document the operation of the
   IETF itself.  For example, this document defines the IETF Standards
   Process and is published as a BCP.

5.1.  BCP Review Process

   Unlike standards-track documents, the mechanisms described in BCPs
   are not well suited to the phased roll-in nature of the two stage
   standards track and instead generally only make sense for full and
   immediate instantiation.

   The BCP process is similar to that for proposed standards.  The BCP
   is submitted to the IESG for review, (see section 6.1.1) and the
   existing review process applies, including a Last-Call on the IETF



Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


   Announce mailing list.  However, once the IESG has approved the
   document, the process ends and the document is published.  The
   resulting document is viewed as having the technical approval of the
   IETF.

   Specifically, a document to be considered for the status of BCP must
   undergo the procedures outlined in sections 6.1, and 6.4 of this
   document.  The BCP process may be appealed according to the
   procedures in section 6.5.

   Because BCPs are meant to express community consensus but are arrived
   at more quickly than standards, BCPs require particular care.
   Specifically, BCPs should not be viewed simply as stronger
   Informational RFCs, but rather should be viewed as documents suitable
   for a content different from Informational RFCs.

   A specification, or group of specifications, that has, or have been
   approved as a BCP is assigned a number in the BCP series while
   retaining its RFC number(s).
































Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


6.  THE INTERNET STANDARDS PROCESS

   The mechanics of the Internet Standards Process involve decisions of
   the IESG concerning the elevation of a specification onto the
   standards track or the movement of a standards-track specification
   from one maturity level to another.  Although a number of reasonably
   objective criteria (described below and in section 4) are available
   to guide the IESG in making a decision to move a specification onto,
   along, or off the standards track, there is no algorithmic guarantee
   of elevation to or progression along the standards track for any
   specification.  The experienced collective judgment of the IESG
   concerning the technical quality of a specification proposed for
   elevation to or advancement in the standards track is an essential
   component of the decision-making process.

6.1.  Standards Actions

   A "standards action" -- entering a particular specification into,
   advancing it within, or removing it from, the standards track -- must
   be approved by the IESG.

6.1.1.  Initiation of Action

   A specification that is intended to enter or advance in the Internet
   standards track shall first be posted as an Internet-Draft (see
   section 2.2) unless it has not changed since publication as an RFC.
   It shall remain as an Internet-Draft for a period of time, not less
   than two weeks, that permits useful community review, after which a
   recommendation for action may be initiated.

   A standards action is initiated by a recommendation by the IETF
   Working group responsible for a specification to its Area Director,
   copied to the IETF Secretariat or, in the case of a specification not
   associated with a Working Group, a recommendation by an individual to
   the IESG.  As a practical matter, the IESG requires that individual
   submissions be sponsored by an Area Director.  The wisdom behind this
   is simply that if the author(s) cannot find at least one AD to
   support a draft, they certainly not be able to find support for
   advancement.

6.1.2.  IESG Review and Approval

   The IESG shall determine whether or not a specification submitted to
   it according to section 6.1.1 satisfies the applicable criteria for
   the recommended action (see sections 4.1 and 4.2), and shall in
   addition determine whether or not the technical quality and clarity
   of the specification is consistent with that expected for the
   maturity level to which the specification is recommended.



Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


   In order to obtain all of the information necessary to make these
   determinations, particularly when the specification is considered by
   the IESG to be extremely important in terms of its potential impact
   on the Internet or on the suite of Internet protocols, the IESG may,
   at its discretion, commission an independent technical review of the
   specification.

   The IESG will send notice to the IETF of the pending IESG
   consideration of the document(s) to permit a final review by the
   general Internet community.  This "Last-Call" notification shall be
   via electronic mail to the IETF Announce mailing list.  Comments on a
   Last-Call shall be accepted from anyone, and should be sent as
   directed in the Last-Call announcement.

   The Last-Call period shall be no shorter than two weeks except in
   those cases where the proposed standards action was not initiated by
   an IETF Working Group, in which case the Last-Call period shall be no
   shorter than four weeks.  If the IESG believes that the community
   interest would be served by allowing more time for comment, it may
   decide on a longer Last-Call period or to explicitly lengthen a
   current Last-Call period.

   The IESG is not bound by the action recommended when the
   specification was submitted.  For example, the IESG may decide to
   consider the specification for publication in a different category
   than that requested.  If the IESG determines this before the Last-
   Call is issued then the Last-Call should reflect the IESG's view.

   The IESG could also decide to change the publication category based
   on the response to a Last-Call.  If this decision would result in a
   specification being published at a "higher" level than the original
   Last-Call was for, a new Last-Call should be issued indicating the
   IESG recommendation.  In addition, the IESG may decide to recommend
   the formation of a new Working Group in the case of significant
   controversy in response to a Last-Call for specification not
   originating from an IETF Working Group.

   In a timely fashion after the expiration of the Last-Call period, the
   IESG shall make its final determination of whether or not to approve
   the standards action, and shall notify the IETF of its decision via
   electronic mail to the IETF Announce mailing list.

6.1.3.  Publication

   If a standards action is approved, notification is sent to the RFC
   Editor and copied to the IETF with instructions to publish the
   specification as an RFC.  The specification shall at that point be
   removed from the Internet-Drafts directory.



Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


   An official summary of standards actions completed and pending shall
   appear in each issue of the Internet Society's newsletter.  This
   shall constitute the "publication of record" for Internet standards
   actions.

   The RFC Editor shall publish periodically an "Internet Official
   Protocol Standards" RFC [1], summarizing the status of all Internet
   protocol and service specifications.

6.2.  Advancing in the Standards Track

   The procedure described in section 6.1 is followed for each action
   that attends the advancement of a specification along the standards
   track.

   A specification shall remain at Level 1 for at least one year.  This
   minimum period is intended to ensure adequate opportunity for
   community review without severely impacting timeliness.  This
   interval shall be measured from the date of publication of the
   corresponding RFC(s), or, if the action does not result in RFC
   publication, the date of the announcement of the IESG approval of the
   action.

   When a specification is advanced from Level 1 to Level 2, it may be
   (indeed, is likely to be) revised.  The IESG shall determine the
   scope and significance of the revision to the specification, and, if
   necessary and appropriate, modify the recommended action.  Minor
   revisions are expected, but a significant revision may require that
   the specification accumulate more experience at Level 1 before
   progressing.

   Change of status shall result in republication of the specification
   as an RFC, except in the rare case that there have been no changes at
   all in the specification since the last publication.  Generally,
   desired changes will be "batched" for incorporation at the next level
   in the standards track.  However, deferral of changes to the next
   standards action on the specification will not always be possible or
   desirable; for example, an important typographical error, or a
   technical error that does not represent a change in overall function
   of the specification, may need to be corrected immediately.  In such
   cases, the IESG or RFC Editor may be asked to republish the RFC (with
   a new number) with corrections, and this will not reset the minimum
   time-at-level clock.

   When a standards-track specification has not reached the an L2
   Standard level but has remained at the same maturity level for
   twenty-four (24) months or at any time thereafter, the IESG may at
   its sole discretion and in a manner of its choosing review the



Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


   viability of the standardization effort responsible for that
   specification and the usefulness of the technology.  Following each
   such review, the IESG shall approve termination or continuation of
   the development effort, at the same time the IESG shall decide to
   maintain the specification at the same maturity level or to move it
   to Historic status.  This decision shall be communicated to the IETF
   by electronic mail to the IETF Announce mailing list to allow the
   Internet community an opportunity to comment.  This provision is not
   intended to threaten a legitimate and active Working Group effort,
   but rather to provide an administrative mechanism for terminating a
   moribund effort.

6.3.  Revising a Standard

   A new version of an established Internet Standard must progress
   through the full Internet standardization process as if it were a
   completely new specification.  A new L1 Standard will retire an old
   L1 Standard.  However, only a new L2 Standard can retire an old L2
   Standard.  Retired standards are moved to Historic status.  Once the
   new version has reached the Standard level, it will usually replace
   the previous version, which will be moved to Historic status.
   However, in some cases both versions may remain as Internet Standards
   to honor the requirements of an installed base.  In this situation,
   the relationship between the previous and the new versions must be
   explicitly stated in the text of the new version or in another
   appropriate document (e.g., an Applicability Statement; see section
   3.2).

6.4.  Retiring a Standard

   As the technology changes and matures, it is possible for a new
   Standard specification to be so clearly superior technically that one
   or more existing standards track specifications for the same function
   should be retired.  In this case, or when it is felt for some other
   reason that an existing standards track specification should be
   retired, the IESG shall approve a change of status of the old
   specification(s) to Historic.  This recommendation shall be issued
   with the same Last-Call and notification procedures used for any
   other standards action.  A request to retire an existing standard can
   originate from a Working Group, an Area Director or some other
   interested party.

6.5.  Conflict Resolution and Appeals

   Disputes are possible at various stages during the IETF process.  As
   much as possible the process is designed so that compromises can be
   made, and genuine consensus achieved, however there are times when
   even the most reasonable and knowledgeable people are unable to



Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


   agree.  To achieve the goals of openness and fairness, such conflicts
   must be resolved by a process of open review and discussion.  This
   section specifies the procedures that shall be followed to deal with
   Internet standards issues that cannot be resolved through the normal
   processes whereby IETF Working Groups and other Internet Standards
   Process participants ordinarily reach consensus.

6.5.1.  Working Group Disputes

   An individual (whether a participant in the relevant Working Group or
   not) may disagree with a Working Group recommendation based on his or
   her belief that either (a) his or her own views have not been
   adequately considered by the Working Group, or (b) the Working Group
   has made an incorrect technical choice which places the quality
   and/or integrity of the Working Group's product(s) in significant
   jeopardy.  The first issue is a difficulty with Working Group
   process; the latter is an assertion of technical error.  These two
   types of disagreement are quite different, but both are handled by
   the same process of review.

   A person who disagrees with a Working Group recommendation shall
   always first discuss the matter with the Working Group's chair(s),
   who may involve other members of the Working Group (or the Working
   Group as a whole) in the discussion.

   If the disagreement cannot be resolved in this way, any of the
   parties involved may bring it to the attention of the Area
   Director(s) for the area in which the Working Group is chartered.
   The Area Director(s) shall attempt to resolve the dispute.  If the
   disagreement cannot be resolved by the Area Director(s) any of the
   parties involved may then appeal to the IESG as a whole.  The IESG
   shall then review the situation and attempt to resolve it in a manner
   of its own choosing.

   If the disagreement is not resolved to the satisfaction of the
   parties at the IESG level, any of the parties involved may appeal the
   decision to the IAB.  The IAB shall then review the situation and
   attempt to resolve it in a manner of its own choosing.

   The IAB decision is final with respect to the question of whether or
   not the Internet standards procedures have been followed and with
   respect to all questions of technical merit.

6.5.2.  Process Failures

   This document sets forward procedures required to be followed to
   ensure openness and fairness of the Internet Standards Process, and
   the technical viability of the standards created.  The IESG is the



Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 25]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


   principal agent of the IETF for this purpose, and it is the IESG that
   is charged with ensuring that the required procedures have been
   followed, and that any necessary prerequisites to a standards action
   have been met.

   If an individual should disagree with an action taken by the IESG in
   this process, that person should first discuss the issue with the
   IESG Chair.  If the IESG Chair is unable to satisfy the complainant
   then the IESG as a whole should re-examine the action taken, along
   with input from the complainant, and determine whether any further
   action is needed.  The IESG shall issue a report on its review of the
   complaint to the IETF.

   Should the complainant not be satisfied with the outcome of the IESG
   review, an appeal may be lodged to the IAB.  The IAB shall then
   review the situation and attempt to resolve it in a manner of its own
   choosing and report to the IETF on the outcome of its review.

   If circumstances warrant, the IAB may direct that an IESG decision be
   annulled, and the situation shall then be as it was before the IESG
   decision was taken.  The IAB may also recommend an action to the
   IESG, or make such other recommendations as it deems fit.  The IAB
   may not, however, pre-empt the role of the IESG by issuing a decision
   which only the IESG is empowered to make.

   The IAB decision is final with respect to the question of whether or
   not the Internet standards procedures have been followed.

6.5.3.  Questions of Applicable Procedure

   Further recourse is available only in cases in which the procedures
   themselves (i.e., the procedures described in this document) are
   claimed to be inadequate or insufficient to the protection of the
   rights of all parties in a fair and open Internet Standards Process.
   Claims on this basis may be made to the Internet Society Board of
   Trustees.  The President of the Internet Society shall acknowledge
   such an appeal within two weeks, and shall at the time of
   acknowledgment advise the petitioner of the expected duration of the
   Trustees' review of the appeal.  The Trustees shall review the
   situation in a manner of its own choosing and report to the IETF on
   the outcome of its review.

   The Trustees' decision upon completion of their review shall be final
   with respect to all aspects of the dispute.

6.5.4.  Appeals Procedure

   All appeals must include a detailed and specific description of the



Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 26]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


   facts of the dispute.

   All appeals must be initiated within two months of the public
   knowledge of the action or decision to be challenged.

   At all stages of the appeals process, the individuals or bodies
   responsible for making the decisions have the discretion to define
   the specific procedures they will follow in the process of making
   their decision.

   In all cases a decision concerning the disposition of the dispute,
   and the communication of that decision to the parties involved, must
   be accomplished within a reasonable period of time.  [NOTE: These
   procedures intentionally and explicitly do not establish a fixed
   maximum time period that shall be considered "reasonable" in all
   cases.  The Internet Standards Process places a premium on consensus
   and efforts to achieve it, and deliberately foregoes
   deterministically swift execution of procedures in favor of a
   latitude within which more genuine technical agreements may be
   reached.]































Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 27]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


7.  EXTERNAL STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS

   Many standards groups other than the IETF create and publish
   standards documents for network protocols and services.  When these
   external specifications play an important role in the Internet, it is
   desirable to reach common agreements on their usage -- i.e., to
   establish Internet Standards relating to these external
   specifications.

   There are two categories of external specifications:

   (1) Open Standards Various national and international standards
      bodies, such as ANSI, ISO, IEEE, and ITU-T, develop a variety of
      protocol and service specifications that are similar to Technical
      Specifications defined here.  National and international groups
      also publish "implementors' agreements" that are analogous to
      Applicability Statements, capturing a body of implementation-
      specific detail concerned with the practical application of their
      standards.  All of these are considered to be "open external
      standards" for the purposes of the Internet Standards Process.

   (2)  Other Specifications Other proprietary specifications that have
      come to be widely used in the Internet may be treated by the
      Internet community as if they were a "standards".  Such a
      specification is not generally developed in an open fashion, is
      typically proprietary, and is controlled by the vendor, vendors,
      or organization that produced it.

7.1.  Use of External Specifications

   To avoid conflict between competing versions of a specification, the
   Internet community will not standardize a specification that is
   simply an "Internet version" of an existing external specification
   unless an explicit cooperative arrangement to do so has been made.
   However, there are several ways in which an external specification
   that is important for the operation and/or evolution of the Internet
   may be adopted for Internet use.

7.1.1.  Incorporation of an Open Standard

   An Internet Standard TS or AS may incorporate an open external
   standard by reference.  For example, many Internet Standards
   incorporate by reference the ANSI standard character set "ASCII". [4]
   Whenever possible, the referenced specification shall be available
   online.






Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 28]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


7.1.2.  Incorporation of Other Specifications

   Other proprietary specifications may be incorporated by reference to
   a version of the specification as long as the proprietor meets the
   requirements of BCPs 78 and 79.  If the other proprietary
   specification is not widely and readily available, the IESG may
   request that it be published as an Informational RFC.

   The IESG generally should not favor a particular proprietary
   specification over technically equivalent and competing
   specification(s) by making any incorporated vendor specification
   "required" or "recommended".

7.1.3.  Assumption

   An IETF Working Group may start from an external specification and
   develop it into an Internet specification.  This is acceptable if (1)
   the specification is provided to the Working Group in compliance with
   the requirements of BCPs 78 and 79, and (2) change control has been
   conveyed to IETF by the original developer of the specification for
   the specification or for specifications derived from the original
   specification.





























Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 29]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


8.  NOTICES AND RECORD KEEPING

   Each of the organizations involved in the development and approval of
   Internet Standards shall publicly announce, and shall maintain a
   publicly accessible record of, every activity in which it engages, to
   the extent that the activity represents the prosecution of any part
   of the Internet Standards Process.  For purposes of this section, the
   organizations involved in the development and approval of Internet
   Standards includes the IETF, the IESG, the IAB, all IETF Working
   Groups, and the Internet Society Board of Trustees.

   For IETF and Working Group meetings announcements shall be made by
   electronic mail to the IETF Announce mailing list and shall be made
   sufficiently far in advance of the activity to permit all interested
   parties to effectively participate.  The announcement shall contain
   (or provide pointers to) all of the information that is necessary to
   support the participation of any interested individual.  In the case
   of a meeting, for example, the announcement shall include an agenda
   that specifies the standards- related issues that will be discussed.

   The formal record of an organization's standards-related activity
   shall include at least the following:

   o  the charter of the organization (or a defining document equivalent
      to a charter);

   o  complete and accurate minutes of meetings;

   o  the archives of Working Group electronic mail mailing lists; and

   o  all written contributions from participants that pertain to the
      organization's standards-related activity.

   As a practical matter, the formal record of all Internet Standards
   Process activities is maintained by the IETF Secretariat, and is the
   responsibility of the IETF Secretariat except that each IETF Working
   Group is expected to maintain their own email list archive and must
   make a best effort to ensure that all traffic is captured and
   included in the archives.  Also, the Working Group chair is
   responsible for providing the IETF Secretariat with complete and
   accurate minutes of all Working Group meetings.  Internet-Drafts that
   have been removed (for any reason) from the Internet-Drafts
   directories shall be archived by the IETF Secretariat for the purpose
   of preserving an historical record of Internet standards activity.
   The Secretariat may make such drafts available as directed by a court
   order, or as otherwise directed by the IAD in order to further the
   purposes of the IETF, IESG, IAB, or Internet Society.




Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 30]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


9.  VARYING THE PROCESS

   This document, which sets out the rules and procedures by which
   Internet Standards and related documents are made is itself a product
   of the Internet Standards Process (as a BCP, as described in section
   5).  It replaces a previous version, and in time, is likely itself to
   be replaced.

   While, when published, this document represents the community's view
   of the proper and correct process to follow, and requirements to be
   met, to allow for the best possible Internet Standards and BCPs, it
   cannot be assumed that this will always remain the case.  From time
   to time there may be a desire to update it, by replacing it with a
   new version.  Updating this document uses similar open procedures as
   are used for any other BCP.

   In addition, there may be situations where following the procedures
   leads to a deadlock about a specific specification, or there may be
   situations where the procedures provide no guidance.  In these cases
   it may be appropriate to invoke the variance procedure described
   below.

9.1.  The Variance Procedure

   Upon the recommendation of the responsible IETF Working Group (or, if
   no Working Group is constituted, upon the recommendation of an ad hoc
   committee), the IESG may enter a particular specification into, or
   advance it within, the standards track even though some of the
   requirements of this document have not or will not be met.  The IESG
   may approve such a variance, however, only if it first determines
   that the likely benefits to the Internet community are likely to
   outweigh any costs to the Internet community that result from
   noncompliance with the requirements in this document.  In exercising
   this discretion, the IESG shall at least consider (a) the technical
   merit of the specification, (b) the possibility of achieving the
   goals of the Internet Standards Process without granting a variance,
   (c) alternatives to the granting of a variance, (d) the collateral
   and precedential effects of granting a variance, and (e) the IESG's
   ability to craft a variance that is as narrow as possible.  In
   determining whether to approve a variance, the IESG has discretion to
   limit the scope of the variance to particular parts of this document
   and to impose such additional restrictions or limitations as it
   determines appropriate to protect the interests of the Internet
   community.

   The proposed variance must detail the problem perceived, explain the
   precise provision of this document which is causing the need for a
   variance, and the results of the IESG's considerations including



Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 31]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


   consideration of points (a) through (d) in the previous paragraph.
   The proposed variance shall be issued as an Internet Draft.  The IESG
   shall then issue an extended Last-Call, of no less than 4 weeks, to
   allow for community comment upon the proposal.

   In a timely fashion after the expiration of the Last-Call period, the
   IESG shall make its final determination of whether or not to approve
   the proposed variance, and shall notify the IETF of its decision via
   electronic mail to the IETF Announce mailing list.  If the variance
   is approved it shall be forwarded to the RFC Editor with a request
   that it be published as a BCP.

   This variance procedure is for use when a one-time waving of some
   provision of this document is felt to be required.  Permanent changes
   to this document shall be accomplished through the normal BCP
   process.

   The appeals process in section 6.5 applies to this process.

9.2.  Exclusions

   No use of this procedure may lower any specified delays, nor exempt
   any proposal from the requirements of openness, fairness, or
   consensus, nor from the need to keep proper records of the meetings
   and mailing list discussions.

   Specifically, the following sections of this document must not be
   subject of a variance: 5.1, 6.1, 6.1.1 (first paragraph), 6.1.2, 6.3
   (first sentence), 6.5 and 9.  XXX-check numbering.






















Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 32]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


10.  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

   The previous version of this memo specified Intellectual Property
   Rights of individuals and the Internet community.  Experience has
   shown that this is still an evolving area.  The Internet process
   specified in this memo incorporates by reference BCPs 78 and 79.
   These are important documents that should be well understood by
   participants prior to submitting specifications for standardization.











































Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 33]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


11.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

   There have been a number of people involved with the development of
   the documents defining the IETF Standards Process over the years.
   The process was first described in RFC 1310 then revised in RFC 1602
   before the current effort (which relies heavily on its predecessors).
   The next version lived on in RFC 2026 for over ten years, something
   that amazes the current authors.  In particular, thanks go to Lyman
   Chapin, Phill Gross and Christian Huitema as the editors of the
   previous versions, to Jon Postel, Dave Crocker, John Stewart, Robert
   Elz, and Steve Coya for their inputs to those versions, and to Sam
   Hartman, Joel Halpern, Fred Baker, Spencer Dawkins, and Leslie Daigle
   for their input into this version (for both what is there and what is
   not).

   In addition much of the credit for the refinement of the details of
   the IETF processes belongs to the many members of the various
   incarnations of the POISED Working Group.

































Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 34]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


12.  SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS

   Security issues are not discussed in this memo.
















































Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 35]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


13.  IANA Considerations

   While there are no specific IANA considerations in this memo, when
   the IESG chooses to retire a standard based on the guidance contained
   here-in, it should provide IANA with specific requests relating to
   those standards.













































Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 36]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


14.  References

14.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Reynolds, J. and S. Ginoza, "Internet Official Protocol
        Standards", STD 1, RFC 3700, July 2004.

   [2]  Postel, J., "Introduction to the STD Notes", RFC 1311,
        March 1992.

   [3]  Postel, J. and J. Reynolds, "Instructions to RFC Authors",
        RFC 2223, October 1997.

14.2.  Informational References

   [4]  American National Standards Institute, "Coded Character Set -
        7-bit American Standard Code for Information Interchange",
        ANSI X3.4, 1986.

































Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 37]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


Appendix A.  Changes from Previous Versions

   The following changes have been made to this document since RFC 2026:

   o  The standards track has been revamped to be a two-step process,
      where the second step is optional.  The reasoning behind this is
      that few if any documents were making it beyond the first step in
      the standards process.  A second step remains for those who wish
      to demonstrate that a particular standard is very stable.  The
      authors expect further review to occur as we get experience with
      the new process.

   o  All Technical Specifications approved by the IESG are now
      Standards.  In practice, nobody treated a Proposed Standard as
      anything other than a standard, and so we are recognizing this
      fact.

   o  A mapping of old to new is discussed.

   o  The IESG no longer is required to review standards that have not
      achieved L2 status.  These timelines may have made sense ten years
      ago, but in practice since then there has only been a single
      review.  At its sole discretion and in a manner of its choosing,
      the IESG may review specifications below L2 after a period of 24
      months.

   o  Intellectual Property Rights have been moved out of the document
      and incorporated by reference.

   o  Portions of text have been revised to reflect the current state of
      the Internet.  References to DECNET and FTP have been removed.

   o  All submissions to the RFC Editor must be in the form of Internet-
      Drafts.

















Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 38]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


Appendix B.  DEFINITIONS OF TERMS

   xxx IETF Area - A management division within the IETF.  An Area
   consists of Working Groups related to a general topic such as
   routing.  An Area is managed by one or two Area Directors.

   Area Director - The manager of an IETF Area.  The Area Directors
   along with the IETF Chair comprise the Internet Engineering Steering
   Group (IESG).

   File Transfer Protocol (FTP) - An Internet application used to
   transfer files in a TCP/IP network.

   gopher - An Internet application used to interactively select and
   retrieve files in a TCP/IP network.

   Internet Architecture Board (IAB) - An appointed group that assists
   in the management of the IETF standards process.

   Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG) - A group comprised of the
   IETF Area Directors and the IETF Chair.  The IESG is responsible for
   the management, along with the IAB, of the IETF and is the standards
   approval board for the IETF.

   interoperable - For the purposes of this document, "interoperable"
   means to be able to interoperate over a data communications path.

   Last-Call - A public comment period used to gage the level of
   consensus about the reasonableness of a proposed standards action.
   (see section 6.1.2)

   online - Relating to information made available over the Internet.
   When referenced in this document material is said to be online when
   it is retrievable without restriction or undue fee using standard
   Internet applications such as anonymous FTP, gopher or the WWW.

   Working Group - A group chartered by the IESG and IAB to work on a
   specific specification, set of specifications or topic.













Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 39]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


Appendix C.  GLOSSARY OF ACRONYMS

      ANSI: American National Standards Institute

      ARPA: (U.S.) Advanced Research Projects Agency

      AS: Applicability Statement

      FTP: File Transfer Protocol

      ASCII: American Standard Code for Information Interchange

      ITU-T: Telecommunications Standardization sector of the

      International Telecommunication Union (ITU), a UN

      treaty organization; ITU-T was formerly called CCITT.

      IAB: Internet Architecture Board

      IANA: Internet Assigned Numbers Authority

      IEEE: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers

      ICMP: Internet Control Message Protocol

      IESG: Internet Engineering Steering Group

      IETF: Internet Engineering Task Force

      IP: Internet Protocol

      IRSG Internet Research Steering Group

      IRTF: Internet Research Task Force

      ISO: International Organization for Standardization

      ISOC: Internet Society

      MIB: Management Information Base

      OSI: Open Systems Interconnection

      RFC: Request for Comments

      TCP: Transmission Control Protocol




Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 40]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


      TS: Technical Specification

      WWW: World Wide Web
















































Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 41]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


Authors' Addresses

   Scott O. Bradner
   Harvard University
   Holyoke Center, Room 813
   1350 Mass. Ave.
   Cambridge,, MA  02138
   USA

   Phone: +1 617 495 3864
   Email: sob@harvard.edu


   Eliot Lear
   Cisco Systems GmbH
   Glatt-com
   Glattzentrum, ZH  CH-8301
   Switzerland

   Phone: +41 1 878 9200
   Email: lear@cisco.com






























Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 42]

Internet-Draft         Internet Standards Process         September 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Bradner & Lear           Expires March 17, 2007                [Page 43]

