

    IRTF ANS Research Group                                        L. Yang 
    Internet Draft                                               S. Conner 
    Document: draft-irtf-yang-ans-scenarios-00.txt                  X. Guo 
    Expires: April 2004                                           M. Hazra 
                                                                    J. Zhu 
                                                                     Intel 
                                                              October 2003 
     
     
                Common Wireless Ad Hoc Network Usage Scenarios 
     
     
 Status of this Memo 
     
    This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
    all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
     
    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
    other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
    Drafts. 
     
    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
    and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
    time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
    material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
     
    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
         http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
         http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
     
 Abstract 
     
    This document examines some common wireless ad hoc network usage 
    scenarios that have the potential of being deployed as medium or 
    large scale networks.  The scenarios include both pure ad hoc 
    networks without any infrastructure support and the hybrid networks 
    with some infrastructure in place.  This document is motivated by the 
    effort in the IRTF ANS (Ad hoc Network Scalability) research group.  
    The aim of this document is to provide some common network scenarios 
    that are rooted in the real world deployment to facilitate meaningful 
    investigation and research of scalability in ad hoc networks.  
  
  
 Yang, et al.             Expires - April 2004                 [Page 1] 
                    Common Ad Hoc Network Usage Scenarios   October 2003 
  
  
    Table of Contents 
     
    1. Introduction..................................................2 
       1.1 Terminology Overview......................................2 
       1.2 Motivations...............................................4 
       1.3 Document Structure........................................6 
    2. Enterprise Networks...........................................6 
       2.1 Environmental Parameters..................................6 
       2.2 Independent Parameters....................................8 
       2.3 Primary Metrics...........................................8 
    3. Community Networks............................................9 
       3.1 Environmental Parameters..................................9 
       3.2 Independent Parameters...................................11 
       3.3 Primary Metrics..........................................11 
    4. Hot Spot Networks............................................11 
       4.1 Environmental Parameters.................................12 
       4.2 Independent Parameters...................................13 
       4.3 Primary Metrics..........................................14 
    5. Home/Apartment Networks......................................14 
       5.1 Environmental Parameters.................................14 
       5.2 Independent Parameters...................................15 
       5.3 Primary Metrics..........................................16 
    6. Summary......................................................16 
    Security Considerations.........................................17 
    References......................................................17 
    Acknowledgments.................................................18 
    Author's Addresses..............................................18 
  
     
 1. Introduction 
     
    One of the primary focuses of the ANS (Ad hoc Network Scalability) 
    research group is to evaluate the scalability of ad hoc routing 
    protocols developed by the IETF MANET community.  Since it is fairly 
    expensive and time consuming for most researchers to deploy medium to 
    large scale networks in the real world for the purpose of research 
    and evaluation, simulation is the predominant method in ad hoc 
    network research, esp. for scalability study.  Therefore, it is very 
    important to understand the characteristics of real world network 
    scenarios so that the simulation is done with meaningful and 
    realistic assumptions.  We also hope that by introducing and using a 
    common set of network scenarios, the IRTF ANS group and the larger ad 
    hoc research community can share and compare their research results 
    more directly and easily.  
  
 1.1  Terminology Overview 
     
    To some people, the terminology of Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET), or 
    simply, Ad Hoc Networks, is used synonymously with Mobile Mesh 
    Networks, and Mobile Multi-hop Wireless Networks.  Nevertheless, 
    these terminologies may mean slightly different things for others.  
    So for the sake of discussion in this document, we would like to 
    define the relevant terminologies more precisely. 
     
    According to RFC 2501 ([1]), "A MANET consists of mobile platforms 
    (e.g., a router with multiple hosts and wireless communications 
    devices)--herein simply referred to as 'nodes' -- which are free to 
    move about arbitrarily".  "A MANET is an autonomous system of mobile 
    nodes.  The system may operate in isolation, or may have gateways to 
    and interface with a fixed network.  In the latter operational mode, 
  
  
 Yang, et al.             Expires - April 2004                 [Page 2] 
                    Common Ad Hoc Network Usage Scenarios   October 2003 
  
  
    it is typically envisioned to operate as a 'stub' network connecting 
    to a fixed internetwork.  Stub networks carry traffic originating at 
    and/or destined for internal nodes, but do not permit exogenous 
    traffic to 'transit' through the stub network."   
     
    While the definition above remains valid and accurate, we do want to 
    point out some signs of shifting trend as to how MANET technology can 
    be used in the real world deployment.  MANET research was initially 
    motivated by the military and defense sector where the main appeal of 
    an ad hoc network is its peer-to-peer communication capability in a 
    dynamic and mobile environment without any form of infrastructure 
    support.  However, the recent wide spread success of IEEE 802.11 WLAN 
    technology in the consumer, enterprise and service provider markets 
    demonstrates that Internet or Intranet connectivity remains the 
    primary application driver and so infrastructure support remains a 
    key part of most wireless mobile networks.  Therefore, it is 
    necessary to make the distinction of a pure ad hoc network (or 
    simply, an ad hoc network) from a hybrid network, as defined below.   
     
    A hybrid network is typically consisted of two distinct categories of 
    nodes.  One category is called the infrastructure nodes, (e.g., 
    Access Points) which are typically put in place with the primary 
    purpose of aggregating and transporting the traffic for the client 
    nodes in the network.  The other category of nodes in a hybrid 
    network is the client nodes, which represent the application users of 
    the network.  In another word, a hybrid network is consisted of two 
    hierarchical levels -- infrastructure support and clients.  A pure ad 
    hoc network, on the other hand, consists of a flat hierarchy of only 
    client nodes without any infrastructure nodes.    
     
    Most of the networks deployed today are hybrid networks instead of 
    pure ad hoc networks.  It is worth noting that both the 
    infrastructure nodes and the client nodes can be wireless and mobile 
    nodes, and so multi-hop mesh technology can be potentially used to 
    form both a wireless infrastructure mesh, and a client mesh.  We 
    adopt the terminology of "mesh network" to refer to the multi-hop 
    network where each node can relay traffic on behalf of other nodes.  
    "Mesh" can be formed at different hierarchy in the networks.  As we 
    will point out later in each scenario, some usage scenario may form 
    mesh in both hierarchical layers while some may form mesh only in one 
    but not both.  On the other hand, we use "ad hoc network" only to 
    refer to the flat mesh networks consisting of only client nodes but 
    no infrastructure nodes.   
     
    Mobility has been a salient feature in most of the MANET research, 
    partly due to the fact that an ad hoc military network is indeed 
    consisting of highly mobile nodes in the battle field.  Mobility is 
    still a very important feature and sometime a primary motivation for 
    most wireless networks deployed in the commercial world.  However, 
    the kinds of typical client nodes (e.g., laptop, PDA, consumer 
    devices at home, etc.) and the applications prevalent in the 
    commercial sector (email, web surfing, file sharing, etc.) suggest a 
    very different usage model and hence a very different mobility model, 
    as it will become apparent in the following sections as we discuss 
    each of the usage scenarios.  For example, people typically sit down 
    with their laptops before checking their email; and people tend to 
    stand still or walk only slowly when using their PDA, unless they are 
    inside a car or a train.  So mobility does exist but maybe not as 
    prevalent as previously assumed in a military environment.  In the 
    following sections we will discuss the mobility pattern for each 
  
  
 Yang, et al.             Expires - April 2004                 [Page 3] 
                    Common Ad Hoc Network Usage Scenarios   October 2003 
  
  
    usage scenario individually.  Overall we assume that the nodes can be 
    potentially mobile but they may also remain fixed in some scenarios.  
     
    It is also worth pointing out that mobility is not the only factor 
    contributing to the dynamic nature in a wireless network.  For 
    example, an indoor wireless network consisting of only fixed (non-
    mobile) wireless nodes still demonstrates very dynamic link 
    characteristics over time, typically due to the movement of objects 
    and people around the network nodes in the environment.  Therefore, a 
    wireless network with fixed nodes can still face the similar 
    challenge (e.g., dynamic links between neighboring nodes) as a 
    network with highly mobile nodes.  Some research attention has been 
    given to mobility modeling so that the models can represent the real 
    world mobility more realistically.  However it remains an open 
    question whether the mobility of the other objects (including people) 
    in the environment results in the same kind of dynamic link 
    characteristics as the mobility of nodes themselves would.  It 
    remains to be seen whether the current mobility models commonly used 
    by the Ad Hoc research community can model such dynamic environment 
    realistically.  If not, the question becomes how to model not just 
    the node mobility but also the dynamic environment for wireless 
    networks.    
  
 1.2  Motivations 
  
    [2] provides a working definition of scalability for a method of an 
    ad hoc network.  According to [2], the scalability of a method in an 
    ad hoc network is a measure of its ability to maintain efficiency in 
    a set of metrics, with respect to a given environment, as some 
    independent parameter of the network increases to very large values.  
    Therefore, the scalability of a method is evaluated with respect to 
    an [INDEPENDENT PARAMETER, PRIMARY METRICS, ENVIRONMENTAL PARAMETERS] 
    triple, where INDEPENDENT PARAMETERS are parameters that can be 
    freely varied; the PRIMARY METRICS are performance quantities that 
    are observed in the network; and the ENVIRONMENTAL PARAMETERS are 
    parameters that define the operational conditions of the network.  
    For example, researchers may evaluate a particular routing protocol's 
    scalability by evaluating the performance curves of end-to-end 
    throughput and delay versus increasing number of nodes in a certain 
    network environment.  
     
    Some useful independent parameters listed in [1] include: 
    - Number of nodes 
    - Node density 
    - Traffic load 
    - Mobility 
     
    Primary metrics of the system are the dependent variables that are 
    observed as the network is scaled with respect to an independent 
    parameter.  In general, multiple primary metrics are arranged in a 
    SCALABILITY VECTOR and scalability of a certain method is evaluated 
    with respect to this vector.  Some common primary metrics include: 
    - (1/throughput) of the network 
    - Delay in the network 
    - Battery power required at the network nodes 
    - Memory/storage required at the network nodes 
    - Processing power required at the network nodes 
    - 1/(network lifetime) 
     
  
  
 Yang, et al.             Expires - April 2004                 [Page 4] 
                    Common Ad Hoc Network Usage Scenarios   October 2003 
  
  
    Environmental parameters are the most diverse one among the triple.  
    Many environmental parameters may affect scalability, including 
    categories such as: 
    - Network characteristics 
    - Node characteristics 
    - Traffic pattern 
    - Routing layer being used 
    - MAC layer being used 
    - PHY layer being used 
     
    Each category above can include many different individual variables.  
    Consider the collection of all the possible combinations of these 
    environmental parameters as a multi-dimensional "environmental 
    space", and each combination of the environmental parameters becomes 
    only a single data point in this space.  It becomes apparent that 
    this is a huge high-dimensional space and it is practically 
    impossible to evaluate any give method for all the possible data 
    points within this space.  Researchers in the ad hoc network 
    community typically evaluate a given method only for a few data 
    points in this huge environmental space.  But the choices of these 
    data points are somewhat arbitrary, and it becomes difficult to 
    leverage or compare with other researchers' results because the 
    choices of these data points usually vary from one researcher to 
    another.  
     
    Practically speaking, not every data point in this space is equally 
    interesting.  Ad hoc network is an important technology for wireless 
    networks and the markets for today's wireless networks include home, 
    small offices, large enterprises, campus networks, hot spots, 
    community networks, military networks, sensor networks etc.  Most of 
    these networks have the potential to be deployed at medium to large 
    scales, with the exception of maybe single-family houses and small 
    offices.  If we examine each of these categories carefully, it 
    becomes obvious that each has some distinct characteristics in terms 
    of network topology, traffic pattern, mobility pattern, nodes etc.  
    Each of the categories can be represented more or less as a dense 
    cluster of data points instead of random data points in the huge 
    environmental space.  We argue that these dense clusters represent 
    some of the most interesting data points in this huge environmental 
    space, because they represent some of the most common ad hoc network 
    usage scenarios deployed in the real world.  
     
    The objective of this document is to identify a subset of common ad 
    hoc network usage scenarios in this environmental space with 
    description of the environmental characteristics, esp. the network 
    characteristics, the node characteristics and the traffic pattern.  
    Some of the other categories of the environmental parameters, e.g., 
    the routing protocol, MAC and PHY layer used, are more technology 
    dependent and so in general remain unspecified in the descriptions 
    provided here.  However, 802.11 WLAN technology has been the major 
    driving force in today's wireless markets and so many of the 
    scenarios described here are typically deployed with 802.11 
    infrastructure support in the real world.  Pure ad hoc networks 
    (i.e., without any infrastructure support) are more suitable for 
    some usage scenarios (like military networks and sensor networks) 
    but not others.  Nevertheless, we believe there is real value in 
    combining the multi-hop networking technology into the 
    infrastructure-based usage scenarios to create hybrid networks.  
    Therefore, most of the scenarios described in this document belong 
    to hybrid networks rather than pure ad hoc networks.  
  
  
 Yang, et al.             Expires - April 2004                 [Page 5] 
                    Common Ad Hoc Network Usage Scenarios   October 2003 
  
  
     
    In addition to describing some of the environmental characteristics, 
    this document also tries to identify the most relevant independent 
    parameters and the most important scalability metrics when the 
    networks in each category scale upward toward medium to large scale 
    networks.  
  
 1.3  Document Structure 
     
    Rest of this document descries some of the common wireless network 
    usage scenarios, including both ad hoc and hybrid networks.  Each of 
    the following sections is devoted to one common network usage 
    scenario.  The scenarios included in this version of the documents 
    are: 
    - Enterprise networks 
    - Hot spot networks 
    - Community networks 
    - Home/Apartment networks. 
     
    It is our intention to include more usage scenarios in the future 
    version of the document, including sensor networks, military 
    networks, vehicle networks on the highway, etc.  
     
    At the end of this document, we also point out some of the initial 
    findings from studying the usage scenarios described in this 
    document.  
  
 2. Enterprise Networks 
  
    As the name suggests, enterprise wireless networks deal with the 
    deployment and management of a wireless LAN in the enterprise. 
    Wireless LAN technology can be used to link corporate buildings in 
    diverse locations.  
  
    Use of wireless technology in the enterprise network has several 
    advantages. 
    - Ease of installation.  Using wireless LAN technology, IT 
       professionals can extend wired LANS and easily provide 
       connectivity to any location in the enterprise.  Dynamic moves, 
       additions and changes are easy to implement.  
    - Low cost.  The need to install expensive wiring is reduced.  IT 
       professionals installing networked computers can save money by 
       using a cost-effective wireless network infrastructure solution. 
    - Mobility.  Wireless Enterprise networks keep workers productive 
       wherever business takes them by providing the mobile workers 
       secure, high-speed access to critical corporate network resources 
       even when they are away from their desks. 
     
 2.1  Environmental Parameters 
     
    Today∆s enterprise wireless networks are typically deployed with IEEE 
    802.11 infrastructure mode, and the "ad hoc" mode as defined by 
    802.11 is seldom used in such networks.  Enterprise networks 
    generally have very large infrastructure, with 100s of APs and 1000s 
    of wireless clients, covering most of the indoor space on the 
    enterprise campus.  All client devices associate with an AP and all 
    APs are connected to the wired backbone.  However, we do see the 
    potential of utilizing multi-hop mesh technology among the APs and 
    even among the fixed client nodes in the near future, so tomorrow's 
    enterprise networks likely become true hybrid networks.  
  
  
 Yang, et al.             Expires - April 2004                 [Page 6] 
                    Common Ad Hoc Network Usage Scenarios   October 2003 
  
  
     
    The enterprise typically has very good control over all the nodes 
    participating in the enterprise networks, therefore, it represents 
    one of the most controlled usage scenarios with most stringent 
    performance requirement.   
     
   2.1.1 Node Characteristics 
  
    The nodes in the enterprise wireless network can be categorized as: 
    - Access Points (APs): In an enterprise network today, each AP is 
       connected to the wired backbone.  Client devices associate with an 
       AP, which then acts as the client∆s gateway to the enterprise 
       network.  Currently most of the APs are connected into the 
       enterprise network via wired medium.  In the future, it is 
       foreseeable that a wireless multi-hop mesh network can be formed 
       among the APs via wireless medium.  In the AP mesh networks, all 
       APs need not be connected to the gateway directly.  Such a 
       wireless backhaul can help further reduce the need for wiring in 
       the enterprise buildings.   
    - Client Devices: The client devices can be further broken down into 
       two sub-categories.  
         o Mobile Clients.  This includes laptops with wireless 
            capabilities and wireless Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs). 
            These devices have a limited battery life available, 
            especially when mobile and not connected to a power source. 
            When static these nodes may be utilized in forwarding traffic 
            to other nodes.  When in motion, however, these devices can 
            switch their association from one AP to another and are not 
            very reliable in providing uninterrupted forwarding service. 
            Also the power (battery life) limitation of these devices 
            makes it infeasible to have the nodes on for a long time to 
            act as relay nodes. 
         o Fixed clients. This includes desktops equipped with wireless 
            NIC cards.  The wireless enabled desktop client devices have 
            higher processing power and higher memory and storage 
            capabilities than the mobile clients.  They are walled 
            powered devices and can be potentially always on.  Being 
            fixed in wall-powered locations and having comparatively 
            better resources than the mobile clients, and being owned by 
            the enterprise (instead of the personnel using them), they 
            have the potential of being used as relay nodes to forward 
            traffic for other client nodes in a multi-hop fashion.  
            Security will be an important issue that needs to be 
            addressed when implementing multi-hop networking using these 
            devices.  
     
   2.1.2 Network Characteristics 
      
    In the enterprise deployment of a wireless LAN today, physical site 
    surveys are done to place the APs.  IT professionals and network 
    planners take several factors into account while doing the site 
    survey.  The site survey helps in selecting the number of APs, 
    location of the APs and each AP∆s wireless settings.  Once the site 
    survey is done, APs are distributed more-or-less uniformly in each 
    floor of a building and the density of the APs is also uniform. 
    Hence a regular topology, e.g. grid or hexagon, is commonly used to 
    place the infrastructure nodes for today∆s enterprise networks.  
     
    As offices/cubicles and conference rooms are more or less uniformly 
    laid out through the buildings, the fixed clients nodes tend to 
  
  
 Yang, et al.             Expires - April 2004                 [Page 7] 
                    Common Ad Hoc Network Usage Scenarios   October 2003 
  
  
    conform to uniform or regular topologies.  On the other hand, the 
    mobile client nodes tend to be either randomly distributed 
    throughout the building (as people move around with their laptops) 
    or densely cramped into a few small locations (e.g., inside the 
    conference rooms).   
     
    In future enterprise networks, a mesh topology may exist between the 
    APs; i.e. a wireless backhaul may exist between the APs configured 
    into a mesh topology.  A mesh network can also exist between clients 
    of the enterprise network, utilizing the more reliable fixed 
    desktops as relay for the other clients.  Or a hybrid ad hoc network 
    can exist where an AP equipped with multiple radios can use one 
    radio to be part of the AP mesh and the other to be part of the 
    client mesh. 
     
    Enterprise networks typically are deployed in the indoors 
    environment, and the wireless nodes are surrounded with many objects 
    (including poles, walls, furniture) and walking people that can cause 
    highly dynamic RF characteristics for the wireless links, even if the 
    nodes stay static.  Attenuation of the RF signal at the crowded 
    office environment may be more severe than the outdoors and so the 
    radio transmission range may also be shorter than that in the 
    outdoors.  So the PHY layer model needs to take into account both the 
    node mobility and environmental dynamic. 
  
   2.1.3 Traffic Pattern 
     
    The mobile worker typically needs access to the Internet, his 
    personal e-mail or corporate databases.  Hence most traffic is data 
    centric, dealing with web-surfing, e-mail and file sharing 
    applications. However need for voice (for VoIP applications) and 
    video (for net-meeting like applications) is growing, in order to 
    allow workers to keep in touch with their colleagues while in motion.  
    Most of the traffic is directed between the client nodes and the APs 
    and between the APs and the wired gateway.  Hence the performance 
    requirements for the enterprise WLAN is more stringent than in other 
    WLAN scenarios; i.e. there is need to provide high-bandwidth access 
    to the mobile users.  In addition, as there is need to protect 
    company secrets, need to secure the wireless communication is very 
    high in this scenario.  
  
 2.2 Independent Parameters 
     
    As mentioned earlier, when deploying the WLAN in the enterprise, IT 
    personnel and network planners take into account several factors. Of 
    these, the independent parameters, that affect the network design 
    (how many APs to add, where to place the APs, how to configure the 
    APs∆ settings) include: 
         o Coverage Area: The area over which coverage is to be 
            provided. 
         o Node density: The expected number of wireless clients in the 
            coverage area and the expected number of mobile clients in 
            the coverage area. 
         o Load: Expected load to be offered by each client to the 
            network. 
     
 2.3  Primary Metrics 
     
    The most important metrics in the enterprise WLAN are throughput per 
    client and delay encountered by a client in the network. The aim is 
  
  
 Yang, et al.             Expires - April 2004                 [Page 8] 
                    Common Ad Hoc Network Usage Scenarios   October 2003 
  
  
    to provide the mobile user seamless roaming capabilities, by offering 
    him a throughput and delay experience similar to what he can get at 
    his desk. 
  
 3. Community Networks 
  
    The widespread availability of WLAN technology has led to a large 
    number of grassroots groups around the world to use this technology 
    to share Internet connectivity across neighborhoods, parks, college 
    campuses, and city blocks.  WLAN technology can be used to provide 
    "last-mile" broadband connectivity to homes in areas that do not have 
    cable modern or DSL service as well as to mobile users outdoors.  
    Unlike wireless networks that are configured and maintained by 
    service providers (e.g., hotspot networks, as described in Section 
    4), community networks are typically deployed by individuals or non-
    profit organizations or donated by companies to provide free or very 
    low-cost wireless network access.  It is difficult to define a 
    "typical" community network since these networks tend to be deployed 
    in a very ad hoc manner, wherever resources happen to be available 
    (i.e., very limited planning).  Likewise, they tend to consist of 
    non-uniform topologies since nodes are often deployed wherever 
    convenient rooftops, lamp posts, or hilltops happen to be available 
    and owned by individuals/ organizations that are willing to donate 
    real estate to the network deployment effort. 
     
 3.1 Environmental Parameters 
     
    Community networks tend to cover large geographical areas including 
    both indoors and outdoors spaces, like across neighborhood, parks, 
    city blocks, etc.  A combination of IEEE 802.11 (WLAN), IEEE 802.16 
    (WMAN) and other technologies (some of them proprietary) maybe used 
    to provide different functional layers needed to cover the intended 
    area.  The very nature of the community networks being owned/formed 
    by a group of volunteers with limited resources makes it easier to 
    leverage the multi-hop mesh technology in these networks to share the 
    network connectivity, extend the coverage and lower the cost for the 
    community as whole.  
     
   3.1.1 Node Characteristics 
     
    The devices that comprise a community network tend to be 
    heterogeneous due to different functional layers of typical community 
    networks.  Most community networks deployed today consist of Access 
    Point (AP) devices deployed at fixed locations where wired Internet 
    access happens to be available and mobile client devices that connect 
    to an AP for Internet access.  In addition, some community networks 
    leverage multi-hop wireless backhaul to extend range and coverage 
    from wired network locations. 
       
    Summary of node types: 
    - Long-Range Wireless Router Nodes: devices that are deployed in 
       strategic locations to provide long-range wireless backhaul to 
       wired Internet access.  These devices may have multiple radios and 
       directional antennas for long-range line-of-sight connectivity.  
       These devices are deployed in fixed locations with available line-
       power. 
    - Access Point Nodes: devices deployed at fixed locations to provide 
       wireless access to fixed and mobile clients.  Unlike long-range 
       wireless router nodes, these typically do not need to be deployed 
       at strategic locations with line-of-sight to distant long-range 
  
  
 Yang, et al.             Expires - April 2004                 [Page 9] 
                    Common Ad Hoc Network Usage Scenarios   October 2003 
  
  
       wireless router nodes.  They may connect directly to a nearby 
       long-range wireless router node, connect using dense mesh 
       topologies (usually with omni-directional antennas), or have a 
       local wired Internet connection.  These devices typically have 
       line power, and may be co-located with a long-range wireless 
       router node. 
    - Fixed and Mobile Client Nodes: end-user devices that connect to 
       access point nodes for Internet access.  These devices may connect 
       directly to an AP or use ad hoc routing to leverage other mobile 
       client nodes to connect to an AP.  The devices may be in fixed 
       locations with line-powered, but are often mobile with battery 
       power. 
     
   3.1.2 Network Characteristics 
     
    Community networks tend to be deployed in a very ad hoc manner, 
    wherever resources such as wired Internet access and antenna/radio 
    mounting locations happen to be available.  Community networks are 
    usually deployed by volunteers in a best-effort manner, unlike 
    enterprise and service provider networks (hot spots) that are 
    designed to provide as uniform coverage as possible.  This often 
    leads to very non-uniform topologies.  As described in the previous 
    section, community networks tend to consist of multiple functional 
    topology layers.  The primary purpose of a community network is 
    usually to provide connectivity to the Internet, although there is 
    usually not a single wired backbone.  Nodes tend to be initially 
    deployed in sparse topologies to provide initial connectivity in 
    convenient locations.  They tend to be relatively small scale when 
    initially deployed, but grow in scale over time. 
     
    Summary of topology elements: 
    - Long-range wireless backhaul of routers, most likely using 
    directional antennas and multiple radios.  Some of these devices are 
    connected directly to wired internet connections, while multi-hop 
    wireless protocols are used to connect the remaining devices via 
    wireless backhaul. 
    - Clusters of APs connecting to long-range wireless routers, either 
    with directional or omni-directional antennas. 
    - Dense mesh of APs (shorter range than the wireless backhaul 
    routers), some of which have either a wireless link to a long-range 
    wireless router or their own wired network connection.  These could 
    have one or multi radios and could use either directional or omni 
    antennas. 
    - End-point client device connectivity.  Each of the APs could act as 
    a local community hotspot, providing wireless access to clients 
    (e.g., within a home, business, park, etc). 
     
   3.1.3 Traffic Pattern 
     
    The primary purpose of most community networks is to provide 
    connectivity to the Internet.  End-devices connect primarily to 
    destinations on the Internet (outside of the wireless network 
    itself), e.g. for web surfing and email applications.  A fraction of 
    the communication may consist of file sharing and multi-player game 
    traffic that requires peer-to-peer connectivity between end-devices 
    in the wireless network.  Because community networks typically 
    provide wireless Internet access for free or very low cost, 
    performance requirements are typically less stringent than in service 
    provider networks.  In general, a community network should provide 
  
  
 Yang, et al.             Expires - April 2004                [Page 10] 
                    Common Ad Hoc Network Usage Scenarios   October 2003 
  
  
    higher throughput per-user than is available from alternative low-
    cost network connection options (e.g. 56k modem). 
     
 3.2 Independent Parameters 
     
    When community networks are deployed using multi-layer topologies, 
    there is opportunity to divide scalability analysis into largely 
    independent pieces.  For example, the maximum throughput that can be 
    provided by each long-range wireless router when the backhaul is 
    connected with directional antennas can be studied primarily 
    independently from the throughput per client that can be achieved 
    surrounding a given backhaul router depending on the number and 
    topology of APs and clients. 
     
    Parameters that can be independently configured when simulating 
    community networks include: 
    - Long-Range Wireless Router Topology 
    - Access Point Density surrounding a Long-Range Wireless Router or 
       wired network connection 
    - Client Density 
    - Traffic Load 
  
 3.3  Primary Metrics 
     
    The most important metrics in real-world community networks are 
    typically cost and coverage.  Because end-users typically do not pay 
    for service, the absolute throughput per user is usually not as 
    critical as in service provider hotspot networks.  However, when 
    analyzing different community network configurations, the following 
    metrics should be considered: 
    - Coverage 
    - Throughput per client 
    - Latency 
  
 4. Hot Spot Networks 
     
    A major appeal of WLANs is that network access providers can quickly 
    deploy them in areas with a high volume of users of network traffic 
    and where the traditional wireless carriers have not been able to 
    keep up with public demand for broadband connections.  These high 
    traffic areas are referred as Hot Spots.  
     
    Several thousand hot spots have already been identified throughout 
    the world and the number is expected to increase significantly over 
    the next several years.  Dozens of start-up hot spot operators have 
    installed Wi-Fi access points at hotels, airports, restaurants, 
    bookstores, schools, theaters, convention centers, health clubs, and 
    other public venues.  Major wireless carriers are now entering the 
    WLAN connectivity business leveraging their nationwide coverage and 
    extensive customer base, e.g. T-Mobile offers 802.11b-based access 
    for more than half of the hot spots in the United States, with tens 
    of thousands of mobile users accessing the Internet from its WLANs.  
     
    The hot spot networks deployed today are typically based on 802.11 
    infrastructure mode.  As we will discuss below, we believe it is 
    reasonable to expect the hot spot operators may leverage mesh 
    technology to build up the wireless backhaul among APs for larger 
    coverage (meaning the traffic may be relayed by several APs over 
    wireless links before reaching its final destination at the gateway); 
  
  
 Yang, et al.             Expires - April 2004                [Page 11] 
                    Common Ad Hoc Network Usage Scenarios   October 2003 
  
  
    but it is unlikely for the hot spot operators rely on the client 
    nodes to act as traffic relay for other clients.  
     
 4.1  Environmental Parameters 
     
    The geographic area covered by the hot spot networks can vary a lot, 
    depending on the intended location and the business model of the 
    service provider.  A small hot spot covering a coffee shop or a 
    restaurant may only require one or two APs, while a hot spot 
    operated throughout an international airport may require 50-100 APs.  
    Larger size of hot spots may share many similar characteristics with 
    the community networks. For example, the mixture of technologies 
    being used (802.11, 802.16 etc.), the functional layers (long range 
    wireless backhaul routers, APs, and clients) deployed to cover a 
    larger geographic area may be very similar to what we describe for 
    community networks in Section 3.  On the other hand, the very 
    different business model of hot spots (owned and operated by service 
    providers to make money) also makes it very different from the 
    community networks in some aspects.  For example, while it is 
    relatively easy to convince the volunteers of a community network to 
    allow other people using their APs as relay nodes to get on the 
    Internet; it will be a big challenge to ask the paying customers to 
    do the same on their devices.  
     
   4.1.1 Node Characteristics 
  
    There are mainly two kinds of nodes in a hot spot ˚ client nodes and 
    Access Point.  The former includes mobile terminal such as laptops, 
    hand held devices, and so on.  Access Point is deployed at fixed 
    locations to provide wireless access to mobile clients.  If the 
    geographic area is large, long range wireless backhaul router may be 
    used with multiple radios and/or directional antennas, just as in 
    the community networks.  As power outlets are typically under short 
    supply in the hot spots, the client nodes are typically operated 
    with limited battery power.  Hand held devices are also very 
    resource constraint in terms of the memory and processing power.  As 
    customers walk in and out of the hot spots, the client nodes join 
    and leave the networks very frequently.   
     
    Although the environment in a hot spot is highly dynamic, the 
    mobility of most client nodes is typically very low because most 
    people tend to sit down while working on their laptops and the 
    walking speed while working with hand held also tend to be slow.   
  
   4.1.2 Network Characteristics 
     
    The key characteristic of the hot spots deployed today is 
    heterogeneous connectivity.  Usually, the network size could range 
    from small to very large, where the number of Access Points could 
    range from few (e.g. < 5) to a large value (e.g. 50).  The typical 
    topology for a hot spot today is a star topology.  All client nodes  
    are associated with one of the APs and all APs are connected to the 
    gateway on the wired backbone because network connectivity remains 
    the major application for hot spot customers.  However, in the 
    future, it is possible especially for a large scale hot spot with 
    multiple cells that APs are connected with each other wirelessly and 
    form a wireless backhaul. 
     
    In a hot spot, client nodes are randomly distributed and the density 
    typically is not uniform or even regular throughout the geographic 
  
  
 Yang, et al.             Expires - April 2004                [Page 12] 
                    Common Ad Hoc Network Usage Scenarios   October 2003 
  
  
    area.  This leads to the co-existence of links with different signal 
    quality; therefore, one of the main challenges in a hot spot is 
    heterogeneous link connections.  For 802.11 WLAN, a direct 
    consequence of the heterogeneous connections is a multi-rate 
    environment, because IEEE 802.11 provides different data rates for 
    different link quality.  As presented in many previous research 
    works, current 802.11 MAC protocol guarantees packet level fairness, 
    where all links get the equal share of the total throughput no 
    matter what data rate it uses.  As a result, the whole system 
    performance can be very sensitive to the distribution of nodes, 
    since a node with a slow link can drag down the whole system 
    throughput for other nodes.   
     
    Comparing to community networks, the service provider has more 
    control over the coverage and density of the infrastructure nodes 
    deployed in a given facility.  The service providers may still 
    deploy the APs in a very non-regular way, for example, so that 
    better coverage is achieved in the sitting areas than along the 
    corridors in the airport to match the expected usage pattern by the 
    end users.  
     
    Given the dynamic and resource constraint natures of the client 
    nodes in a hot spot, and the business model most hot spots are 
    operating under, it is very difficult to make a client device work 
    as a relaying node to forward traffic for others willingly and 
    reliably.  Security will also be another important obstacle for 
    using client devices as relays in a hot spot.  Therefore we expect 
    the hot spot operators continue relying on their own infrastructure 
    to deliver the customers' traffic.  
     
    On the other hand, as geographic area of the hot spot and the number 
    of client devices using the hot spot grow larger and larger, the 
    operators have to put in more and more APs to support the growing 
    demand.  While wireline backbone is difficult and expensive to 
    deploy for a large area, the wireless backhaul becomes an attractive 
    alternative.  Therefore, we expect multi-hop capable wireless 
    backhaul become an enabling technology component to deploy large 
    scale hot spot networks. 
     
   4.1.3 Traffic Pattern 
     
    Internet-based applications will be the main applications for the hot 
    spots, such as email and web, etc.  Most traffic is data, and so it 
    is not very delay sensitive.  Local peer-to-peer traffic will be very 
    small comparing to the out-going/in-coming traffic through gateway. 
    Therefore, the traffic pattern for the hot spots is very much star-
    like, and the down-link (in-coming) traffic dominates due to the 
    nature of the main applications (email, web, etc.). 
     
    As we have pointed out in the previous section, it may be very 
    difficult to implement multi-hop networking among the client nodes 
    in a hot spot due to many issues, such as security and limited 
    resources provided by laptop.  Thus, the average number of hops 
    between a client node and an infrastructure node is one, but mesh 
    may still be used among the APs to reach the final gateway to the 
    Internet.  
     
 4.2 Independent Parameters 
     
  
  
 Yang, et al.             Expires - April 2004                [Page 13] 
                    Common Ad Hoc Network Usage Scenarios   October 2003 
  
  
    The main factor driving the scaling dimension is the total number of 
    clients in a hot spot.  The out-going bandwidth is limited (say T1 
    line) thus the per-client throughput decreases as the number of 
    clients increases.  The performance of contention-based MAC protocol 
    in IEEE 802.11 is likely to drop significantly as the number of 
    clients increases because of the increased contentions.  Therefore, 
    as the number of clients increase, the number of APs in the hot spot 
    tends to increase as well. 
  
 4.3  Primary Metrics 
     
    The main metrics in a hotspot is throughput per client.   
     
 5. Home/Apartment Networks 
     
    The initial driving force for wireless (e.g. IEEE 802.11 networks) at 
    home/apartment is its convenience at extending broadband access to 
    devices (primarily laptops) anywhere in the home.  But the future 
    home networks will include more wireless-capable devices such as the 
    consumer electronic devices and can potentially become a hybrid 
    networks with local ad-hoc communications amongst these devices. 
     
 5.1  Environmental Parameters 
     
    Today's single-family home network is typically a small scale network 
    with a few client devices connecting to one or two 802.11 APs.  
    However, as higher throughput radio technology (with shorter range) 
    becomes available, it is foreseeable to form a multi-hop mesh 
    networks among the client devices at home.  That can be achieved by 
    turning every consumer devices into a wireless mesh relay node, or by 
    developing specialized home-use wireless relay nodes to form a low 
    cost infrastructure mesh inside a home.   
     
    Medium to large scale networks can be formed in a sizable apartment 
    complex or dormitory building on college campus.  This may be the 
    result of a well planned activity when a single administrative entity 
    (i.e., the apartment owner) deployed the infrastructure throughout 
    the building; or it may be the result of a bunch of uncoordinated 
    small networks set up by neighboring apartment tenants inside their 
    own apartment units.  In either case, coordination among the client 
    nodes across the boundary of apartment units to form a mesh may be a 
    challenge because these client nodes belong to different tenants.  
    Forming a mesh among APs may be feasible if these APs are owned by a 
    single entity.  
  
   5.1.1 Node Characteristics 
     
    Nodes in the future home network may include computing devices (e.g. 
    desktops, laptops, handhelds), multimedia devices (e.g. video 
    recorder, HDTV, home theatre), appliances and possibly low cost 
    consumer grade wireless routers (special purpose wireless relay 
    nodes).  These devices have a wide range of computing, communication 
    and resource capability. 
     
    Most of the home appliances (DVD, TV, etc.) are plugged to the wall.  
    So will the wireless routers.  Power consumption is not the primary 
    concern.  However, home appliances may employ low cost commodity 
    wireless component.  Hence the processing capacity (computing, 
    storage) may not be as powerful as a laptop.  Therefore, protocols 
  
  
 Yang, et al.             Expires - April 2004                [Page 14] 
                    Common Ad Hoc Network Usage Scenarios   October 2003 
  
  
    or mechanisms designed for home appliance network should be scalable 
    to processing capacity. 
     
    Most of the client devices remain fixed in locations (e.g., consumer 
    devices) while some may be mobile (laptop, handheld, etc.).   
  
   5.1.2 Network Characteristics 
     
    Co-channel interference (CCI) is not an issue in a single home 
    environment where neighbors are far enough such that interference 
    from them can be ignored.  But CCI becomes significant in apartment 
    complex environment where homes share walls.  Frequency planning is 
    necessary.  However, frequency selection amongst apartment units may 
    lack the level of coordination found in enterprise or hotspot 
    environments.  Hence, frequency planning for apartment complex can 
    not take advantage of a single administrative domain, and may need 
    to assume an un-cooperated environment. 
     
    Frequency agility may also be required to avoid interference from 
    non-networking devices using the same (unlicensed) frequency band.  
    Such devices include microwave oven, cordless phone, baby monitor, 
    etc. 
     
    A home network may need to support multimedia service that requires 
    QoS guarantee.  Hence the routing and reservation scheme should be 
    accurate.  However in a home environment, even a short distance 
    between two devices may experience multiple wall attenuation and 
    complex multi-path propagation.  So it is very difficult to 
    accurately measure the link capacity between deices.  Hence the QoS 
    scheme should be able to tolerate such inaccuracy. In addition, it 
    should explore multi-path routing for better QoS guarantee. 
     
   5.1.3 Traffic Pattern 
     
    A home network may need to support a large variety of traffic 
    patterns.  Low data rate such as sensory data from appliance, medium 
    data rate such as web browsing or high data rate such as HDTV 
    streams.  While traffic going in/out of the home networks to connect 
    to the outside world is definitely a significant part of the total 
    traffic expected in a home network, we also expect to see significant 
    peer-to-peer traffic within the local home network.  For example, 
    media files (music or even movie clips) may be fed from the desktop 
    PC (hided somewhere in the corner of the den/study) to the media 
    players (DVD, TV, etc.) in the family room via the local mesh 
    networks formed inside the house or apartment unit.  Therefore, home 
    networks may distinguish itself from many other scenarios 
    (enterprise, community, hot spots, etc.) because of its unique 
    traffic pattern.  
  
    Traffic variation due to mobility is not expected to be significant 
    because many of the client nodes remain fixed.  Similar to the 
    indoors enterprise networks, the RF links may still be highly dynamic 
    due to the multi-path attenuation of the signals and the mobility of 
    people (and pets) inside the home. 
  
 5.2 Independent Parameters 
     
    Load -- the most significant parameter will be the number of high-
    throughput applications that need to be supported simultaneously. 
     
  
  
 Yang, et al.             Expires - April 2004                [Page 15] 
                    Common Ad Hoc Network Usage Scenarios   October 2003 
  
  
 5.3  Primary Metrics 
     
    From the perspective of serving multimedia applications, the primary 
    metrics include throughput and delay.  Both the average and the 
    distribution will be evaluated, as little jitter in both metrics are 
    desirable. 
     
    From the perspective of robust connectivity (e.g. to long-running 
    multimedia applications), the primary metrics may also include route 
    resilience to path/node failure. 
     
    From the perspective of serving heterogeneous traffic classes, the 
    primary metrics may also include the ability to isolate each traffic 
    class and provide performance predictability. 
     
 6. Summary 
  
    Even though we've only examined a few of the common usage scenarios 
    in which ad hoc networking technology may be applicable, we can see 
    that some of the common assumptions used by many researchers in the 
    ad hoc research community are not always valid in the real world. 
     
    One common assumption people use for most ad hoc networking research 
    (but admittedly less so in the last two years), is that the ad hoc 
    network consists of only homogeneous nodes in a flat hierarchy and 
    each and every node can act as both a client and a relay for other 
    nodes in the network.  We can see that is not always true for the 
    scenarios we describe here.  Most of the scenarios deploy some kind 
    of infrastructure hierarchy and so we should evaluate the protocol or 
    method in question for both the pure ad hoc networks and the hybrid 
    networks to ensure real world success. 
     
    Another common assumption used by many of the researchers is that all 
    the nodes in the networks are mobile and can move about arbitrarily.  
    As pointed out by some of the most recent research in mobility study, 
    most of the mobility models commonly used today don't match well with 
    the mobility patterns in the real world.   
     
    As we point out earlier, node mobility is not the only factor 
    contributing to the RF dynamics in the wireless networks.  Mobility 
    of objects and people in the environment contribute probably just as 
    much as the mobility of the nodes themselves.  Little research is 
    done so far to evaluate and model the dynamic effect on the RF links 
    and routing method.   
     
    Picking random pairs of source and destination nodes in the network 
    constitutes a common traffic pattern assumed by many research papers' 
    simulation.  However, as we examine the scenarios in this document, 
    most of the traffic patterns are star-like traffic between client 
    nodes in the network and the gateway nodes that can connect to the 
    Internet or Intranet.    
     
    As we discuss in the introduction section, the environmental space in 
    which we evaluate any ad hoc protocol or method can be a huge multi-
    dimensional space with infinite evaluation data points.  We believe a 
    set of well defined and understood usage scenarios can go a long way 
    to help the research community focus our collective research and 
    evaluation effort around a few important cluster data points in the 
    vast environmental space.  The usage scenarios we describe in this 
    document are only a few examples that we intend to use as starting 
  
  
 Yang, et al.             Expires - April 2004                [Page 16] 
                    Common Ad Hoc Network Usage Scenarios   October 2003 
  
  
    points for the discussion in the IRTF ANS group and the larger ad hoc 
    research community.  We just pointed out a few findings that came out 
    of this study that might help us better tune our assumptions and 
    models in the future simulations or even test-bed study.   
  
 Security Considerations 
  
    This document only describes some of usage scenarios either exist 
    today or potentially might emerge in the near future.  Cecurity 
    consideration is one of the aspects we look at for each scenario. 
    Since this document does not define or recommend any networking 
    protocol or specific technology and hence there is no directly 
    applicable security consideration that is relevant here.  
     
 References 
  
    [1] S. Corson, J. Macker, ÙMobile Ad hoc Networking (MANET): Routing 
                Protocol Performance Issues and Evaluation 
                Considerations", RFC 2501, January 1999. 
    [2] O. Arpacioglu, T. Small, Z. J. Haas, ÙNotes on Scalability of 
                Wireless Ad Hoc Networks", work in progress, August 2003, 
                <draft-irtf-and-scalability-notes-00.txt>. 
                      
    1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
       9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
     
  
  
 Yang, et al.             Expires - April 2004                [Page 17] 
    
  Acknowledgments 
      
  Author's Addresses 
      
     Lily Yang 
     Intel JF3-206 
     2111 NE 25th Ave., 
     Hillsboro, OR 97124 
     Phone: (503)264-8813 
     Email: lily.l.yang@intel.com 
      
     Steve Conner 
     Intel JF3-206 
     2111 NE 25th Ave., 
     Hillsboro, OR 97124 
     Phone: (503)264-8036 
     Email: w.steven.conner@intel.com 
      
     Xingang Guo 
     Intel JF3-206 
     2111 NE 25th Ave., 
     Hillsboro, OR 97124 
     Phone: (503)264-9944 
     Email: xingang.guo@intel.com 
      
     Mousumi Hazra 
     Intel JF3-206 
     2111 NE 25th Ave., 
     Hillsboro, OR 97124 
     Phone: (503)712-7853 
     Email: mousumi.m.hazra@intel.com 
      
     Jing Zhu 
     Intel JF3-206 
     2111 NE 25th Ave., 
     Hillsboro, OR 97124 
     Phone: (503)712-7235 
     Email: jing.a.zhu@intel.com 
      
      


ang                     Expires - April 2004                 [Page 1] 