Network Working Group		
Request for Comments:   				           
                                                        Bill Moss
Category: Experimental					January 2002

				Named Ports

                    draft-moss-named-ports-v.01-00.txt 



Status of this Memo





This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to
all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
other groups may also distribute working documents as
Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
"work in progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

        This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet
	community.  This memo does not specify an Internet standard of any
	kind.  Discussion and suggestions for improvement are requested.
	Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

Copyright Notice

	Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

Introduction

	This likely involves a new TCP/IP standard. I'm
	not so technical to know if it's feasible or informed to
	know if it exists (perhaps in IPv6), or is proposed. But
	simply put, in addition to the numbered range of ports used
	now for IP services like ssh, http, etc., in the interest
	of security, arbitrary named ports could be used e.g.
	http://foo.bar.net:mooky, or telnet 0 thisone, further
	these named ports could be encrypted strings.

Security Considerations

	If named ports were possible, their use could increase network security.

Author's Address

	Bill Moss
	89 Bleecker St. #3A
	New York, NY 10012
	Telephone: (212) 375-8869
	E-Mail: billmoss@hotmail.com

Full Copyright Statement

	Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

	This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished
	to others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise
	explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied,
	published and distributed, in whole or in part, without
	restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice
	and this paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative
	works.  However, this document itself may not be modified in any
	way, such as by removing the copyright notice or references to the
	Internet Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed
	for the purpose of developing Internet standards in which case the
	procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards

Moss				Experimental			[Page 1]

RFC     			Named Ports			January 2002

	process must be followed, or as required to translate it into
	languages other than English.

	The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not
	be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

	This document and the information contained herein is provided on
	an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
	ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
	IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
	THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
	WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Moss				Experimental			[Page 2]



