
SIPPING WG                                                    H. Kaplan 
Internet Draft                                              Acme Packet 
Intended status: BCP                                                    
Expires: January 11, 2010                                 July 11, 2009 
    
    
              Best Current Practices for SIP Interoperability 
                    draft-kaplan-sipping-interop-bcp-02 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 11, 2010.  
    
Copyright and License Notice 
    
   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors.  All rights reserved. 
    
   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).  
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your 
   rights and restrictions with respect to this document. 
    
Abstract 
    
   This document identifies several commonly found interoperability 
   issues with SIP, and provides guidance to implementers for how to 
   avoid them.  This is an initial set of commonly found problems. 



Kaplan                 Expires January 1, 2009               [Page 1] 
Internet-Draft         SIP Interoperability BCP              July 2009 



Table of Contents 
    
   1.    Introduction................................................2 
   2.    Applicability...............................................2 
   3.    Warning for Readers.........................................3 
   4.    General Interoperability Issues and Recommendations.........4 
      4.1.   Response code issues...................................4 
      4.2.   SIP field and message lengths..........................5 
      4.3.   SIP and TEL URI formats................................6 
      4.4.   Tel URI's and their parameters in SIP URI's............7 
   5.    Specific SIP Issues.........................................8 
      5.1.   REGISTER response behavior.............................8 
      5.2.   Contact-URI Handling...................................9 
      5.3.   Require header values..................................9 
      5.4.   Call-Forwarding Issues: Diversion vs. History-Info....10 
      5.5.   REFER Call Transfer Issues............................11 
   6.    Specific SIP-related SDP Issues............................11 
      6.1.   Offer-less Invites and Re-Invites.....................11 
      6.2.   Call-hold signaling...................................12 
      6.3.   SDP Media Lines in Answers not matching Offers........13 
      6.4.   Supported Media Incompatibilities.....................14 
   7.    Rare SIP usages............................................15 
   8.    IANA Considerations........................................16 
   9.    Acknowledgments............................................16 
   10.   Informative References.....................................16 
   Author's Address.................................................18 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
   SIP has grown both in terms of vendor/customer adoption and protocol 
   complexity, with numerous implementations, and differing 
   assumptions, leading to numerous interoperability issues.  Unlike 
   some other protocols, it suffers from a lack of either a single 
   dominant vendor, or of a single autocratic standards body.  The 
   large number of vendors involved, from different regions of the 
   World, and the differences in needs and wants of the customers of 
   those vendors, has led to a complicated interoperability problem 
   space. 
    
   This document lists some of the more common interoperability issues 
   encountered in deployments, and provides BCP recommendations for how 
   to avoid or resolve them. 
    
2. Applicability 
    
   This draft is focused on SIP interoperability issues only. 

 
 
Kaplan                  Expires - January 2010                [Page 2] 
                       SIP Interoperability BCP              July 2009 
 
 
3. Warning for Readers 
 
             WARNING WARNING WARNING WARNING WARNING WARNING WARNW 
             W                                                   W 
             W    The following list is an initial strawman.     W 
             W            It is still under review.              W 
             W                                                   W 
             W                 ! DO NOT USE !                    W 
             W                                                   W 
             W    this list for any purpose other than           W 
             W    discussing what should be in this list.        W 
             W    It is incomplete, probably wrong and           W 
             W                 it WILL change.                   W 
             W                                                   W 
             W    If you think you have a use for this           W 
             W    list outside this draft, please participate    W 
             W    in the upcoming discussion and use some        W 
             W    future version of the list that results.       W 
             W    Do not use this one.                           W 
             W                                                   W 
             W    Specifically, some Recommendations in this     W 
             W    draft may well exacerbate problems, or lead    W 
             W    to MORE or WORSE interoperability issues.      W 
             W                                                   W 
             W             ! You have been warned. !             W 
             W                                                   W 
             W           NO!                          MNO!       W 
             W          MNO!!                        MNNOO!      W 
             W        MMNO!                           MNNOO!!    W 
             W      MNOONNOO!   MMMMMMMMMMPPPOII!   MNNO!!!!     W 
             W      !O! NNO! MMMMMMMMMMMMMPPPOOOII!! NO!         W 
             W            ! MMMMMMMMMMMMMPPPPOOOOIII! !          W 
             W             MMMMMMMMMMMMPPPPPOOOOOOII!!           W 
             W             MMMMMOOOOOOPPPPPPPPOOOOMII!           W 
             W             MMMMM..    OPPMMP    .,OMI!           W 
             W             MMMM::   o.,OPMP,.o   ::I!!           W 
             W               NNM:::.,,OOPM!P,.::::!!             W 
             W              MMNNNNNOOOOPMO!!IIPPO!!O!            W 
             W              MMMMMNNNNOO:!!:!!IPPPPOO!            W 
             W               MMMMMNNOOMMNNIIIPPPOO!!             W 
             W                  MMMONNMMNNNIIIOO!                W 
             W                MN MOMMMNNNIIIIIO! OO              W 
             W               MNO! IiiiiiiiiiiiI OOOO             W 
             W          NNN MNO!   O!!!!!!!!!O   OONO NO!        W 
             W         MNNNNNO!    OOOOOOOOOOO    MMNNON!        W 
             W           MNNNNO!    PPPPPPPPP    MMNON!          W 
             W              OO!                   ON!            W 
             W                                                   W 
             WARNING WARNING WARNING WARNING WARNING WARNING WARNW 
 
 
Kaplan                  Expires - January 2010                [Page 3] 
                       SIP Interoperability BCP              July 2009 
 
 
    
4.   General Interoperability Issues and Recommendations 
    
   The following sections detail interoperability issues found, and 
   general guidelines and recommendations for implementers to follow to 
   avoid interoperability problems.  This is by no means an 
   exhaustive/comprehensive list. 
    
    
4.1. Response code issues  
    
   There are numerous reasons a given response code may be sent, and in 
   some cases more than one response code may be appropriate, which has 
   led to differing expectations and behaviors.  The need to resolve 
   such conflicts between domains of proxies has led to middle-boxes 
   changing the response codes, which may well exacerbate the problem 
   in the future. 
    
   In general the interoperability problems that arise are where the 
   upstream proxies or UAC perform automatic re-attempts to alternate 
   paths for certain response codes but not others, and such action 
   cannot be known in advance to the downstream device.  For example a 
   404 Not Found or 480 Temporarily Unavailable are commonly returned 
   by a proxy when it cannot find a route to the target for any number 
   of reasons, and this response causes some upstream nodes to try 
   alternate paths and some not to.  Because a 404/480 can be returned 
   for a variety of reasons, some of which should cause a re-route and 
   some not, some vendors send different response codes than 404/480 
   for those conditions: response codes which are more explicit about 
   whether a re-route is the appropriate action. 
    
   Another example is 503, which seems to cover everything from 
   temporary overload conditions, administrative-down state, permanent 
   failure, and as a catch-all for anything not easily identified by 
   other codes.  Some devices treat this response code as a semi-
   permanent condition for the next-hop, and avoid sending any 
   subsequent requests to the next-hop for a sustained period of time, 
   which may or may not be the correct action to take.  Unfortunately 
   the upstream nodes have no idea which downstream proxy actually 
   generated the 503. 
    
   Interoperability problems also arise due to SIP response code 
   reason-phrases, which are supposed to be ignored from a response 
   processing perspective.  They are useful for logs and to show the 
   user, but only the response code itself should be used for response 
   processing.  Some vendors use unique reason-phrase string values for 
   different events of the same code number, to aid in troubleshooting, 
   while other vendors need the reason-phrase to be the default 
   examples from the RFC's.  
 
 
Kaplan                  Expires - January 2010                [Page 4] 
                       SIP Interoperability BCP              July 2009 
 
 
    
   See "REGISTER response behavior" section for related problems. 
    
    
   Recommended Behavior: 
    
   [Can we recommend any specific behavior about response codes here?  
   It's not clear we can.] 
    
   UA's, B2BUA's, and Proxies MUST ignore the received SIP response 
   reason-phrase from a response processing perspective.  The reason-
   phrase is an opaque string value useful for logging, 
   troubleshooting, and displaying to human users.  The example reason-
   phrases in the RFC's are only examples, and are non-normative.  Many 
   SIP nodes generate unique reason-phrase string values to aid in 
   troubleshooting, which is a significant value for SIP operators and 
   users. 
    
4.2. SIP field and message lengths 
    
   While the RFCs do not define any maximum lengths for SIP header 
   fields (values, parameters, etc.) or SIP messages, the reality of 
   computing technology is such that vendors often do impose maximum 
   lengths for received fields and messages.  Whether it's due to 
   security concerns, product architecture, logging constraints, etc., 
   the fact is there are many systems which cannot or will not handle 
   fields as large as other systems can generate.  Although [RFC3261] 
   does define some specific response codes (413/414/513) for this 
   case, it does not fix the underlying interoperability issue.  
   Devices cannot simply stop sending larger fields based on a SIP 
   response code.   
    
   This issue has been appearing more frequently lately, with the use 
   of embedded cookies in URIs and parameter growth.  
    
    
   Recommended Behavior: 
    
   It is RECOMMENDED that a UA, B2BUA or Proxy not generate any SIP 
   field longer than 256 bytes.  This includes any header parameters, 
   URI, and header value.  It is RECOMMENDED that a Proxy, B2BUA, and 
   UA be able to process SIP fields of at least 1024 bytes in length. 
    
   It is RECOMMENDED that a UA or B2BUA not generate any SIP message 
   size larger than 64,000 bytes.  Note this is not 65,535, in order to 
   accommodate message growth due to header insertion in Proxies.  It 
   is RECOMMENDED that a Proxy, B2BUA, or UA be able to process SIP 
   messages of at least 65,535 bytes. 
    
 
 
Kaplan                  Expires - January 2010                [Page 5] 
                       SIP Interoperability BCP              July 2009 
 
 
   It is RECOMMENDED that a UA or B2BUA not generate any SIP message 
   bodies larger than 32,768 bytes.  It is RECOMMENDED that a B2BUA or 
   UA be able to process SIP message bodies of at least 64,000 bytes in 
   length. 
    
4.3. SIP and TEL URI formats 
    
   Despite all RFC wording to the contrary, the SIP URI format has seen 
   widespread use as essentially the semantic equivalent of the TEL 
   URI, albeit with different syntax.  Many provider systems treat 
   sip:16035551212@example.net as logically equivalent to 
   tel:+16035551212, even though the former has local scope to 
   example.net only, and the latter has global scope.  Part of the 
   reason for this, I believe, is that originating UA's have no real 
   way of knowing when a URI should be one or the other - the user 
   pressed digit buttons and hit "send", and all the UAC can do is send 
   the request to sip:[digits]@[local-domain].  It doesn't know the 
   numbers pressed were global in scope, or even E.164 numbers.  Only 
   the routing proxies know this, and even then they only know the 
   numbers they're each responsible for.  Thus we see the domain 
   portion of SIP URIs getting replaced by middle-boxes at provider 
   boundaries, if the username portion looks like an E.164 number.   
    
   Furthermore, many systems have either been designed or provisioned 
   to handle only one scheme type: SIP URIs.  This has led to cases 
   where requests are rejected unless the appropriate URI scheme is 
   used, and frequently that single common scheme needs to be used in 
   more than just the request-URI (e.g., To and From URI's as well).  
   This wholesale replacement of schemes and domain names in URIs leads 
   to interop issues when the same URIs are expected to be used for 
   end-to-end purposes, in headers or XML bodies the middle-boxes do 
   not or cannot change.  The most recent example is [RFC4474] sip-
   identity. 
    
    
   Recommended Behavior: 
    
   It is RECOMMENDED that a UA or B2BUA only use SIP URIs for any SIP 
   header field values which need a URI; for example the request URI, 
   To, From, Contact, P-Asserted-Identity, P-Called-Party-ID, P-
   Associated-URI, History-Info, and so on.  It is RECOMMENDED that a 
   UA, B2BUA, or Proxy be able to process/support TEL and SIPS URI's 
   per their associated RFC's. 
    
   It is RECOMMENDED that SIP domains not allocate SIP URI AoR 
   usernames which match the following regular expression syntax, 
   unless they are actually E.164 assigned numbers for them: 
   ^+?[0-9]{11,16}$ 

 
 
Kaplan                  Expires - January 2010                [Page 6] 
                       SIP Interoperability BCP              July 2009 
 
 
   Note this is after removing visual-separators, and any user 
   parameters. 
   Providing AoR usernames which match E.164 syntax but which are not 
   truly E.164 assigned numbers will lead to significant 
   interoperability issues and user confusion, if such domain 
   interconnect with other SIP domains.  One SIP Service Provider is 
   known to currently use such usernames. 
    
   It is RECOMMENDED, that the SIP Working Group address the 
   fundamental issue of E.164 or telephone number scope in SIP URI's.  
   The TEL URI also has specific syntactic and usage issues beyond 
   simply lack of broad industry support, which may be a reason for not 
   supporting it. 
    
4.4. Tel URI's and their parameters in SIP URI's 
    
   Although the Tel URI has not seen much usage itself using the "tel" 
   scheme, it is quite common to see SIP URI's containing Tel-URI 
   parameters - i.e., Tel URI's in the form of SIP URI's.  There are 
   many URI parameters defined for Tel-URI that are popular, and thus 
   frequently appear in SIP URI's, for example in the request-URI. 
    
   The most common interoperability problem in this area is the 
   placement of the Tel URI parameters, for example the "tgrp" and 
   "trunk-context" parameters from [RFC4904], and the "rn", "npdi", and 
   "cic" parameters from [RFC4694].  RFC 3261 section 19.1.6 is very 
   clear that the entire telephone-subscriber portion, including 
   parameters, is placed in the userinfo portion of a SIP URI.  Thus 
   the Tel-URI parameters become user parameters for SIP, not SIP URI 
   parameters. 
    
   An example, therefore, of a SIP URI containing some of the 
   aforementioned Tel-URI parameters would be: 
   sip:+12125551212;npdi;tgrp=foo;trunk-context=example.com@example.net 
    
   Another common interoperability problem concerns the visual-
   separators.  The Tel-URI format allows for visual-separators such as 
   dashes and parenthesis to appear in Tel-URI's, and thus in SIP URI 
   usernames, even though they are not truly part of the username from 
   a processing perspective.  The URI username "+12125551212" is 
   semantically equivalent to "+1(212)555-1212".  For humans and IETF 
   document examples, this provides a nice visual representation of 
   telephone numbers.  However several systems cannot accept such 
   usernames, or do not process/route them in the same way they do ones 
   without the visual-separators.  [And in this author's opinion, the 
   SIP protocol should not have allowed a human-presentation-layer 
   format to be incorporated into a machine-session-layer URI on the 
   wire!] 
    
 
 
Kaplan                  Expires - January 2010                [Page 7] 
                       SIP Interoperability BCP              July 2009 
 
 
    
   Recommended Behavior: 
    
   UA's, B2BUA's, or Proxies which convert Tel URI's to SIP URI's, or 
   insert Tel URI parameters into SIP URI's, such as those based on 
   [RFC4904] or [RFC4694], MUST insert them as SIP URI userinfo 
   parameters, not URI parameters. 
    
   It is RECOMMENDED that UA's, B2BUA's, or Proxies which process 
   received SIP URI's and support Tel URI parameters, such as those 
   based on [RFC4904] or [RFC4694], be able to recognize and process 
   such parameters regardless of whether they are SIP URI userinfo 
   parameters or just URI parameters. 
    
   It is RECOMMENDED that UA's, B2BUA's, or Proxies which generate SIP 
   or Tel URI's containing telephone numbers do not include visual-
   separators in their usernames. 
    
   UA's, B2BUA's, or Proxies MUST be able to process SIP or Tel URI 
   usernames containing visual-separators, in the same manner and with 
   the same results as they do ones without visual-separators. 
    
5. Specific SIP Issues 
    
5.1. REGISTER response behavior 
    
   Another form of the interop problems that arise from responses is 
   the behavior of UA's with regard to Registration and Subscribe 
   response handling.  For example, only a minority of UA's properly 
   support 3xx redirects for REGISTER, even though it would be a useful 
   mechanism for load-balancing.  For REGISTER requests specifically, 
   it would be beneficial if there was explicit documentation of what 
   actions should be performed by the UAC. 
    
   To reinforce this point, consider that UA's perform Registrations 
   and Subscriptions in a fairly automatic fashion with little user 
   interaction, and so the way in which they treat specific response 
   codes can have dramatic consequences.  For example, it is not well-
   defined what a UA should do when its REGISTER is rejected with a 
   404, or even 503, and hardly any UA's honor the Retry-After header.  
   A very few UA's will give up altogether and wait for user input; 
   some UA's will wait a few minutes and try again, indefinitely; some 
   will re-attempt their Registration almost immediately, even faster, 
   and never give up.  This creates numerous problems in large network 
   deployments, and has led SBC vendors to implement various protection 
   schemes - from dynamic hardware ACLs, to even sending a 200 ok just 
   to shut the UA up. 
    
   [What can we say here that UA's will actually do?] 
 
 
Kaplan                  Expires - January 2010                [Page 8] 
                       SIP Interoperability BCP              July 2009 
 
 
    
5.2. Contact-URI Handling 
    
   Contact URI's represent a significant role in SIP routing behavior.  
   Record-Route URI's form a portion of the route set for in-dialog 
   requests, but the Contact-URI is the final route hop to reach the 
   UA, and many case a B2BUA.  They also provide reachability 
   information through REGISTER requests, along with the Path header 
   fields.  The common interoperability problems found with Contact-URI 
   handling are around "unexpected" usernames, username and URI 
   parameters, and transport information. 
    
   In particular, some Registrars/Proxy-Registrars expect the Contact 
   URI username for REGISTER requests to match the AoR username.  This 
   behavior is generally unsafe, because it makes guessing a UA's 
   Contact-URI relatively easy.  Conversely, some UA's constantly 
   generate random Contact-URI's for every Registration refresh and 
   out-of-dialog request they generate, in the misguided belief that it 
   is more secure to do so. 
    
   Interoperability issues have also been found with Contact URI 
   username and URI parameters, whereby the parameters are not 
   reflected/copied into the request-URI for upstream requests.  This 
   is incorrect behavior (i.e., a "bug") - the entire Contact-URI MUST 
   be reflected/copied, per RFC 3261. 
    
   Lastly, interoperability issues have been found with upstream 
   request routing using Contact-URI's for transport information.  This 
   is particularly true for TCP-based scenarios, where in some cases a 
   UA is not actually reachable at its indicated TCP server port, due 
   to Firewalls or NATs.  Some UA's will use their TCP client socket 
   information in the URI, in the hopes of making upstream requests use 
   the same TCP or TLS connection. 
 
5.3. Require header values 
    
   SIP offers a means of indicating extension use, in the Require, 
   Proxy-Require, and Supported header fields.  Some SDO's and vendors 
   make assumptions about the capabilities of other UA's, and do not 
   take user perception or expectations into account.  Inserting an 
   option tag into a Require or Proxy-Require header literally implies 
   "I don't want this request to succeed, unless every possible 
   recipient of this in the Universe supports this extension".  
    
   For example, the 100rel option tag for supporting PRACK is sometimes 
   inserted in the Require header of an INVITE request.  This is 
   fundamentally unsound in actual usage.  The support for PRACK is not 
   universal, by any measure, and inserting this tag in the Require 
   header leads to failed calls.  No user or operator wants a failed 
 
 
Kaplan                  Expires - January 2010                [Page 9] 
                       SIP Interoperability BCP              July 2009 
 
 
   call, unless it is literally impossible to succeed.  Such is not the 
   case with PRACK.  There is no condition under which not getting a 
   provisional response should ever lead to call failure, because in 
   fact there may be no provisional responses ever sent. 
    
   The Require header field makes much more sense for requests which do 
   not create sessions, such as REGISTER or OPTIONS; but again only if 
   the client (and ultimately the human user) truly wants the request 
   to fail if the other end cannot support the extension.  Implementors 
   should take note that requiring an extension may mean many failure 
   cases, and so are advised to not implement things in such a way that 
   they are actually required. 
 
5.4. Call-Forwarding Issues: Diversion vs. History-Info 
    
   To support specific features, billing models, and user-expectations, 
   SIP requests which are routed to a different user than the 
   originally intended target generally need some form of indication as 
   to the original target of the request.   
    
   An early form of indicating the original called party(ies), and the 
   number of redirections, was documented in the Individual-Draft 
   [draft-diversion], which used a multi-instance SIP header field 
   named "Diversion" to record the redirection information.  Although 
   this draft expired and was never published as an RFC, and is 
   therefore a proprietary header, it has gained fairly wide-spread 
   use.  Meanwhile, the official IETF RFC for indicating such 
   information is [RFC4244] with the History-Info SIP header field, 
   which is also popular.   
    
   Unfortunately, the two mechanisms are not directly interoperable - 
   either the receiver of the SIP request has to support both, or a 
   middlebox must convert one form to the other.  In fact, the only 
   reliable means of indicating redirection information is to use one 
   mechanism or the other but not both, because using both leads to 
   cases where a redirecting Proxy only supported one mechanism, and 
   thus its redirection information is only in one of the mechanism 
   header fields, and the two mechanisms record different information.  
   Therefore, while a UAS/Proxy can support both mechanisms, it 
   actually needs to prefer one over the other whenever it receives 
   both, and remove the one it does not use to avoid ambiguity 
   downstream.  In other words, within any given domain of SIP devices, 
   only one of the two mechanisms should be used. 
    
   To compound the issue, the semantics of the two mechanisms are not 
   identical; Diversion was a simple equivalent to the PSTN ISUP 
   Redirection parameter model, while History-Info is a richer, more 
   generally applicable mechanism for all/any SIP routing mechanics.  
   Because of this difference, it is not always clear which History-
 
 
Kaplan                  Expires - January 2010               [Page 10] 
                       SIP Interoperability BCP              July 2009 
 
 
   Info header field values should really be encoded in Diversion 
   header field information, because History-Info records routing 
   events which are not actually redirections from a Diversion (or 
   PSTN) perspective.  Work is underway in the IETF to address this, by 
   providing specific semantic indications in the History-Info header 
   field for the cause of the header field value's creation. 
    
    
5.5. REFER Call Transfer Issues 
    
   The call transfer mechanisms provided through the REFER method has 
   been found to cause numerous interoperability issues.  Some of the 
   issues are due to specific assumptions on the part of vendor 
   implementations; others are due to specific deployment models.  For 
   example, some implementations and deployment models do not support 
   out-of-dialog REFER's.  Another example is some implementations do 
   not support the Replaces mechanism in [RFC3891], which is a pre-
   requisite for some call transfer models.  It is not clear what more 
   can be said/recommended regarding REFER which is not already 
   documented somewhere in the plethora of RFC's on the subject. [the 
   fact there are a "plethora" of RFC's on the subject may be part of 
   the problem?] 
    
   [Note: the various REFER models are something we should focus on 
   testing at Sipit's] 
    
6. Specific SIP-related SDP Issues 
    
6.1. Offer-less Invites and Re-Invites 
    
   Although this is clearly a device implementation issue (i.e., a 
   "bug"), we have seen numerous devices from different vendors have 
   trouble handling Invites or re-Invites that do not contain SDP.  For 
   initial Invites without SDP, often the root cause for failure is 
   that specific request routing or admission decision logic of 
   intermediate devices depends on the SDP; for example devices which 
   route calls based on codec, or bandwidth allocation devices, or 3PCC 
   transcoding devices which themselves send out offer-less Invites but 
   didn't expect to receive such. (Apparently they never considered 
   that a call could cross two such systems!) 
    
   For re-Invites, the delayed SDP offer model is performed for very 
   specific use cases which are common, but were simply not envisioned 
   by the developers of the UA's. 
    
    
   Recommended Behavior: 
    

 
 
Kaplan                  Expires - January 2010               [Page 11] 
                       SIP Interoperability BCP              July 2009 
 
 
   It is RECOMMENDED that a UAC provide the SDP offer with its INVITE 
   requests.   
    
   A UAS or B2BUA MUST support receiving an INVITE without an SDP 
   offer. 
    
6.2. Call-hold signaling 
    
   The legacy mechanism defined in [RFC2543] for call-hold by setting 
   the SDP connection address to 0.0.0.0 is unfortunately far from 
   obsolete in usage, despite the superior direction attribute 
   (a=inactive/recvonly/sendonly) concept of [RFC3264].  To increase 
   interoperability, some devices send both types in the re-Invite, 
   which defeats the purpose of using a direction attribute (e.g., 
   keeping RTCP flowing).  Other vendors send the direction attribute 
   first, and if the SDP answer does not mirror it they use the legacy 
   approach, which leads to extraneous signaling overhead.  An IETF 
   recommendation/BCP for this is probably warranted.  In hindsight 
   [RFC3264] should have been backwards compatible (e.g., still using 
   the 0.0.0.0 syntax with some new attribute for on-hold connection 
   address, which would be ignored by legacy devices but used by newer 
   ones). [note: I recognize this is SDP not SIP, but it's a big deal 
   and was caused by rfc2543] 
    
   A note for Implementors: this does not imply an address of 0.0.0.0 
   in the media line is inappropriate in all circumstances; quite the 
   contrary, it is used in "black hole" cases, which are different from 
   "on-hold" cases.  A "black hole" case is one where the device 
   sending the SDP literally does not want the far end to send RTP or 
   RTCP anywhere.  This is sometimes needed in 3PCC call scenarios, for 
   example.  An "on-hold" scenario is typically different: the media 
   session was already established, and is only being temporarily 
   disabled such that the party doing the on-hold does not wish to 
   receive media from the far-end, but still wants to receive RTCP. 
    
    
   Recommended Behavior:  
    
   It is RECOMMENDED that a UA include only a "sendonly", or 
   "inactive", direction attribute in an SDP offer for on-hold, and not 
   set the address to 0.0.0.0.  If the SDP answer does not have a 
   direction attribute (i.e., of recvonly or inactive), then the 
   offerer MAY wish to send another offer with a connection address of 
   0.0.0.0, if it is vital that no RTP be sent to the offering party. 
    
   It is RECOMMENDED that a UA support both the direction attribute of 
   (a=inactive/recvonly) and the 0.0.0.0 connection address semantic 
   for on-hold, when processing received SDP offers, such that the 
   existence of *either* one, or both, triggers on-hold behavior. 
 
 
Kaplan                  Expires - January 2010               [Page 12] 
                       SIP Interoperability BCP              July 2009 
 
 
    
   If a UA receives an SDP offer with both attributes, it is 
   RECOMMENDED that the UA use only the direction attribute in its SDP 
   answer, and leave the connection address line set to whatever IP 
   Address it wishes to receive RTCP on. 
    
   UA's MUST support the direction attribute of "a=sendrecv" being an 
   implicit default attribute, such that if another direction attribute 
   does not exist in the SDP, sendrecv is implied.  Note that a 
   connection line of 0.0.0.0 means there is no remote address to send 
   RTP/RTCP to, and thus implying "sendrecv" does not conflict with 
   stopping RTP. 
    
   It is RECOMMENDED that UA's include an "a=sendrecv" attribute in 
   SDP, instead of relying on implicit behavior. 
    
   [Note: should we include the sip.rendering media feature parameter?  
   I fear that will cause even more interop problems] 
    
6.3. SDP Media Lines in Answers not matching Offers 
    
   A frequent interoperability problem arises when an SDP offer 
   contains multiple "m=" media lines, but the SDP answer does not 
   contain the same number of lines.  According to [RFC3264]: 
   For each "m=" line in the offer, there MUST be a corresponding "m=" 
   line in the answer.  The answer MUST contain exactly the same number 
   of "m=" lines as the offer.  This allows for streams to be matched 
   up based on their order.  This implies that if the offer contained 
   zero "m=" lines, the answer MUST contain zero "m=" lines. 
    
   Although the text is unambiguous, in the wild many implementations 
   have been found which do not adhere to this policy.  In general, it 
   appears that the device receiving the SDP offer was designed to only 
   look for and process the first "m=" media line, and ignore the rest; 
   or in some cases only processes audio type media lines.  Since 
   standard-abiding devices receiving such an SDP answer detect this as 
   a protocol failure, typically, they proceed to terminate the session 
   request, leading to poor user experience. 
    
   Furthermore, sending an SDP offer without any media lines, though 
   technically legal, is extremely rare and is bound to cause 
   interoperability issues.  It is difficult to envision why such an 
   SDP offer would be sent, since the SDP offerer presumably knows what 
   type of media it wishes to offer. 
    
   Recommended Behavior:  
    
   A UA MUST include an "m=" media line in the SDP answer for every 
   media line in the offer.  If the answerer does not wish to use one 
 
 
Kaplan                  Expires - January 2010               [Page 13] 
                       SIP Interoperability BCP              July 2009 
 
 
   or more of the offered medias, it MUST set the port number in the 
   rejected media lines to zero ("0"), as per [RFC3264]. 
    
   It is RECOMMENDED that a UA which receives an SDP answer which does 
   not contain the same number of media lines as the offer, assume that 
   the answered media lines align linearly with the offer, and that all 
   media lines after the number in the answer are implicitly rejected, 
   as if the answerer had set their port number to zero. 
    
   It is RECOMMENDED that a UA which wishes to offer audio media 
   streams along with other media stream types, list the audio type 
   media lines first, before media lines for other media types. 
    
   It is RECOMMENDED that a UA never send an SDP offer without media 
   lines.  [Note: should we say what it should do if such a need 
   arises?  There are multiple options] 
    
6.4. Supported Media Incompatibilities 
    
   In practice, a significant number of SIP devices only support 
   specific media types, codecs, and transports.  The overwhelming 
   majority of such devices only support G.711 audio media, with 
   RTP/AVP transport over UDP.  This is not only limited to PSTN-based 
   gateways and home IAD's, but even those device types represent a 
   large population of SIP devices.  Unfortunately, it is not uncommon 
   for two SIP devices attempting to communicate to have no audio or 
   video codecs in common.  Even G.711 (of either companding mode) is 
   not guaranteed to be supported by the far-end device, although it is 
   by far the most common denominator for audio codecs. 
    
   In scenarios where both UA's have no media in common, the SDP offer 
   is typically refused, but with varying response codes or behaviors.  
   While for some people it may not seem important how an SDP offer is 
   refused, it is vitally important to others: for either 
   troubleshooting such cases, or for providing middlebox "aid" in such 
   cases, for example by invoking transcoding servers only when initial 
   SDP offers fail. 
    
   Unfortunately, it is also quite difficult to provide specific 
   guidance on this issue, since the correct behavior is sometimes 
   application-specific.  For example, it is not uncommon that 
   audio+video offers are (and should be) accepted by audio-only 
   answerers, and they simply set the "m=" media line(s) of the video 
   type to port value zero in the SDP response.  But it is also not 
   uncommon that audio+video offers are (and should be) rejected if the 
   device receiving the offer supports both audio and video but just 
   not the specific audio codecs in the offer - even though it does 
   support the video media types offered.  It is a local decision as to 
   what the appropriate action to take is for such cases. 
 
 
Kaplan                  Expires - January 2010               [Page 14] 
                       SIP Interoperability BCP              July 2009 
 
 
    
   What can be recommended is what is in fact documented in [RFC3261] 
   and industry practice on such matters, with regard to response codes 
   to use, should the answerer decide to reject the offer.  While it is 
   fairly clear how SIP requests, such as INVITEs, with unacceptable 
   SDP offers should be handled, it is not as clear how SIP responses 
   with unacceptable SDP offers should be handled.  This issue is 
   documented further in [draft-offeranswer-usage]. 
    
    
   Recommended Behavior:  
    
   A UA which receives a SIP request with an SDP offer it does not wish 
   to accept at all, due to media incompatibilities, MUST respond with 
   a 488 response code.  Note that for re-INVITE's and UPDATE's sent in 
   an established dialog, this does not terminate the dialog; it simply 
   rejects the new offer, and the session continues using the 
   previously accepted offer. 
    
   A UA which receives a SIP response with an SDP offer it does not 
   wish to accept at all, due to media incompatibilities, MUST continue 
   to acknowledge the response with an ACK (or PRACK as appropriate), 
   with matching SDP and every "m=" media line from the offer set to 
   port value zero.  The rejecting UA may then either end the session 
   (e.g., with a BYE), or attempt a new round of negotiation by sending 
   its own offer in a new in-dialog request, as documented in [draft-
   offeranswer-usage]. 
    
   It is RECOMMENDED that a UA which sends a SIP request such as BYE, 
   to end the session for a case where a SIP response had an 
   unacceptable SDP offer, include a Reason header field in the BYE 
   with the SIP 488 cause code in it, per [RFC3326]. 
    
   [Note: one trick some vendors use is to pretend the unacceptable 
   response was not received and send a CANCEL - should we recommend 
   that?] 
    
7. Rare SIP usages 
    
   Although they have not led to interoperability problems yet, there 
   are some incredibly rare SIP usages that will probably lead to 
   interoperability problems if anyone actually tries to use them.  In 
   this author's opinion they should probably be deprecated or moved 
   into an experimental RFC if they were published more than 2 years 
   ago without success.  In the mean-time, the ones which are 2 years 
   old or older and have seen little use are noted here:  
    
     . S/MIME in [RFC3261] 
     . S/MIME AES [RFC3853] 
 
 
Kaplan                  Expires - January 2010               [Page 15] 
                       SIP Interoperability BCP              July 2009 
 
 
     . The SIPS URI scheme (sips:...) in [RFC3261] 
     . SDP ANAT Parameters [RFC4091] - this one *is* used by IPv6 
        nodes, but has issues and is rarely supported by IPv4 nodes, 
        which basically defeats using it to begin with 
     . AIB Authenticated Identity Body [RFC3893] 
     . The following SIP Header fields in [RFC3261]: 
        Accept-Language, Call-Info, Content-Language, Error-Info, In-
        Reply-To, Mime-Version, Organization, Priority, Reply-To 
    
   [NOTE: Obviously the above list is the author's opinion for a 
   starting volley.  It may well be some of these are wildly popular, 
   unbeknownst to this author, but we will never find out unless we 
   start with some list and find differently.  So please don't get 
   upset if your favorite extension is in this list - simply email on 
   the SIP mailing list that you've seen it really used in an 
   interoperable fashion.] 
 
8.   IANA Considerations 
    
   This document makes no request of IANA. 
    
9.   Acknowledgments 
    
   Thanks to Gunnar Hellstrom, Paul Kyzivat, Andrew Hutton, Maureen 
   Stillman, Markus Isomaki, and Simo Veikkolainen for additional 
   issues/cases and recommendations to include; Robert Sparks for the 
   Warning Label text idea, and Marco Lamberto's sunnyspot.org for the 
   skull-n-crossbones ascii art.   
    
    
10.  Informative References 
    
   [RFC2543]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Handley, M., and E. 
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 2543, 
              March 1999. 
    
   [RFC2833]  Schulzrinne, H., Taylor, T., "RTP Payload for DTMF 
              Digits, Telephony Tones, and Telephony Signals", RFC 
              4733, December 2006. 
    
   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, 
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E. 
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, 
              June 2002. 
    
   [RFC3264]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., "An Offer/Answer Model 
              with the Session Description Protocol (SDP)", RFC 3264, 
              June 2002. 
    
 
 
Kaplan                  Expires - January 2010               [Page 16] 
                       SIP Interoperability BCP              July 2009 
 
 
   [RFC3326]  Schulzrinne, H., Oran, D., Camarillo, G., "The Reason 
              Header Field for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", 
              RFC 3326, December 2002. 
    
   [RFC3608]  Willis, D., Hoeneisen, B., "Session Initiation Protocol 
              (SIP) Extension Header Field for Service Route Discovery 
              During Registration", RFC 3608, October 2003. 
    
   [RFC3853]  Peterson, J., "S/MIME Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) 
              Requirement for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", 
              RFC 3853, July 2004. 
    
   [RFC3891]  Mahy, R., Biggs, B., Dean, R., "The Session Initiation 
              Protocol (SIP) "Replaces" Header", RFC 3891, September 
              2004. 
    
   [RFC3893]  Peterson, J., "Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) 
              Authenticated Identity Body (AIB) Format", RFC 3893, 
              September 2004. 
    
   [RFC3966]  Schulzrinne, H., "The tel URI for Telephone Numbers", RFC 
              3966, December 2004. 
    
   [RFC4091]  Camarillo, G., Rosenberg, J., "The Alternative Network 
              Address Types (ANAT) Semantics for the Session 
              Description Protocol (SDP) Grouping Framework", RFC 4091, 
              June 2005. 
    
   [RFC4244]  Barnes, M., "An Extension to the Session Initiation 
              Protocol (SIP) for Request History Information", RFC 
              4244, November 2005. 
    
   [RFC4474]  Peterson, J., Jennings, C., "Enhancements for 
              Authenticated Identity Management in the Session 
              Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 4474, August 2006. 
    
   [RFC4694]  Yu, J., "Number Portability Parameters for the "tel" 
              URI", RFC 4694, October 2006. 
    
   [RFC4730]  Burger, E., Dolly, M., "A Session Initiation Protocol 
              (SIP) Event Package for Key Press Stimulus (KPML)", RFC 
              4730, November 2006. 
    
   [RFC4904]  Gurbani, V., Jennings, C., "Representing Trunk Groups in 
              tel/sip Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs)", RFC 4904, 
              June 2007. 
    
   [draft-diversion]  Levy, S., Yang, J.R., "Diversion Indication in 
              SIP", draft-levy-sip-diversion-08.txt, August 2004. 
 
 
Kaplan                  Expires - January 2010               [Page 17] 
                       SIP Interoperability BCP              July 2009 
 
 
    
   [draft-offeranswer-usage]  Sawada, T., Kyzivat, P., "SIP (Session 
              Initiation Protocol) Usage of the Offer/Answer Model", 
              draft-ietf-sipping-sip-offeranswer-10, January 2009. 
    
    
Author's Address 
    
   Hadriel Kaplan
   Acme Packet
   71 Third Ave.
   Burlington, MA 01803, USA
   Email: hkaplan@acmepacket.com




































 
 
Kaplan                  Expires - January 2010               [Page 18] 
