



Network Working Group                                             Y. Liu
Internet-Draft                                         Xidian University
Expires: November 26, 2020                                  May 25, 2020


   The Cooperative Communication Method of the Converged Multi-media
                  Wireless Resource Management Network
                           draft-liu-mwrmn-02

Abstract

   This paper describes a cooperative communication method of
   theconverged multi-media wireless resource management network.It can
   maximize the utilization of heterogeneous network resources and
   optimize the access to wireless resources of the network in the form
   of Mesh, which solves the problem of collaborative wireless resource
   management in multi-media converged networks.  Through the overall
   consideration of multi-media converged networks including wired
   network, wireless network, broadband network, and narrowband network,
   joint access control and resource scheduling for network devices with
   different characteristics in heterogeneous networks are realized.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 26, 2020.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents



Liu                     Expires November 26, 2020               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           The CCM of the CMMWRMN                 May 2020


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

1.  Introduction

   The rapid development of wireless network technology has not only
   significantly improved network coverage, network capacity,
   transmission rate, and service quality, but also presents the
   development trend of diversification of access modes, higher speed of
   data transmission, universal mobility and full IP integration.  Being
   different from wired communication, wireless transmission media are
   uncertain and susceptible to unpredictable interferences such as
   noise, multipath fading, and shadow effect.  Moreover, the inherent
   mobility of wireless transmission media also does harm to channel
   prediction and channel estimation.  It brings considerable problem,
   which increases the bit error rate of the channel.  In order to
   ensure the availability of wireless communication, the conservative
   design is often performed according to the requirements of the lowest
   channel performance, rather than adaptively adjusting to adapt to the
   communication channel.  It makes the protocol stack unable to
   effectively and reasonably utilize limited power resources and
   spectrum resources.

   However, existing wireless communication methods ignore the
   correlation between the overall requirements of network design and
   the functions of each layer.  Each layer of the protocol stack is
   designed and operated independently, and between layers and layers
   only exist interfaces which are static and independent of the
   limitation and application of each network layers.  This rigorous
   layering design method lacks flexibility, compatibility, and does not
   fit well into the characteristics of today's networks.  In the
   practical network communication process, the information between
   layers is difficult to share, which also adds a large number of
   uncontrollable link overheads, information redundancy, and
   communication overhead between peer layers.

   The cooperative communication method of the converged multi-media
   wireless resource management network described in the proposal can
   easily solve these problems.  It can change the link type and
   facilitate cross-layer design, which not only realizes device
   independence, but also achieves the effect communication between
   high-level applications and underlying channels.






Liu                     Expires November 26, 2020               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           The CCM of the CMMWRMN                 May 2020


2.  Conventions used in this document

2.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

2.2.  Protocol Stack

   The protocol stack, is a specific software implementation of the
   computer network protocol suite.  A protocol in a protocol suite is
   usually designed for one purpose only, which makes the design easier.
   Each protocol module can usually be treated as a layer in the
   protocol stack, because it typically communicates with two other
   protocol modules.  The lowest level protocol always describes the
   physical interaction with the hardware.  The user applications only
   handle the top-level protocols.

2.3.  Wireless Pipe

   Wireless Pipe - phytype = "atheros", refers to wireless mesh_Pipe
   based on wlan_mwds;

2.4.  Ethernet Pipe

   Ethernet Pipe - phytype = "ethernet", refers to the two-layered wired
   mesh_Pipe in the same broadcast domain;

2.5.  Ip Tunnel Pipe

   Ip_tunnel Pipe - phytype = "ip_tunnel" is used to establish a three-
   layered mesh network across the LAN.  It can be divided into two
   modes: active one and non-active one according to different working
   modes.

2.6.  Ip Pipe

   Ip Pipe - phytype = "ip", which refers to the ability to extend other
   types of links based on the change of the three-layered wired
   mesh_Pipe in the same broadcast domain.

3.  Joint Access Control and Resource Scheduling








Liu                     Expires November 26, 2020               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           The CCM of the CMMWRMN                 May 2020


3.1.  Unified Interface

   The cooperative communication method of the converged multi-media
   wireless resource management network can provide a unified standard
   Ethernet interface to users by adapting to protocol specifications of
   different media, so that coordination between network layer protocols
   can improve the overall performance and efficiency of the wireless
   network.

   In practical applications, the protocol stack is usually divided into
   three main parts: media, transmission, and application.  A particular
   operating system or platform often has two well-defined software
   interfaces: one between the media layer and the transport layer and
   the other between the transport layer and the application layer.

3.2.  Different Assessment Standards

   Different transmission quality assessment methods are adopted for
   different media, which requires effective implementation of network
   cross-layer radio resource management mechanism which assists in the
   design of cross-layer optimal relay node selection algorithm in
   cooperative relay network, and supports multi-hop self-organizing
   network cross-layer routing.

4.  Maximization of the Heterogeneous Network Resources Utilization Rate

4.1.  Flexible Networking

   The IP Pipe and IP Tunnel are designed to be ones that can change the
   link type, which makes the network mode flexible.

4.2.  Design Structure

   Design structure: mesh - Pipe - link;

4.3.  Service Interfaces

   Pipe provides a standard Ethernet interface to Mesh.  After being
   configured in the configuration file G8000.xml, then the Ethernet
   port can be treated as a Mesh Pipe.  The type of the Box is
   Relay/Mobile/Gateway (dual Ethernet port).  While the Ethernet port
   is used as the Mesh Pipe, it cannot be used as another role at the
   same time, such as access users, etc.  For example, the device is
   connected to the Mesh Pipe through a standard Ethernet interface, and
   the Mesh Pipe provides standard adaptation interface to the external
   network.





Liu                     Expires November 26, 2020               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           The CCM of the CMMWRMN                 May 2020


4.4.  Link Adaptation

   The message format encapsulation and the transmission of
   corresponding control instructions are chosen according to different
   link transmission standards.

5.  Classified Design of Mesh Pipe

   Mesh Pipe's classified design technique is mainly showed in the power
   control and adaptive modulation and demodulation control according to
   the QoS requirements of MAC protocol, routing protocol, TCP protocol
   and application layer services.

   In the separate unit of a converged multi-media system, all Mesh Pip-
   es will provide a unified Ethernet interface.

5.1.  Design of Different Link Type

   Two-layer and three-layer Pipe are designed according to different
   link types.  Set two-layer Pipes for Ethernet and link types "ethos".
   Set three-layer Pipe for IP Tunnel.

   --------------------------------------- | wired Pipe | fiber,covered
   wire | --------------------------------------- |wireless
   Pipe|scatter,radio,satellite| ---------------------------------------

5.2.  Wired and Wireless Design

   Designing wired and wireless Pipe is to set wired Pipe for fiber and
   covered wire devices, and to set wireless Pipe for scatter, radio and
   satellite devices, which achieves the wireless communication between
   heterogeneous multi-media.

5.3.  Broadband and Narrowband Design

   Setting broadband Pipe and narrowband Pipe according to the practical
   transmission rate of the device.A broadband Pipe is set for the fiber
   devices, and a narrowband Pipe is set for the scattering and the
   radio devices.

   The structure can achieve multi-media convergence through the
   application of Mesh Pipe, and provide a unified network interface for
   business units, so the business units has the ability to cross media,
   and the business units only need standard Ethernet port access.  For
   example, communication unit can be linked up to the converged multi-
   media wireless communication system not only through the Mac layer
   but also through the IP_tunnel Pipe using IP.  Regardless of the




Liu                     Expires November 26, 2020               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           The CCM of the CMMWRMN                 May 2020


   access, a unified standard Ethernet interface will be provided by the
   converged multi-media wireless communication system.

   ------------------------------- | broadband Pipe| fiber |
   ------------------------------- |narrowband Pipe|scatter,radio|
   -------------------------------

6.  Security Considerations

   It is necessary to use the "network ID" to distinguish different ad
   hoc networks.  Only the ad hoc network node devices (hereinafter
   referred to as nodes) configured with the same "network ID" can
   discover each other.

   Nodes in the same ad hoc network use a unified pre-configured static
   key to encrypt the transmitted data.  When the keys are different,
   nodes cannot transfer data.  Even if the eavesdropper acquires the
   key seed by some means, he cannot get the final key.

   And broadcast data packets and Mesh protocol packets are not
   encrypted.

7.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not include an IANA request.

8.  Acknowledgements

   We would like to thank Shanghai zhige network communication
   technology co., LTD for providing technical scheme verification
   support.

Author's Address

   Yi Liu
   Xidian University
   2 South Taibai Road
   Xi'an, Shaanxi  710071
   P.R.China

   Email: yliu@xidian.edu.cn










Liu                     Expires November 26, 2020               [Page 6]
