


Transport Area Working Group                                  B. Briscoe
Internet-Draft                                                  BT & UCL
Intended status: Informational                         November 19, 2007
Expires: May 22, 2008


                Byte and Packet Congestion Notification
                  draft-briscoe-tsvwg-byte-pkt-mark-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 22, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   This memo concerns dropping or marking packets using active queue
   management (AQM) such as random early detection (RED) or pre-
   congestion notification (PCN).  It answers the question of whether to
   take packet size into account when network equipment writes
   congestion notification, or when transports read it.  The primary
   conclusion is that the variant of RED that gives lower drop
   probability to smaller packets (byte-mode packet drop) should not be
   used because it creates a perverse incentive for transports to use



Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


   tiny segments, consequently also opening up a DoS vulnerability.
   TCP's lack of attention to packet size and its sensitivity to loss of
   SYNs and ACKs should be fixed in TCP, not by reverse engineering
   network forwarding to fix transport protocols.  Nonetheless raw drop-
   tail is just as vulnerable to gaming by small packets, so AQM itself
   should not be turned off.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  Working Definition of Congestion Notification  . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Congestion Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Idealised Wire Protocol Coding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  The State of the Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.1.  Congestion Measurement: Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.2.  Congestion Coding: Status  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       6.2.1.  Network Bias when Encoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       6.2.2.  Transport Bias when Decoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       6.2.3.  Congestion Coding: Summary of Status . . . . . . . . . 14
   7.  Outstanding Issues and Next Steps  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     7.1.  Bit-congestible World  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     7.2.  Bit- & Packet-congestible World  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   9.  Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   10. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   11. Comments Solicited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   Editorial Comments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   Appendix A.  Example Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     A.1.  Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     A.2.  Bit-congestible resource, equal bit rates (Ai) . . . . . . 20
     A.3.  Bit-congestible resource, equal packet rates (Bi)  . . . . 21
     A.4.  Pkt-congestible resource, equal bit rates (Aii)  . . . . . 22
     A.5.  Pkt-congestible resource, equal packet rates (Bii) . . . . 22
   Appendix B.  Congestion Notification Definition: Further
                Justification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   Appendix C.  Byte-mode Drop Complicates Policing Congestion
                Response  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   12. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
     12.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
     12.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 29







Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


1.  Introduction

   When notifying congestion, the problem of how (and whether) to take
   packet sizes into account has exercised the minds of researchers and
   practitioners for as long as active queue management (AQM) has been
   discussed.  Indeed, AQM was originally introduced largely to remove
   the advantage that small packets get from drop-tail queues.  This
   memo aims to state the principles we should be using and to come to
   conclusions on what these principles will mean for future protocol
   design, taking into account the deployments we have already.

   Note that the byte vs. packet dilemma concerns congestion
   notification irrespective of whether it is signalled implicitly by
   drop or using explicit congestion notification (ECN [RFC3168]).
   Throughout this document, unless clear from the context, the term
   congestion marking, or just marking, will be used to mean either drop
   or explicit congestion notification.

   If the load on a resource depends on the rate at which packets
   arrive, it is called packet-congestible.  If the load depends on the
   rate at which bits arrive it is called bit-congestible.

   Examples of packet-congestible resources are route look-up engines
   and firewalls, because load depends on how many packet headers they
   have to process.  Examples of bit-congestible resources are
   transmission links, and buffer memory, because the load depends on
   how many bits they have to transmit or store.  Note that information
   is generally processed or transmitted with a minimum granularity
   greater than a bit (e.g. octets).  The appropriate granularity for
   the resource in question SHOULD be used, but for the sake of brevity
   we will talk in terms of bytes in this memo.

   Resources may be congestible at higher levels of granularity than
   packets, for instance stateful firewalls are flow-congestible and
   call-servers are session-congestible.  This memo focuses on
   congestion of connectionless resources, but the same principles may
   be applied for congestion notification protocols controlling per-flow
   and per-session processing or state.

   The byte vs. packet dilemma arises at three stages in the congestion
   notification process:

   Measuring congestion  When the congested resource decides locally how
      to measure how congested it is.  (Should the queue be measured in
      bytes or packets?);






Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


   Coding congestion notification into the wire protocol:  When the
      congested resource decides how to notify the level of congestion.
      (Should the level of notification depend on the byte-size of each
      particular packet carrying the notification?);

   Decoding congestion notification from the wire protocol:  When the
      transport interprets the notification.  (Should the byte-size of a
      missing or marked packet be taken into account?).

   In RED, whether to use packets or bytes when measuring queues is
   called packet-mode or byte-mode queue measurement.  This choice is
   now fairly well understood but is included in Section 4 to document
   it in the RFC series.

   The controversy is mainly around the other two stages: whether to
   allow for packet size when the network codes or when the transport
   decodes congestion notification.  In RED, the variant that reduces
   drop probability for packets based on their size in bytes is called
   byte-mode drop, while the variant that doesn't is called packet mode
   drop.  Whether queues are measured in bytes or packets is an
   orthogonal choice, termed byte-mode queue measurement or packet-mode
   queue measurement.

   Currently, the paper trail of advice referenced from the RFC series
   conditionally recommends byte-mode (packet-size dependent) drop,
   although all the implementers who responded to our survey have
   ignored this advice.  The primary purpose of this memo is to build a
   definitive consensus against allowing for packet size in AQM
   algorithms and record this advice within the RFC series.

   Increasingly, it is being recognised that a protocol design must take
   care not to cause unintended consequences by giving the parties in
   the protocol exchange perverse incentives [Evol_cc][RFC3426].  For
   instance, imagine a scenario where the same bit rate of packets will
   contribute the same to congestion of a link irrespective of whether
   it is sent as fewer larger packets or more smaller packets.  A
   protocol design that caused larger packets to be more likely to be
   dropped than smaller ones would be dangerous in this case.
   Transports would tend to act in their own interests by breaking their
   data stream down into tiny segments, reducing their drop rate without
   reducing their bit rate.  Further, encouraging a high volume of tiny
   packets might in turn unnecessarily overload a completely unrelated
   part of the system, perhaps more limited by header-processing than
   bandwidth.

   Imagine two flows arrive at a bit-congestible transmission link each
   with the same bit rate, say 1Mbps, but one consists of 1500B and the
   other 60B packets, which are 25x smaller.  If the advice referred to



Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


   from RFC2309 is followed, gentle RED [gentle_RED] would be used,
   configured to adjust the drop probability of packets in proportion to
   each packet's size (byte mode packet drop).  So in this case, if RED
   drops 25% of the larger packets, it will aim to drop 1% of the
   smaller packets (but in practice it may drop more as congestion
   increases [RFC4828](S.B.4)[Note_Variation]).  Even though both flows
   arrive with the same bit rate, the bit rate the RED queue aims to
   pass to the line will be 750k for the flow of larger packet but 990k
   for the smaller packets (but because of rate variation it will be
   less than this target).  It can be seen that this behaviour reopens
   the same denial of service vulnerability that drop tail queues offer
   to floods of small packet, though not necessarily as strongly (see
   Section 8).

   The above advice (that referred to by RFC2309) says the question of
   whether a packet's own size should affect its drop probability
   "depends on the dominant end-to-end congestion control mechanisms".
   But we argue the network layer should not be optimised for whatever
   transport is predominant.  For instance, TCP congestion control
   ensures that flows competing for the same resource each maintain the
   same number of segments in flight, irrespective of segment size.
   Even though reducing the drop probability of small packets helps
   correct this feature of TCP, we argue it should be corrected in TCP
   itself, not in the network.  Favouring small packets also reduces the
   chance of dropping SYNs and pure ACKs, which has a disproportionate
   effect on TCP performance.  But again, rather than fix these problems
   in the network, we argue that TCP should be altered.  Effectively,
   favouring small packets is reverse engineering of the network layer
   around TCP, contrary to the excellent advice in [RFC3426], which asks
   designers to question "Why are you proposing a solution at this layer
   of the protocol stack, rather than at another layer?"

   Now is a good time to discuss whether fairness between different
   sized packets would best be implemented in the network layer, or at
   the transport, for a number of reasons:

   1.  The packet vs. byte issue requires speedy resolution because the
       IETF pre-congestion notification (PCN) working group is in the
       process of being chartered to produce a standards track
       specification of its congestion marking (AQM) algorithm
       [PCNcharter];

   2.  [RFC2309] says RED may either take account of packet size or not
       when dropping, but gives no recommendation between the two,
       referring instead to advice on the performance implications in an
       email [pktByteEmail], which recommends byte-mode drop.  Further,
       just before RFC2309 was issued, an addendum was added to the
       archived email that revisited the issue of packet vs. byte-mode



Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


       drop in its last para, making the recommendation less clear-cut;

   3.  Without this memo, the only advice in the RFC series on packet
       size bias in AQM algorithms would be a reference to an archived
       email in [RFC2309] (including an addendum at the end of the email
       to correct the original).

   4.  The IRTF Internet Congestion Control Research Group (ICCRG)
       recently took on the challenge of building consensus on what
       common congestion control support should be required from
       forwarding engines on routers in the future
       [I-D.irtf-iccrg-welzl-congestion-control-open-research].  The
       wider Internet community needs to discuss whether the complexity
       of adjusting for packet size should be on routers or in
       transports;

   5.  Given there are many good reasons why larger path max
       transmission units (PMTUs) would help solve a number of scaling
       issues, we don't want to create any bias against large packets
       that is greater than their true cost;

   6.  And finally, given it has recently been pointed out that TCP
       doesn't achieve any meaningful fairness anyway [Rate_fair_Dis],
       because it doesn't consider fairness over all the flows a user
       transmits nor over time, modifying the network rather than
       modifying TCP still won't achieve fairness.  It seems more likely
       we have to face up to evolving beyond TCP anyway.

   This memo starts from first principles, defining congestion
   notification in Section 3 then determining the correct way to measure
   congestion (Section 4) and to design an idealised congestion
   notification protocol (Section 5).  It then surveys the advice given
   previously in the RFC series, the research literature and the
   deployed legacy (Section 6) before listing outstanding issues
   (Section 7) that will need resolution both to achieve the ideal
   protocol and to handle legacy.  After discussing security
   considerations (Section 8) strong recommendations for the way forward
   are given in the conclusions (Section 9).


2.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].






Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


3.  Working Definition of Congestion Notification

   Rather than aim to achieve what many have tried and failed, this memo
   will not try to define congestion.  It will give a working definition
   of what congestion notification should be taken to mean for this
   document.  Congestion notification is a changing signal that aims to
   communicate the ratio E/L, where E is the instantaneous excess load
   offered to a resource that it cannot (or would not) serve and L is
   the instantaneous offered load.

   The phrase `would not serve' is added, because AQM systems (e.g.
   RED, PCN [I-D.ietf-pcn-architecture]) use a virtual capacity smaller
   than actual capacity, then notify congestion of this virtual capacity
   in order to avoid congestion of the actual capacity.

   Note that the denominator is offered load, not capacity.  Therefore
   congestion notification is a real number bounded by the range [0,1].
   This ties in with the most well-understood form of congestion
   notification: drop rate.  It also means that congestion has a natural
   interpretation as a probability; the probability of offered traffic
   not being served (or being marked as at risk of not being served).
   Appendix B describes a further incidental benefit that arises from
   using load as the denominator of congestion notification.


4.  Congestion Measurement

   Queue length is usually the most correct and simplest way to measure
   congestion of a resource.  To avoid the pathological effects of drop
   tail, an AQM function can then be used to transform queue length into
   the probability of dropping or marking a packet (e.g.  RED's
   piecewise linear function between thresholds).  If the resource is
   bit-congestible, the length of the queue SHOULD be measured in bytes.
   If the resource is packet-congestible, the length of the queue SHOULD
   be measured in packets.  No other choice makes sense, because the
   number of packets waiting in the queue isn't relevant if the resource
   gets congested by bytes and vice versa.  We discuss the implications
   on RED's byte mode and packet mode for measuring queue length in
   Section 6.

   There is a complication for some queuing hardware that consists of
   fixed sized buffers.  Each packet fills as many buffers as are
   necessary leaving remaining space empty in the last buffer.  Also,
   with some hardware, any fixed sized buffers not completely filled by
   the end of a packet are padded when transmitted to the wire.

   Taking the extreme for the size of these buffers, a forwarding system
   with both queuing and transmission in MTU-sized units should clearly



Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


   be treated as packet-congestible, because the queue length in packets
   would be a good model of congestion of the lower layer link.

   A hybrid forwarding system with transmission delay largely dependent
   on the byte-size of packets but buffers of one MTU per packet would
   strictly require a more complex algorithm to determine the
   probability of congestion.  It would have to be treated as two
   resources in sequence, where the sum of the byte-sizes of the packets
   within each packet buffer modelled congestion of the line while the
   length of the queue in packets modelled congestion of the buffer.
   Then the probability of congesting the forwarding buffer would have
   to be a conditional probability--conditional on the previously
   calculated probability of congesting the line.  The sub-MTU-sized
   fixed buffers described above would require a slightly more complex
   model to fully determine how best to measure the queue.  It would
   then be necessary to approximate this back to some practical
   algorithm.

   Not all congested resources lead to queues.  For instance, wireless
   spectrum is bit-congestible (for a given coding scheme), because
   interference increases with the rate at which bits are transmitted.
   But wireless link protocols do not always maintain a queue that
   depends on spectrum interference.  Similarly, power limited resources
   are also usually bit-congestible if energy is primarily required for
   transmission rather than header processing, but it is rare for a link
   protocol to build a queue as it approaches maximum power.

   [ECNFixedWireless] proposes a practical and theoretically sound way
   to combine congestion notification for different bit-congestible
   resources along an end to end path, whether wireless or wired, and
   whether with or without queues.


5.  Idealised Wire Protocol Coding

   We will start by inventing an idealised congestion notification
   protocol before discussing how to make it practical.  The idealised
   protocol is shown to be correct using examples in Appendix A.
   Congestion notification involves the congested resource coding a
   congestion notification signal into the packet stream and the
   transports decoding it.  The idealised protocol uses two different
   fields in each datagram to signal congestion: one for byte congestion
   and one for packet congestion.

   We are not saying two ECN fields will be needed (and we are not
   saying that somehow a resource should be able to drop a packet in one
   of two different ways so that the transport can distinguish which
   sort of drop it was!).  These two congestion notification channels



Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


   are just a conceptual device.  They allow us to defer having to
   decide whether to distinguish between byte and packet congestion when
   the network resource codes the signal or when the transport decodes
   it.

   However, although this idealised mechanism isn't intended for
   implementation, we do want to emphasise that we may need to find a
   way to implement it, because it could become necessary to somehow
   distinguish between bit and packet congestion [RFC3714].  Currently a
   design goal of network processing equipment such as routers and
   firewalls is to keep packet processing uncongested even under worst
   case bit rates with minimum packet sizes.  Therefore, packet-
   congestion is currently rare, but there is no guarantee that it will
   not become common with future technology trends.

   The idealised wire protocol is given below.  It accounts for packet
   sizes at the transport layer, not in the network, and then only in
   the case of bit-congestible resources.  This avoids the perverse
   incentive to send smaller packets and the DoS vulnerability that
   would otherwise result if the network were to bias towards them (see
   Introduction).  Incidentally, it also ensures neither the network nor
   the transport needs to do a multiply--multiplication by packet size
   is effectively achieved as a repeated add when the transport adds to
   its count of marked bytes as each congestion event is fed to it:

   o  A packet-congestible resource trying to code congestion level p_p
      into a packet stream should mark the idealised `packet congestion'
      field in each packet with probability p_p irrespective of the
      packet's size.  The transport should then take a packet with the
      packet congestion field marked to mean just one mark, irrespective
      of the packet size.

   o  A bit-congestible resource trying to code time-varying byte-
      congestion level p_b into a packet stream should mark the `byte
      congestion' field in each packet with probability p_b, again
      irrespective of the packet's size.  Unlike before, the transport
      should take a packet with the byte congestion field marked to
      count as a mark on each byte in the packet.

   The worked examples in Appendix A show that transports can extract
   sufficient and correct congestion notification from these protocols
   for cases when two flows with different packet sizes have matching
   bit rates or matching packet rates.  Examples are also given that mix
   these two flows into one to show that a flow with mixed packet sizes
   would still be able to extract sufficient and correct information.

   Sufficient and correct congestion information means that there is
   sufficient information for the two different types of transport



Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


   requirements:

   Ratio-based:  Established transport congestion controls like TCP's
      [RFC2581] aim to achieve equal segment rates per RTT through the
      same bottleneck--TCP friendliness [RFC3448].  They work with the
      ratio of marked to unmarked segments.  The example scenarios show
      that these ratio-based transports are effectively the same whether
      counting in bytes or marks, because the units cancel out.
      (Incidentally, this is why TCP's bit rate is still proportional to
      packet size even when byte-counting is used, as recommended for
      TCP in [I-D.ietf-tcpm-rfc2581bis], mainly for orthogonal security
      reasons.)

   Absolute-target-based:  Other congestion controls proposed in the
      research community aim to limit the volume of congestion caused to
      a constant weight parameter.  [MulTCP][WindowPropFair] are
      examples of weighted proportionally fair transports designed for
      cost-fair environments [Rate_fair_Dis].  In this case, the
      transport requires a count (not a ratio) of dropped/marked bytes
      in the bit-congestible case and of dropped/marked packets in the
      packet congestible case.


6.  The State of the Art

   The original 1993 paper on RED [RED93] proposed two options for the
   RED active queue management algorithm: packet mode and byte mode.
   Packet mode measured the queue length in packets and marked (or
   dropped) individual packets with a probability independent of their
   size.  Byte mode measured the queue length in bytes and marked an
   individual packet with probability in proportion to its size
   (relative to the maximum packet size).  In the paper's outline of
   further work, it was stated that no recommendation had been made on
   whether the queue size should be measured in bytes or packets, but
   noted that the difference could be significant.

   When RED was recommended for general deployment in 1998 [RFC2309],
   the two modes were mentioned implying the choice between them was a
   question of performance, referring to a 1997 email [pktByteEmail] for
   advice on tuning.  This email clarified that there were in fact two
   orthogonal choices: whether to measure queue length in bytes or
   packets (Section 6.1 below) and whether the drop probability of an
   individual packet should depend on its own size (Section 6.2 below).

6.1.  Congestion Measurement: Status

   The choice of which metric to use to measure queue length was left
   open in RFC2309.  It is now well understood that queues for bit-



Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


   congestible resources should be measured in bytes, and queues for
   packet-congestible resources should be measured in packets (see
   Section 4).

   Where buffers are not configured or legacy buffers cannot be
   configured to the above guideline, we needn't have to make allowances
   for such legacy in future protocol design.  If a bit-congestible
   buffer is measured in packets, the operator will have set the
   thresholds mindful of a typical mix of packets sizes.  Any AQM
   algorithm on such a buffer will be oversensitive to high proportions
   of small packets, e.g. a DoS attack, and undersensitive to high
   proportions of large packets.  But an operator can safely keep such a
   legacy buffer because any undersensitivity during unusual traffic
   mixes cannot lead to congestion collapse given the buffer will
   eventually revert to tail drop, discarding proportionately more large
   packets.

   Some modern router implementations give a choice for setting RED's
   thresholds in byte-mode or packet-mode.  This may merely be an
   administrator-interface preference, not altering how the queue itself
   is measured but on some hardware it does actually change the way it
   measures its queue.  Whether a resource is bit-congestible or packet-
   congestible is a property of the resource, so an admin SHOULD NOT
   ever need to, or be able to, configure the way a queue measures
   itself.

   We believe the question of whether to measure queues in bytes or
   packets is fairly well understood these days.  The only outstanding
   issues concern how to measure congestion when the queue is bit
   congestible but the resource is packet congestible or vice versa (see
   Section 4).

6.2.  Congestion Coding: Status

6.2.1.  Network Bias when Encoding

   The previously mentioned email [pktByteEmail] referred to by
   [RFC2309] said that the choice over whether a packet's own size
   should affect its drop probability "depends on the dominant end-to-
   end congestion control mechanisms".  [Section 1 argues against this
   approach, citing the excellent advice in RFC3246.]  The referenced
   email went on to argue that drop probability should depend on the
   size of the packet being considered for drop if the resource is bit-
   congestible, but not if it is packet-congestible, but advised that
   most scarce resources in the Internet were currently bit-congestible.
   The argument continued that if packet drops were inflated by packet
   size (byte-mode dropping), "a flow's fraction of the packet drops is
   then a good indication of that flow's fraction of the link bandwidth



Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


   in bits per second".  This was consistent with a referenced policing
   mechanism being worked on at the time for detecting unusually high
   bandwidth flows, eventually published in 1999 [pBox].  [The problem
   could have been solved by making the policing mechanism count the
   volume of bytes randomly dropped, not the number of packets.]

   A few months before RFC2309 was published, an addendum was added to
   the above archived email referenced from the RFC, in which the final
   paragraph seemed to partially retract what had previously been said.
   It clarified that the question of whether the probability of marking
   a packet should depend on its size was not related to whether the
   resource itself was bit congestible, but a completely orthogonal
   question.  However the only example given had the queue measured in
   packets but packet drop depended on the byte-size of the packet in
   question.  No example was given the other way round.

   In 2000, Cnodder et al [REDbyte] pointed out that there was an error
   in the part of the original 1993 RED algorithm that aimed to
   distribute drops uniformly, because it didn't correctly take into
   account the adjustment for packet size.  They recommended an
   algorithm called RED_4 to fix this.  But they also recommended a
   further change, RED_5, to adjust drop rate dependent on the square of
   relative packet size.  This was indeed consistent with the stated
   motivation behind RED's byte mode drop--that we should reverse
   engineer the network to improve the performance of dominant end-to-
   end congestion control mechanisms.

   By 2003, a further change had been made to the adjustment for packet
   size, this time in the RED algorithm of the ns2 simulator.  Instead
   of taking each packet's size relative to a `maximum packet size' it
   was taken relative to a `mean packet size', intended to be a static
   value representative of the `typical' packet size on the link.  We
   have not been able to find a justification for this change in the
   literature, however Eddy and Allman conducted experiments [REDbias]
   that assessed how sensitive RED was to this parameter, amongst other
   things.  No-one seems to have pointed out that this changed algorithm
   can often lead to drop probabilities of greater than 1 [which should
   ring alarm bells hinting that there's a mistake in the theory
   somewhere].  On 10-Nov-2004, this variant of byte-mode packet drop
   was made the default in the ns2 simulator.

   More recently, two drafts have proposed changes to TCP that make it
   more robust against losing small control packets
   [I-D.ietf-tcpm-ecnsyn] [I-D.floyd-tcpm-ackcc].  In both cases they
   note that the case for these TCP changes would be weaker if RED were
   biased against dropping small packets.  We argue here that these two
   proposals are a safer and more principled way to achieve TCP
   performance improvements than reverse engineering RED to benefit TCP.



Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


6.2.2.  Transport Bias when Decoding

   The above proposals to alter the network layer to fix TCP's
   insensitivity to segment size have largely carried on outside the
   IETF process (unless one counts a reference in an informational RFC
   to an archived email!).

   Within the IETF, a recently approved experimental RFC adapts its
   transport layer protocol to take account of packet sizes relative to
   typical TCP packet sizes.  This proposes a new small-packet variant
   of TCP-friendly rate control [RFC3448] called TFRC-SP [RFC4828].
   Essentially, it proposes a rate equation that inflates the flow rate
   by the ratio of a typical TCP segment size (1500B including TCP
   header) over the actual segment size [PktSizeEquCC].  (There are also
   other important differences of detail relative to TFRC, such as using
   virtual packets [CCvarPktSize] to avoid responding to multiple losses
   per round trip and using a minimum inter-packet interval.)

   Section 4.5.1 of this TFRC-SP spec discusses the implications of
   operating in an environment where routers have been configured to
   drop smaller packets with proportionately lower probability than
   larger ones.  But surprisingly, it only discusses TCP operating in
   such an environment, only mentioning TFRC-SP briefly when discussing
   how to define fairness with TCP.  And it only discusses the byte-mode
   dropping version of RED as it was before Cnodder et al pointed out it
   didn't sufficiently bias towards small packets to make TCP
   independent of packet size.

   So the TFRC-SP spec doesn't address the issue of which of the network
   or the transport _should_ handle fairness between different packet
   sizes.  In its Appendix B.4 it discusses the possibility of both
   TFRC-SP and some network buffers duplicating each other's attempts to
   deliberately bias towards small packets.  But the discussion is not
   conclusive, instead reporting simulations of many of the
   possibilities in order to assess performance rather than recommending
   any action.

   The paper originally proposing TFRC with virtual packets (VP-TFRC)
   [CCvarPktSize] proposed that there should perhaps be two variants to
   cater for the different variants of RED.  However, as the TFRC-SP
   authors point out, there is no way for a transport to know whether
   some queues on its path have deployed RED with byte-mode packet drop
   (except if an exhaustive survey found that no-one has deployed it!--
   see Section 6.2.3).  Incidentally, VP-TFRC also proposed that byte-
   mode RED dropping should really square the packet size compensation
   factor (like that of RED_5, but apparently unaware of it).

   Pre-congestion notification [I-D.ietf-pcn-architecture] is a proposal



Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


   to use a virtual queue for AQM marking for packets within one
   Diffserv class in order to give early warning prior to any real
   queuing.  The proposed PCN marking algorithms have been designed not
   to take account of packet size on routers.  Instead the general
   principle has been to take account of the sizes of marked packets
   when monitoring the fraction of marking at the edge of the network.

6.2.3.  Congestion Coding: Summary of Status

   +-----------+----------------+-----------------+--------------------+
   | transport |  RED_1 (packet |  RED_4 (linear  | RED_5 (square byte |
   |        cc |   mode drop)   | byte mode drop) |     mode drop)     |
   +-----------+----------------+-----------------+--------------------+
   |    TCP or |    s/sqrt(p)   |    sqrt(s/p)    |      1/sqrt(p)     |
   |      TFRC |                |                 |                    |
   |   TFRC-SP |    1/sqrt(p)   |    1/sqrt(sp)   |    1/(s.sqrt(p))   |
   +-----------+----------------+-----------------+--------------------+

     Table 1: Dependence of flow bit-rate per RTT on packet size s and
   drop rate p when network and/or transport bias towards small packets
                            to varying degrees

   Table 1 aims to summarise the positions we may now be in.  Each
   column shows a different possible AQM behaviour on different routers
   in the network, using the terminology of Cnodder et al outlined
   earlier (RED_1 is basic RED with packet-mode drop).  Each row shows a
   different transport behaviour: TCP [RFC2581] and TFRC [RFC3448] on
   the top row with TFRC-SP [RFC4828] below.  Suppressing all
   inessential details the table shows that independence from packet
   size should either be achievable by not altering the TCP transport in
   a RED_5 network, or using the small packet TFRC-SP transport in a
   network without any byte-mode dropping RED (top right and bottom
   left).  Top left is the `do nothing' scenario, while bottom right is
   the `do-both' scenario in which bit-rate would become far too biased
   towards small packets.  Of course, if any form of byte-mode dropping
   RED has been deployed on a selection of congested routers, each path
   will present a different hybrid scenario to its transport.

   Whatever, we can see that the linear byte-mode drop column in the
   middle considerably complicates the Internet.  It's a half-way house
   that doesn't bias enough towards small packets even if one believes
   the network should be doing the biasing.  We argue below that _all_
   network layer bias towards small packets should be turned off--if
   indeed any router vendors have implemented it--leaving packet size
   bias solely as the preserve of the transport layer (solely the
   leftmost, packet-mode drop column).

   A survey has been conducted of 84 vendors to assess how widely drop



Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


   probability based on packet size has been implemented in RED.  Prior
   to the survey, an individual approach to Cisco received confirmation
   that, having checked the code-base for each of the product ranges,
   Cisco has not implemented any discrimination based on packet size in
   any AQM algorithm in any of its products.  Also an individual
   approach to Alcatel-Lucent drew a confirmation that it was very
   likely that none of their products contained RED code that
   implemented any packet-size bias.

   Turning to our more formal survey, about 19% of those surveyed have
   replied so far, giving a sample size of 16.  Although we do not have
   permission to identify the respondents, we can say that those that
   have responded include most of the larger vendors, covering a large
   fraction of the market.  They range across the large network
   equipment vendors at L3 & L2, firewall vendors, wireless equipment
   vendors, as well as large software businesses with a small selection
   of networking products.  So far, all those who have responded have
   confirmed that they have not implemented the variant of RED with drop
   dependent on packet size (2 are fairly sure they haven't but need to
   check more thoroughly).

   Where reasons have been given, the extra complexity of packet bias
   code has been most prevalent, though one vendor had a more principled
   reason for avoiding it--similar to the argument of this document.  We
   have established that Linux does not implement RED with packet size
   drop bias, although we have not investigated a wider range of open
   source code.


7.  Outstanding Issues and Next Steps

7.1.  Bit-congestible World

   For a connectionless network with only bit-congestible resources we
   believe the recommended position is now unarguably clear--that the
   network should not make allowance for packet sizes and the transport
   should.  This leaves two outstanding issues:

   o  How to handle any legacy of AQM with byte-mode drop already
      deployed;

   o  The need to start a programme to update transport congestion
      control protocol standards to take account of packet size.

   The sample of returns from our vendor survey Section 6.2.3 suggest
   that byte-mode packet drop seems not to be implemented at all let
   alone deployed, or if it is, it is likely to be very sparse.
   Therefore, we do not really need a migration strategy from all but



Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


   nothing to nothing.

   A programme of standards updates to take account of packet size in
   transport congestion control protocols has started with TFRC-SP
   [RFC4828], while weighted TCPs implemented in the research community
   [WindowPropFair] could form the basis of a future change to TCP
   congestion control [RFC2581] itself.

7.2.  Bit- & Packet-congestible World

   Nonetheless, a connectionless network with both bit-congestible and
   packet-congestible resources is a different matter.  If we believe we
   should allow for this possibility in the future, this space contains
   a truly open research issue.

   The idealised wire protocol coding described in Section 5 requires at
   least two flags for congestion of bit-congestible and packet-
   congestible resources.  This hides a fundamental problem--much more
   fundamental than whether we can magically create header space for yet
   another ECN flag in IPv4, or whether it would work while being
   deployed incrementally.  A congestion notification protocol must
   survive a transition from low levels of congestion to high.  Marking
   two states is feasible with explicit marking, but much harder if
   packets are dropped.  Also, it will not always be cost-effective to
   implement AQM at every low level resource, so drop will often have to
   suffice.  Distinguishing drop from delivery naturally provides just
   one congestion flag--it is hard to drop a packet in two ways that are
   distinguishable remotely.  This is a similar problem to that of
   distinguishing wireless transmission losses from congestive losses.

   We should also note that, strictly, packet-congestible resources are
   actually cycle-congestible because load also depends on the
   complexity of each look-up and whether the pattern of arrivals is
   amenable to caching or not.  Further, this reminds us that any
   solution must not require a forwarding engine to use excessive
   processor cycles in order to decide how to say it has no spare
   processor cycles.

   The problem of signalling packet processing congestion is not
   pressing, as most if not all Internet resources are designed to be
   bit-congestible before packet processing starts to congest.  However,
   given the IRTF ICCRG has set itself the task of reaching consensus on
   generic router mechanisms that are necessary and sufficient to
   support the Internet's future congestion control requirements
   [I-D.irtf-iccrg-welzl-congestion-control-open-research], we must not
   give this problem no thought at all, just because it is hard and
   currently hypothetical.




Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


8.  Security Considerations

   This draft recommends that queues do not bias drop probability
   towards small packets as this creates a perverse incentive for
   transports to break down their flows into tiny segments.  One of the
   benefits of implementing AQM was meant to be to remove this perverse
   incentive that drop-tail queues gave to small packets.  Of course, if
   transports really want to make the greatest gains, they don't have to
   respond to congestion anyway.  But we don't want applications that
   are trying to behave to discover that they can go faster by using
   smaller packets.

   In practice, transports cannot all be trusted to respond to
   congestion.  So another reason for recommending that queues do not
   bias drop probability towards small packets is to avoid the
   vulnerability to small packet DDoS attacks that would otherwise
   result.  One of the benefits of implementing AQM was meant to be to
   remove drop-tail's DoS vulnerability to small packets, so we
   shouldn't add it back again.

   If most queues implemented AQM with byte-mode drop, the resulting
   network would amplify the potency of a small packet DDoS attack.  At
   the first queue the stream of packets would push aside a greater
   proportion of large packets, so more of the small packets would
   survive to attack the next queue.  Thus a flood of small packets
   would continue on towards the destination, pushing regular traffic
   with large packets out of the way in one queue after the next, but
   suffering much less drop itself.

   Appendix C explains why the ability of networks to police the
   response of _any_ transport to congestion depends on bit-congestible
   network resources only doing packet-mode not byte-mode drop.  In
   summary, it says that making drop probability depend on the size of
   the packets that bits happen to be divided into simply encourages the
   bits to be divided into smaller packets.  Byte-mode drop would
   therefore irreversibly complicate any attempt to fix the Internet's
   incentive structures.


9.  Conclusions

   The strong conclusion is that AQM algorithms such as RED SHOULD NOT
   use byte-mode drop.  More generally, the Internet's congestion
   notification protocols (drop and ECN) SHOULD take account of packet
   size when the notification is read by the transport layer, NOT when
   it is written by the network layer.  This approach offers sufficient
   and correct congestion information for all known and future transport
   protocols and also ensures no perverse incentives are created that



Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 17]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


   would encourage transports to use inappropriately small packet sizes.

   The alternative of deflating RED's drop probability for smaller
   packet sizes (byte-mode drop) has no enduring advantages.  It is more
   complex, it creates the perverse incentive to fragment segments into
   tiny pieces and it reopens the vulnerability to foods of small-
   packets that drop-tail queues suffered from and AQM was designed to
   remove.  Byte-mode drop is a change to the network layer that makes
   allowance for an omission from the design of TCP, effectively reverse
   engineering the network layer to contrive to make two TCPs with
   different packet sizes run at equal bit rates (rather than packet
   rates) under the same path conditions.  It also improves TCP
   performance by reducing the chance that a SYN or a pure ACK will be
   dropped, because they are small.  But we SHOULD NOT hack the network
   layer to improve or fix certain transport protocols.  No matter how
   predominant a transport protocol is (even if it's TCP), trying to
   correct for its failings by biasing towards small packets in the
   network layer creates a perverse incentive to break down all flows
   from all transports into tiny segments.

   So far, our survey of over 100 vendors across the industry has drawn
   responses from about 19%, none of whom have implemented the byte mode
   packet drop variant of RED.  Given there appears to be little, if
   any, installed base recommending removal of byte-mode drop from RED
   is possibly only a paper exercise with few, if any, incremental
   deployment issues.

   If a vendor has implemented byte-mode drop, and an operator has
   turned it on, it is strongly RECOMMENDED that it SHOULD be turned
   off.  Note that RED as a whole SHOULD NOT be turned off, as without
   it, a drop tail queue also biases against large packets.  But note
   also that turning off byte-mode may alter the relative performance of
   applications using different packet sizes, so it would be advisable
   to establish the implications before turning it off.

   Instead, the IETF transport area should continue its programme of
   updating congestion control protocols to take account of packet size
   and to make transports less sensitive to losing control packets like
   SYNs and pure ACKS.

   NOTE WELL that RED's byte-mode queue measurement is fine, being
   completely orthogonal to byte-mode drop.  If a RED implementation has
   a byte-mode but does not specify what sort of byte-mode, it is most
   probably byte-mode queue measurement, which is fine.  However, if in
   doubt, the vendor should be consulted.

   The above conclusions cater for the Internet as it is today with
   most, if not all, resources being primarily bit-congestible.  A



Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 18]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


   secondary conclusion of this memo is that we may see more packet-
   congestible resources in the future, so research may be needed to
   extend the Internet's congestion notification (drop or ECN) so that
   it can handle a mix of bit-congestible and packet-congestible
   resources.


10.  Acknowledgements

   Thank you to Sally Floyd, who gave extensive and useful review
   comments.  Also thanks for the reviews from Toby Moncaster and Arnaud
   Jacquet.  I am grateful to Bruce Davie and his colleagues for
   providing a timely and efficient survey of RED implementation in
   Cisco's product range.  Also grateful thanks to Toby Moncaster, Will
   Dormann, John Regnault, Simon Carter and Stefaan De Cnodder further
   helped survey the current status of RED implementation and deployment
   and, finally, thanks to the anonymous individuals who responded.


11.  Comments Solicited

   Comments and questions are encouraged and very welcome.  They can be
   addressed to the IETF Transport Area working group mailing list
   <tsvwg@ietf.org>, and/or to the authors.

Editorial Comments

   [Note_Variation]  The algorithm of the byte-mode drop variant of RED
                     switches off any bias towards small packets
                     whenever the smoothed queue length dictates that
                     the drop probability of large packets should be
                     100%. In the example in the Introduction, as the
                     large packet drop probability varies around 25% the
                     small packet drop probability will vary around 1%,
                     but with occasional jumps to 100% whenever the
                     instantaneous queue (after drop) manages to sustain
                     a length above the 100% drop point for longer than
                     the queue averaging period.


Appendix A.  Example Scenarios

A.1.  Notation

   To prove the two sets of assertions in the idealised wire protocol
   (Section 5) are true, we will compare two flows with different packet
   sizes, s_1 and s_2 [bit/pkt], to make sure their transports each see
   the correct congestion notification.  Initially, within each flow we



Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 19]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


   will take all packets as having equal sizes, but later we will
   generalise to flows within which packet sizes vary.  A flow's bit
   rate, x [bit/s], is related to its packet rate, u [pkt/s], by

      x(t) = s.u(t).

   We will consider a 2x2 matrix of four scenarios:

   +-----------------------------+------------------+------------------+
   |           resource type and |   A) Equal bit   |   B) Equal pkt   |
   |            congestion level |       rates      |       rates      |
   +-----------------------------+------------------+------------------+
   |     i) bit-congestible, p_b |       (Ai)       |       (Bi)       |
   |    ii) pkt-congestible, p_p |       (Aii)      |       (Bii)      |
   +-----------------------------+------------------+------------------+

                                  Table 2

A.2.  Bit-congestible resource, equal bit rates (Ai)

   Starting with the bit-congestible scenario, for two flows to maintain
   equal bit rates (Ai) the ratio of the packet rates must be the
   inverse of the ratio of packet sizes: u_2/u_1 = s_1/s_2.  So, for
   instance, a flow of 60B packets would have to send 25x more packets
   to achieve the same bit rate as a flow of 1500B packets.  If a
   congested resource marks proportion p_b of packets irrespective of
   size, the ratio of marked packets received by each transport will
   still be the same as the ratio of their packet rates, p_b.u_2/p_b.u_1
   = s_1/s_2.  So of the 25x more 60B packets sent, 25x more will be
   marked than in the 1500B packet flow, but 25x more won't be marked
   too.

   In this scenario, the resource is bit-congestible, so it always uses
   our idealised bit-congestion field when it marks packets.  Therefore
   the transport should count marked bytes not packets.  But it doesn't
   actually matter for ratio-based transports like TCP (Section 5).  The
   ratio of marked to unmarked bytes seen by each flow will be p_b, as
   will the ratio of marked to unmarked packets.  Because they are
   ratios, the units cancel out.

   If a flow sent an inconsistent mixture of packet sizes, we have said
   it should count the ratio of marked and unmarked bytes not packets in
   order to correctly decode the level of congestion.  But actually, if
   all it is trying to do is decode p_b, it still doesn't matter.  For
   instance, imagine the two equal bit rate flows were actually one flow
   at twice the bit rate sending a mixture of one 1500B packet for every
   thirty 60B packets. 25x more small packets will be marked and 25x
   more will be unmarked.  The transport can still calculate p_b whether



Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 20]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


   it uses bytes or packets for the ratio.  In general, for any
   algorithm which works on a ratio of marks to non-marks, either bytes
   or packets can be counted interchangeably, because the choice cancels
   out in the ratio calculation.

   However, where an absolute target rather than relative volume of
   congestion caused is important (Section 5), as it is for congestion
   accountability [Rate_fair_Dis], the transport must count marked bytes
   not packets, in this bit-congestible case.  Aside from the goal of
   congestion accountability, this is how the bit rate of a transport
   can be made independent of packet size; by ensuring the rate of
   congestion caused is kept to a constant weight [WindowPropFair],
   rather than merely responding to the ratio of marked and unmarked
   bytes.

   Note the unit of byte-congestion volume is the byte.

A.3.  Bit-congestible resource, equal packet rates (Bi)

   If two flows send different packet sizes but at the same packet rate,
   their bit rates will be in the same ratio as their packet sizes, x_2/
   x_1 = s_2/s_1.  For instance, a flow sending 1500B packets at the
   same packet rate as another sending 60B packets will be sending at
   25x greater bit rate.  In this case, if a congested resource marks
   proportion p_b of packets irrespective of size, the ratio of packets
   received with the byte-congestion field marked by each transport will
   be the same, p_b.u_2/p_b.u_1 = 1.

   Because the byte-congestion field is marked, the transport should
   count marked bytes not packets.  But because each flow sends
   consistently sized packets it still doesn't matter for ratio-based
   transports.  The ratio of marked to unmarked bytes seen by each flow
   will be p_b, as will the ratio of marked to unmarked packets.
   Therefore, if the congestion control algorithm is only concerned with
   the ratio of marked to unmarked packets (as is TCP), both flows will
   be able to decode p_b correctly whether they count packets or bytes.

   But if the absolute volume of congestion is important, e.g. for
   congestion accountability, the transport must count marked bytes not
   packets.  Then the lower bit rate flow using smaller packets will
   rightly be perceived as causing less byte-congestion even though its
   packet rate is the same.

   If the two flows are mixed into one, of bit rate x1+x2, with equal
   packet rates of each size packet, the ratio p_b will still be
   measurable by counting the ratio of marked to unmarked bytes (or
   packets because the ratio cancels out the units).  However, if the
   absolute volume of congestion is required, the transport must count



Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 21]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


   the sum of congestion marked bytes, which indeed gives a correct
   measure of the rate of byte-congestion p_b(x_1 + x_2) caused by the
   combined bit rate.

A.4.  Pkt-congestible resource, equal bit rates (Aii)

   Moving to the case of packet-congestible resources, we now take two
   flows that send different packet sizes at the same bit rate, but this
   time the pkt-congestion field is marked by the resource with
   probability p_p.  As in scenario Ai with the same bit rates but a
   bit-congestible resource, the flow with smaller packets will have a
   higher packet rate, so more packets will be both marked and unmarked,
   but in the same proportion.

   This time, the transport should only count marks without taking into
   account packet sizes.  Transports will get the same result, p_p, by
   decoding the ratio of marked to unmarked packets in either flow.

   If one flow imitates the two flows but merged together, the bit rate
   will double with more small packets than large.  The ratio of marked
   to unmarked packets will still be p_p.  But if the absolute number of
   pkt-congestion marked packets is counted it will accumulate at the
   combined packet rate times the marking probability, p_p(u_1+u_2), 26x
   faster than packet congestion accumulates in the single 1500B packet
   flow of our example, as required.

   But if the transport is interested in the absolute number of packet
   congestion, it should just count how many marked packets arrive.  For
   instance, a flow sending 60B packets will see 25x more marked packets
   than one sending 1500B packets at the same bit rate, because it is
   sending more packets through a packet-congestible resource.

   Note the unit of packet congestion is packets.

A.5.  Pkt-congestible resource, equal packet rates (Bii)

   Finally, if two flows with the same packet rate, pass through a
   packet-congestible resource, they will both suffer the same
   proportion of marking, p_p, irrespective of their packet sizes.  On
   detecting that the pkt-congestion field is marked, the transport
   should count packets, and it will be able to extract the ratio p_p of
   marked to unmarked packets from both flows, irrespective of packet
   sizes.

   Even if the transport is monitoring the absolute amount of packets
   congestion over a period, still it will see the same amount of packet
   congestion from either flow.




Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 22]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


   And if the two equal packet rates of different size packets are mixed
   together in one flow, the packet rate will double, so the absolute
   volume of packet-congestion will accumulate at twice the rate of
   either flow, 2p_p.u_1 = p_p(u_1+u_2).


Appendix B.  Congestion Notification Definition: Further Justification

   In Section 3 on the definition of congestion notification, load not
   capacity was used as the denominator.  This also has a subtle
   significance in the related debate over the design of new transport
   protocols--typical new protocol designs (e.g. in XCP
   [I-D.falk-xcp-spec] & Quickstart [RFC4782]) expect the sending
   transport to communicate its desired flow rate to the network and
   network elements to progressively subtract from this so that the
   achievable flow rate emerges at the receiving transport.

   Congestion notification with total load in the denominator can serve
   a similar purpose (though in retrospect not in advance like XCP &
   QuickStart).  Congestion notification is a dimensionless fraction but
   each source can extract necessary rate information from it because it
   already knows what its own rate is.  Even though congestion
   notification doesn't communicate a rate explicitly, from each
   source's point of view congestion notification represents the
   fraction of the rate it was sending a round trip ago that couldn't
   (or wouldn't) be served by available resources.  After they were
   sent, all these fractions of each source's offered load added up to
   the aggregate fraction of offered load seen by the congested
   resource.  So, the source can also know the total excess rate by
   multiplying total load by congestion level.  Therefore congestion
   notification, as one scale-free dimensionless fraction, implicitly
   communicates the instantaneous excess flow rate, albeit a RTT ago.


Appendix C.  Byte-mode Drop Complicates Policing Congestion Response

   This appendix explains why the ability of networks to police the
   response of _any_ transport to congestion depends on bit-congestible
   network resources only doing packet-mode not byte-mode drop.

   To be able to police a transport's response to congestion when
   fairness can only be judged over time and over all an individual's
   flows, the policer has to have an integrated view of all the
   congestion an individual (not just one flow) has caused due to all
   traffic entering the Internet from that individual.  This is termed
   congestion accountability.

   But with byte-mode drop, one dropped or marked packet is not



Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 23]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


   necessarily equivalent to another unless you know the MTU that caused
   it to be dropped/marked.  To have an integrated view of a user, we
   believe congestion policing has to be located at an individual's
   attachment point to the Internet [Re-TCP].  But from there it cannot
   know the MTU of each remote router that caused each mark.  Therefore
   it cannot take an integrated approach to policing all the responses
   to congestion of all the transports of one individual.  Therefore it
   cannot police anything.

   The security/incentive argument _for_ packet-mode drop is similar.
   Firstly, confining RED to packet-mode drop would not preclude
   bottleneck policing approaches such as [pBox] as it seems likely they
   could work just as well by monitoring the volume of dropped bytes
   rather than packets.  Secondly packet-mode marking naturally allows
   the congestion marking on packets to be globally meaningful without
   relying on MTU information held elsewhere.

   Because we recommend that a marked packet should be taken to mean
   that all the bytes in the packet are congestion marked, a policer can
   remain robust against bits being re-divided into different size
   packets or across different size flows [Rate_fair_Dis].  Therefore
   policing would work naturally with just simple packet-mode drop in
   RED.

   In summary, making drop probability depend on the size of the packets
   that bits happen to be divided into simply encourages the bits to be
   divided into smaller packets.  Byte-mode drop would therefore
   irreversibly complicate any attempt to fix the Internet's incentive
   structures.

Changes from Previous Versions

   To be removed by the RFC Editor on publication.

   From -00 to -01:

         Clarified applicability to drop as well as ECN.

         Highlighted DoS vulnerability.

         Emphasised that drop-tail suffers from similar problems to
         byte-mode drop, so only byte-mode drop should be turned off,
         not RED itself.

         Clarified the original apparent motivations for recommending
         byte-mode drop included protecting SYNs and pure ACKs more than
         equalising the bit rates of TCPs with different segment sizes.
         Removed some conjectured motivations.



Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 24]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


         Added support for updates to TCP in progress (ackcc & ecn-syn-
         ack).

         Updated survey results with newly arrived data.

         Pulled all recommendations together into the conclusions.

         Moved some detailed points into two additional appendices and a
         note.

         Considerable clarifications throughout.

         Updated references


12.  References

12.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2309]  Braden, B., Clark, D., Crowcroft, J., Davie, B., Deering,
              S., Estrin, D., Floyd, S., Jacobson, V., Minshall, G.,
              Partridge, C., Peterson, L., Ramakrishnan, K., Shenker,
              S., Wroclawski, J., and L. Zhang, "Recommendations on
              Queue Management and Congestion Avoidance in the
              Internet", RFC 2309, April 1998.

   [RFC2581]  Allman, M., Paxson, V., and W. Stevens, "TCP Congestion
              Control", RFC 2581, April 1999.

   [RFC3168]  Ramakrishnan, K., Floyd, S., and D. Black, "The Addition
              of Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) to IP",
              RFC 3168, September 2001.

   [RFC3426]  Floyd, S., "General Architectural and Policy
              Considerations", RFC 3426, November 2002.

   [RFC3448]  Handley, M., Floyd, S., Padhye, J., and J. Widmer, "TCP
              Friendly Rate Control (TFRC): Protocol Specification",
              RFC 3448, January 2003.

   [RFC4828]  Floyd, S. and E. Kohler, "TCP Friendly Rate Control
              (TFRC): The Small-Packet (SP) Variant", RFC 4828,
              April 2007.





Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 25]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


12.2.  Informative References

   [CCvarPktSize]
              Widmer, J., Boutremans, C., and J-Y. Le Boudec,
              "Congestion Control for Flows with Variable Packet Size",
              ACM CCR 34(2) 137--151, 2004,
              <http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/997150.997162>.

   [ECNFixedWireless]
              Siris, V., "Resource Control for Elastic Traffic in CDMA
              Networks", Proc. ACM MOBICOM'02 , September 2002, <http://
              www.ics.forth.gr/netlab/publications/
              resource_control_elastic_cdma.html>.

   [Evol_cc]  Gibbens, R. and F. Kelly, "Resource pricing and the
              evolution of congestion control", Automatica 35(12)1969--
              1985, December 1999,
              <http://www.statslab.cam.ac.uk/~frank/evol.html>.

   [I-D.falk-xcp-spec]
              Falk, A., "Specification for the Explicit Control Protocol
              (XCP)", draft-falk-xcp-spec-03 (work in progress),
              July 2007.

   [I-D.floyd-tcpm-ackcc]
              Floyd, S. and I. Property, "Adding Acknowledgement
              Congestion Control to TCP", draft-floyd-tcpm-ackcc-02
              (work in progress), November 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-pcn-architecture]
              Eardley, P., "Pre-Congestion Notification Architecture",
              draft-ietf-pcn-architecture-01 (work in progress),
              October 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-tcpm-ecnsyn]
              Floyd, S. and I. Property, "Adding Explicit Congestion
              Notification (ECN) Capability to TCP's SYN/ACK  Packets",
              draft-ietf-tcpm-ecnsyn-03 (work in progress),
              November 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-tcpm-rfc2581bis]
              Allman, M., "TCP Congestion Control",
              draft-ietf-tcpm-rfc2581bis-03 (work in progress),
              September 2007.

   [I-D.irtf-iccrg-welzl-congestion-control-open-research]
              Papadimitriou, D., "Open Research Issues in Internet
              Congestion Control",



Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 26]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


              draft-irtf-iccrg-welzl-congestion-control-open-research-00
              (work in progress), July 2007.

   [MulTCP]   Crowcroft, J. and Ph. Oechslin, "Differentiated End to End
              Internet Services using a Weighted Proportional Fair
              Sharing TCP", CCR 28(3) 53--69, July 1998, <http://
              www.cs.ucl.ac.uk/staff/J.Crowcroft/hipparch/pricing.html>.

   [PCNcharter]
              IETF, "Congestion and Pre-Congestion Notification (pcn)",
              IETF w-g charter , Feb 2007,
              <http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/pcn-charter.html>.

   [PktSizeEquCC]
              Vasallo, P., "Variable Packet Size Equation-Based
              Congestion Control", ICSI Technical Report tr-00-008,
              2000, <http://http.icsi.berkeley.edu/ftp/global/pub/
              techreports/2000/tr-00-008.pdf>.

   [RED93]    Floyd, S. and V. Jacobson, "Random Early Detection (RED)
              gateways for Congestion Avoidance", IEEE/ACM Transactions
              on Networking 1(4) 397--413, August 1993,
              <http://www.icir.org/floyd/papers/red/red.html>.

   [REDbias]  Eddy, W. and M. Allman, "A Comparison of RED's Byte and
              Packet Modes", Computer Networks 42(3) 261--280,
              June 2003,
              <http://www.ir.bbn.com/documents/articles/redbias.ps>.

   [REDbyte]  De Cnodder, S., Elloumi, O., and K. Pauwels, "RED behavior
              with different packet sizes", Proc. 5th IEEE Symposium on
              Computers and Communications (ISCC) 793--799, July 2000,
              <http://www.icir.org/floyd/red/Elloumi99.pdf>.

   [RFC3714]  Floyd, S. and J. Kempf, "IAB Concerns Regarding Congestion
              Control for Voice Traffic in the Internet", RFC 3714,
              March 2004.

   [RFC4782]  Floyd, S., Allman, M., Jain, A., and P. Sarolahti, "Quick-
              Start for TCP and IP", RFC 4782, January 2007.

   [Rate_fair_Dis]
              Briscoe, B., "Flow Rate Fairness: Dismantling a Religion",
              ACM CCR 37(2)63--74, April 2007,
              <http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1232926>.

   [Re-TCP]   Briscoe, B., Jacquet, A., Salvatori, A., Koyabi, M., and
              T. Moncaster, "Re-ECN: Adding Accountability for Causing



Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 27]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


              Congestion to TCP/IP", draft-briscoe-tsvwg-re-ecn-tcp-04
              (work in progress), July 2007.

   [WindowPropFair]
              Siris, V., "Service Differentiation and Performance of
              Weighted Window-Based Congestion Control and Packet
              Marking Algorithms in ECN Networks", Computer
              Communications 26(4) 314--326, 2002, <http://
              www.ics.forth.gr/netgroup/publications/
              weighted_window_control.html>.

   [gentle_RED]
              Floyd, S., "Recommendation on using the "gentle_" variant
              of RED", Web page , March 2000,
              <http://www.icir.org/floyd/red/gentle.html>.

   [pBox]     Floyd, S. and K. Fall, "Promoting the Use of End-to-End
              Congestion Control in the Internet", IEEE/ACM Transactions
              on Networking 7(4) 458--472, August 1999,
              <http://www.aciri.org/floyd/end2end-paper.html>.

   [pktByteEmail]
              Floyd, S., "RED: Discussions of Byte and Packet Modes",
              email , March 1997,
              <http://www-nrg.ee.lbl.gov/floyd/REDaveraging.txt>.


Author's Address

   Bob Briscoe
   BT & UCL
   B54/77, Adastral Park
   Martlesham Heath
   Ipswich  IP5 3RE
   UK

   Phone: +44 1473 645196
   Email: bob.briscoe@bt.com
   URI:   http://www.cs.ucl.ac.uk/staff/B.Briscoe/












Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 28]

Internet-Draft   Byte and Packet Congestion Notification   November 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgments

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).  This document was produced
   using xml2rfc v1.32 (of http://xml.resource.org/) from a source in
   RFC-2629 XML format.



Briscoe                   Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 29]

