


Network Working Group                                      H. Alvestrand
Internet-Draft                                                    Google
Expires: January 27, 2007                                  July 26, 2006


                         IETF Operational Notes
                        draft-alvestrand-ipod-03

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 27, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document describes a new document series intended for use as a
   repository for IETF operations documents, which should be more
   ephemeral than RFCs, but more referenceable than internet-drafts, and
   with more clear handling procedures than a random Web page.

   It proposes to establish this series as an RFC 3933 process
   experiment.

   Comments should be sent to the author, or to the IETF list:



Alvestrand              Expires January 27, 2007                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                     ION                         July 2006


   ietf@ietf.org.

   Note to RFC Editor: Please delete previous paragraph on publication


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  A description of the ION mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.1.  Properties of an ION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.2.  ION approval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.3.  Draft IONs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.4.  The ION Store  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Proposed initial IONs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Success criteria and sunset period . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Background and motivation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Appendix A.  Change log  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     A.1.  Changes from version -02 to version -03  . . . . . . . . . 10
     A.2.  Changes from version -01 to version -02  . . . . . . . . . 10
     A.3.  Changes from version -00 to version -01  . . . . . . . . . 10
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 12























Alvestrand              Expires January 27, 2007                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                     ION                         July 2006


1.  Introduction

   This document describes a new document series, called the IETF
   Operational Notes, or IONs.

   This document series is intended to capture the set of procedures
   that the IETF follows, but for which the RFC process is an
   inappropriate documentation veichle.

   The document series defined here does not modify the IETF process
   rules that are defined in currently valid BCP documents.

   The document series is a process experiment according to RFC 3933
   [RFC3933]


2.  A description of the ION mechanism

2.1.  Properties of an ION

   An ION is a document with a certain set of attributes ("front page
   matter").  This specification does not place any limits on what else
   an ION can contain.

   An ION has the following attributes:

   o  A name, which is usable as the filename of the document

   o  A title

   o  A date of approval

   o  An identification of the body that approved this version

   The format of the document is not restricted by this document.  It's
   suggested that there be an ION that describe expectations for ION
   formats.

   An ION is a versioned document.  When a new ION is issued with the
   same name, it obsoletes the previous version.  When one desires to
   retire an ION, one issues an ION saying "This document name is now
   obsolete".

   The ION name + the approval date forms a stable identifier for one
   particular version of an ION; once it is published, it shall never be
   changed, although it may be withdrawn (see below).

   The properties list does not include a "category"; while the set of



Alvestrand              Expires January 27, 2007                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                     ION                         July 2006


   documents that might be IONs is extremely wide, we do not know yet
   which categories could make sense.  The question of categories might
   get revisited at the end of the experiment period.

   Procedurally, an ION has the formal authority of a statement from its
   approving body.  This means that an ION cannot change those
   procedures of the IETF that are documented via the BCP series, since
   the BCP series represents a determination of IETF consensus.

2.2.  ION approval

   An ION is always approved by some body.  The IESG is granted
   authority by this document over the practical management of the
   series and the definition of detailed processes and rules associated
   with it.

   The IESG, the IAB and IAOC are given the right to approve IONs by
   this document.  The IESG, IAB or IAOC may decide that other groups or
   roles should be given the right to approve IONs.

   The ION-approving groups are expected to issue IONs related to their
   own areas of responsibility, and to use common sense when IONs are
   needed where it isn't obvious who's responsible for them.

   An updated ION will normally be approved by the same body that
   approved the previous version, or by another body with the approval
   of the previously-approving body.  In case of conflict, or when the
   previous body no longer exists, the IESG gets to decide who gets to
   approve an updated ION.

   A decision by any other body than the IESG to approve an ION can be
   appealed to the IESG, in which case the IESG can nullify the
   approval.  A decision of the IESG can be appealed using the common
   IETF appeals procedure, except that an IESG decision to nullify an
   IAB decision to approve an ION cannot be appealed to the IAB.

   In the case that the IESG ceases to exist, its successors or
   assignees will take over the tasks given to the IESG in this
   document.

2.3.  Draft IONs

   There is no requirement that an ION will be published as a draft
   before publication.  This will, however, be desirable in many cases,
   and thus, this document describes the properties and procedures for
   handling draft IONs.

   Draft IONs shall have, instead of an approval date and an



Alvestrand              Expires January 27, 2007                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                     ION                         July 2006


   identification of the body that approved it, information about:

   o  The word "DRAFT", prominently displayed

   o  The publication date and time

   o  The approval date of the document it is intended to update (if
      any)

   o  The body that is intended to approve this version

   o  The appropriate forum for discussion of this draft (if any)

2.4.  The ION Store

   All approved IONs are archived, in all their versions, and made
   publicly available from resources operated by the IETF secretariat.
   The store should be reachable by common methods like HTTP and FTP,
   and should offer both easy access to the "current" version of all
   IONs and bulk download of all IONs, all versions.

   This document does not constrain the form of the ION Store, but
   mandates that there be a public one.

   Public draft IONs are published separately from the approved IONs.
   Old versions MAY be published in the draft store, but there's no
   requirement that they remain available indefinitely.  Experience will
   show what the best policy for draft retention is.


3.  Proposed initial IONs

   The following IONs should be created as soon as possible after this
   document is published, to give the details of the maintenance of the
   ION series, in order to bootstrap the process:

   o  The ION Format Guide

   o  The ION Store Description

   The following list of documents, some of which currently exist, are
   examples of documents that could be converted to IONs.  This is not a
   binding recommendation, but gives examples of what IONs can be good
   for.

   o  The I-D publishing procedure





Alvestrand              Expires January 27, 2007                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                     ION                         July 2006


   o  The checklist for I-D submission to the IESG (formerly known as
      id-nits)

   o  Procedures for spam control on IETF mailing lists

   o  Procedures for requesting a WG meeting slot

   o  Procedures for IETF minutes

   o  Procedures for IESG meeting minutes

   Once the ION series is permanent, the existence of the ION series may
   cause the following documents to be split into a "policy and
   principles" BCP and a "procedures and boilerplate" document published
   as ION:

   o  IETF Rights in Documents (currently BCP 78)RFC3978 [RFC3978]

   o  IETF Rights in Technology (currently BCP 79)RFC3979 [RFC3979]

   o  IETF mailing list management (currently RFC3005 [RFC3005], BCP 45,
      RFC3683 [RFC3683], BCP 83, and RFC3934 [RFC3934], BCP 94)

   If someone wishes to do such a split while the experiment is running,
   the BCPs cannot refer to the "procedures" documents as IONs, since
   the concept of an ION may go away.


4.  Success criteria and sunset period

   This experiment is expected to run for a period of 12 months,
   starting from the date of the first ION published using this
   mechanism.  At the end of the period, the IESG should issue a call
   for comments from the community, asking for people to state their
   agreement to one of the following statements (or a suitable
   reformulation thereof):

   1.  This document series has proved useful, and should be made
       permanent

   2.  This document series is less useful than the equivalent
       information in RFCs and informal Web pages, and should be
       abandoned

   3.  We cannot decide yet; the experiment should continue

   The author believes that establishing objective metrics for the
   success or failure of this experiment is not a worthwhile exercise;



Alvestrand              Expires January 27, 2007                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                     ION                         July 2006


   the success or failure will be readily apparent in the community's
   attitudes towards the series.

   If the feedback reveals a community consensus for keeping the series,
   the IESG may choose to create a new BCP RFC containing the
   information herein, suitably modified by experience.

   If the IESG decides that the feedback warrants terminating the
   series, the repository will be closed for new documents, and the
   existing ION documents will be returned to having the same status as
   any other Web page or file on the IETF servers - this situation will
   closely resemble the situation before the experiment started.


5.  Background and motivation

   The IETF is an open organization, which means (among other things)
   that there are always newcomers coming in to learn how to perform
   work; this places a requirement on the organization to document its
   processes and procedures in an accessible manner.

   The IETF is also a large organization, which means that when
   procedures change, there are a number of people who will like to know
   of the change, to figure out what has changed, and possibly to
   protest or appeal the change if they disagree with it.

   At the present time (spring 2006), there are three kinds of documents
   used for IETF documentation of its operations and procedures:

   o  BCP and Info RFCs, which require an IETF consensus call for BCP,
      approval by the IESG, and usually a great deal of debate and
      effort to change, and which bind up editing resources in the final
      edit stage, as well as being limited (in practice) to ASCII.  The
      BCP number forms a means of having a stable reference for new
      versions of a document, but an updated Info RFC has a completely
      different identifier from the RFC that it updates; "updates/
      obsoletes" links can give some of the same information, but can
      also be quite confusing to follow.

   o  Web pages, which can be changed without notice, provide very
      little ability to track changes, and have no formal standing -
      confusion is often seen about who has the right to update them,
      what the process for updating them is, and so on.  It is hard when
      looking at a web page to see whether this is a current procedure,
      a procedure introduced and abandoned, or a draft of a future
      procedure.





Alvestrand              Expires January 27, 2007                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                     ION                         July 2006


   o  "floating" internet-drafts, which are frequently updated, in a
      trackable manner, but have no approval mechanism, are limited (in
      practice) to ASCII format, and whose use as semi-permanent
      documents clutters up their use as 6-month temporary working
      documents.

   This note introduces a new series that seems to fulfil the
   requirements for "something in between":

   o  Unlike RFCs, they can be produced without a post-editing stage,
      they can be in any format the controllers of the series choose
      (allowing web pages with hyperlinks, which is an advantage for
      newcomers).

   o  Also unlike RFCs, they can be produced by any body that the IESG
      gives the right to use the mechanism; this allows certain
      procedures to be updated without having to wait for the IESG
      approval cycle.

   o  Unlike internet-drafts, they have an explicit approval step - this
      allows a reader to easily see the difference between an idea and
      an operational procedure.

   o  Unlike Web pages, there is an explicit mechanism for finding "all
      current versions", and a mechanism for tracking the history of a
      document.

   The "author" attribute has quite deliberately been omitted from the
   required property list.  While there may be many cases where
   identifying an author is a Good Thing, the responsibility for an
   approved ION rests with the approving body.

   Note: This proposal is NOT intended to affect the standards track in
   any way - a side effect may be to reduce the number of "process BCPs"
   emitted, but this has no direct bearing on the IETF's technical
   specifications.  It is therefore not within the scope of the NEWTRK
   working group.


6.  IANA Considerations

   IONs will not include protocol specifications, so IONs will make no
   requests for IANA actions.  IANA will not need to review all IONs.

   This document makes no requests of IANA either.






Alvestrand              Expires January 27, 2007                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                     ION                         July 2006


7.  Security Considerations

   IONs will not include protocol specifications, so shouldn't have much
   need to talk about security the way RFCs do.


8.  Acknowledgements

   Many people have contributed over the years to the ideas that I have
   tried to express here.

   I'm in particular indebted to John Klensin for his work on trying to
   find a balance between formalism and flexibility in the IETF process,
   and for his earlier attempts at creating such a document series as an
   adjunct to the "ISD" effort (draft-klensin-std-repurposing), and for
   his many valuable comments on this document.

   In addition, Dave Crocker, Spencer Dawkins, Jeff Hutzelman, Sam
   Hartman and David Black (gen-ART reviewer) provided valuable comments
   at Last Call time.


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC3933]  Klensin, J. and S. Dawkins, "A Model for IETF Process
              Experiments", BCP 93, RFC 3933, November 2004.

9.2.  Informative References

   [RFC3005]  Harris, S., "IETF Discussion List Charter", BCP 45,
              RFC 3005, November 2000.

   [RFC3683]  Rose, M., "A Practice for Revoking Posting Rights to IETF
              mailing lists", BCP 83, RFC 3683, February 2004.

   [RFC3934]  Wasserman, M., "Updates to RFC 2418 Regarding the
              Management of IETF Mailing Lists", BCP 94, RFC 3934,
              October 2004.

   [RFC3978]  Bradner, S., "IETF Rights in Contributions", BCP 78,
              RFC 3978, March 2005.

   [RFC3979]  Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF
              Technology", BCP 79, RFC 3979, March 2005.





Alvestrand              Expires January 27, 2007                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                     ION                         July 2006


Appendix A.  Change log

   This section should be deleted before publication as an RFC.

A.1.  Changes from version -02 to version -03

   Removed the concept of the IESG approving the ION approvers, and
   listed IAB, IAOC and IESG by name.

   Noted that splitting a BCP into a BCP and an ION is tricky if the ION
   mechanism can go away at the end of the experiment

   Wording changes based on IESG feedback.

A.2.  Changes from version -01 to version -02

   Introduction and section 2 was clarified to say that IONs don't
   override BCPs

   Approval section says that IESG gets to say who decides on an ION
   update if existing body can't do it (text was missing)

   Properties section says that "category" is not considered now, but
   might be considered later

   Updated "background" wording on informational RFCs and stable
   identifiers to hopefully be a little clearer

   Removed reference to 2119.  That language is not used here.

   Removed suggestion to remove section 5; nobody's asked for it

A.3.  Changes from version -00 to version -01

   The name of the document class was changed from IPOD to ION.
















Alvestrand              Expires January 27, 2007               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                     ION                         July 2006


Author's Address

   Harald Tveit Alvestrand
   Google

   Email: harald@alvestrand.no













































Alvestrand              Expires January 27, 2007               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                     ION                         July 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Alvestrand              Expires January 27, 2007               [Page 12]

