

Network Working Group                                      H. Alvestrand
Internet-Draft                                             Cisco Systems
Expires: July 7, 2003                                    January 6, 2003


                            An IESG charter
                        draft-iesg-procedures-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 7, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This memo describes the current operating procedures of the Internet
   Engineering Steering Group (IESG), a management function of the
   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).

   This memo is not intended to become an RFC, but provides information
   to the Internet community, for which the internet-drafts mechanism is
   a convenient distribution veichle

   Discussion of this memo is encouraged on the POISED mailing list
   <poised@lists.tislab.com>





Alvestrand                Expires July 7, 2003                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              An IESG charter                 January 2003


1. Introduction

   This document gives some details of IESG procedure.  It is intended
   as a dynamically changeable document, and is intended to give
   visibility to the current process, not to serve as a template for
   what the process "ought" to be.

1.1 Notational conventions

   The term "standards-track documents" is used to cover internet-drafts
   that are being evaluated by the IESG for publication as Proposed
   Standard, Draft Standard, Standard or Best Current Practice (BCP).
   Not all documents evaluated for the standards track are published as
   such.

   The term "responsible AD" is used to indicate the Area Director that
   is in charge of shepherding a document.  For working group documents,
   this will normally be the AD in charge of the working group; for non-
   WG documents, it will be the AD that is in charge of the IETF
   activity most closely associated with the subject matter of the
   document.

   At times, such as when the AD that would normally be selected is a
   document author, or is adamantly opposed to the document, another AD
   will take on that role.

   All person roles described in this document may at times be filled by
   persons of both sexes.  The English language does not admit a short,
   gender-neutral pronoun describing a person whose sex is not
   determined by context.  In the interest of political incorrectness,
   this document will randomly refer to people as "he" or "she", without
   regard to consistency or appropriateness.



















Alvestrand                Expires July 7, 2003                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              An IESG charter                 January 2003


2. IESG communications

   The IESG is in constant session through its mailing list -
   iesg@ietf.org.  The IESG has a teleconference every second Thursday
   for 2 1/2 hours, which is the place where decisions get reviewed and
   initial IESG consensus is gauged.













































Alvestrand                Expires July 7, 2003                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              An IESG charter                 January 2003


3. IESG decision making

   The IESG attempts to make all its decisions by consensus.

   The normal behaviour expected of an AD is that he/she searches for
   consensus, raises objections if he has them, listens to the arguments
   for and against her objections, and makes an informed decision about
   whether to go along with the consensus of the group, attempt to go
   further in discussing the problem, or recusing himself from the
   action because she has insoluble problems with the issue at hand.

   The details of the search for consensus will differ according to the
   form of action to be taken; see below.






































Alvestrand                Expires July 7, 2003                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              An IESG charter                 January 2003


4. IESG document review procedures

   The IESG review procedure is defined by the IESG, within the limits
   given by the rules (RFC 2026), the WG procedures (RFC xxx)  and the
   IESG Charter.

   The procedure consists of:

   o  An initial review by the responsible AD, assisted by whatever
      reviewers the AD wants to bring to bear.  This may include an IETF
      Last Call, and must include such a call for standards-track
      documents.

   o  Once the responsible AD is satisfied that the document is worth
      sponsoring, a review by the entire IESG

   o  If the IESG has questions or comments, the responsible AD takes
      the token to resolve these with the authors or WG responsible
      before taking the (possibly revised) document back to the IESG for
      re-review.

   The procedure of IESG evaluation is different for standards-track
   documents and non-standards-track documents.

4.1 IESG review of standards-track documents

   For this class of document, each AD is requested to state an opinion.
   The responsible AD MUST register a "yes" vote to the document in
   order to get it on the agenda.  At least 2/3 of the ADs that are not
   recusing themselves must register either "Yes" or "No Objection" in
   order for the document to go out.

   If an AD has an objection to the document (called a DISCUSS opinion),
   this is discussed on the mailing list, and on a telechat.  If the
   IESG comes to consensus that the objection is worth sustaining, the
   responsible AD is tasked with resolving the matter with the working
   group or author.  This may involve an explanation of the group's
   choices, clarification of text in the document, or a reevaluation of
   the choices made.

   Normally, the AD contacts the WG chairs or document authors to
   discuss the issue.

   The IESG tries to get a "token holder" AD for the objection; the
   chosen holder is not necessarily the one who raised the objection,
   but one who the IESG trusts to detect whether the problem is solved
   or not.  When there are multiple, significantly different objections,
   there are often multiple token holders.



Alvestrand                Expires July 7, 2003                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              An IESG charter                 January 2003


   When a document is updated, the responsible AD will notify the token
   holding AD, and he will review the document; it can then either be
   approved instantly (if the responsible AD and token-holding AD agree
   that there are no further problems), or it can be put on the agenda
   for a new telechat.

   The IESG tries to get all objections to a document in a single pass;
   however, this does not always succeed, and at times, resolving some
   issues can cause other problems to surface.  When the working group
   or author takes so long to revise a document that ADs have been
   replaced before the document comes back for re-review, the new eyes
   will often see new problems with the document.

4.2 IESG review of WG non-standards-track RFCs

   For this class of document, there is no requirement that all ADs give
   an opinion on the document.  The call is instead "does anyone have
   any objection to this going forward"; if there is none, the document
   is approved.

   An objection to a document is handled much like that for standards-
   track documents; the shepherding AD takes the issue to the author or
   WG for discussion and clarification.

4.3 IESG review of non-WG, non-standards-track documents

   These documents are referred to the IESG by the RFC Editor.  The IESG
   review is supposed to uncover:

   o  Whether the document should be reviewed by a currently active IETF
      working group

   o  Whether the document is an attempt to end-run the IETF standards
      process

   o  Whether the document is misrepresenting the IETF community view or
      otherwise is actively harmful to the IETF community

   As with all documents, a shepherding AD is assigned, and she is
   responsible for reading the document and deciding whether more review
   outside the IESG is required before going forward.

   In some cases, such as when a document describes IANA considerations
   that require "IETF consensus", the AD may ask for an IETF-wide Last
   Call on the document, in order to notify the community that the
   document is being processed.

   The basic question of whether the document is worth publishing is



Alvestrand                Expires July 7, 2003                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              An IESG charter                 January 2003


   left to the RFC Editor; the IESG will only recommend for or against
   publication.  In some cases, the IESG will ask for a change in the
   title of a document (for instance to insert the name of the
   protocol's owner into the title of a document describing a
   proprietary protocol), or ask for an "IESG Note" clarifying some
   issue (often the relationship of the document to the IETF process) on
   the front page of the document.

4.4 IESG review considerations

   The level of review performed by the IESG varies according to the
   IESG's evaluation of the importance and quality of the document and
   the process that produced it.

   An uncontroversial or unimportant document from a well-behaved
   working group is likely to get a light reading once the responsible
   AD signs off on it; ADs are likely to assume that it is OK, and only
   check quickly that they don't see anything obviously broken in their
   particular area of expertise (such as missing security sections or
   other nits).

   Documents that are regarded as important, or have been controversial,
   are likely to receive more review; the IESG wishes to reassure itself
   that the controversial issues are indeed settled, and not just
   papered over; in the process, the ADs are likely to find more
   "trivial" problems than they would otherwise do, too.

























Alvestrand                Expires July 7, 2003                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              An IESG charter                 January 2003


5. IESG working group management

5.1 Working group creation

   A working group proposal is always worked out between a responsible
   AD and the working group proposers.

   When the responsible AD thinks that a working group charter is a good
   idea, she may send an informal note to the IESG and IAB mailing list
   to get initial feedback; this is often called the "laugh test".

   When the AD thinks that the working group description is ready for
   wider review, the AD sends it to the IESG secretary in order to place
   it on a telechat agenda; the IESG secretary will then send the
   document to the IESG and IAB mailing lists for initial review, with
   copy to the proposed WG chairs.

   If no IESG member objects to the charter, the IESG secretary then
   sends the proposed charter to the IETF-announce list and to the new-
   work list (which is a list maintained for cooperation between
   standards bodies).  The purpose of this posting is to make sure IETF
   members and other SDOs are notified of the impending WG creation, and
   have a chance to raise objections if they want to.

   The charter is placed on the next telechat agenda 2 weeks later, and
   if no IESG member objects at that time, the charter of the new
   working group is approved.

5.2 Working group modification

   When a working group charter is changed, the procedure depends on the
   type of change.

   o  Changes to milestone dates are handled by the chairs notifying the
      IESG secretariat (at ietf-action@ietf.org) and the AD, and the AD
      approving them.

   o  Changes to milestone text are handled by the chairs and the AD
      working out new text, the chairs sending the updates to the IESG
      secretary, and the AD approving them.

   o  Adding, removing and replacing chairs is handled by the AD, who
      notifies the IESG secretary, who updates the charter.

   o  Changes to the body of a charter requires IESG approval.

   When updating the body of a charter, the new charter is sent to the
   IESG secretary, who places it on the IESG telechat agenda; if no IESG



Alvestrand                Expires July 7, 2003                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              An IESG charter                 January 2003


   member objects, the charter is approved.  The IESG has the option of
   sending the revised charter to ietf-announce and new-work for public
   review, and will always do so if substantial new work items are added
   to the task list of the WG.

   When the changed charter is approved, the updated charter is always
   sent to ietf-announce.

5.3 Working group termination

   A working group is terminated when the responsible AD decides that
   the working group needs to be terminated.  This may have multiple
   causes:

   o  The working group is finished with its work, and its RFCs are
      published (success)

   o  The AD concludes that letting the working group continue its work
      does not contribute to the IETF's forward progress (failure)

   A failed working group may be considered failed because the work is
   being done by other groups in the IETF, because the solutions being
   worked on are no longer considered relevant to the IETF, or because
   the group is, in the opinion of the AD, not making forward progress
   on achieving its goals.

   In both cases, the working group may have internet-drafts assigned to
   it that are not published as RFCs; these are then formally
   reclassified as individual submissions, and the next update of these
   documents is required to be named draft-<author>, not draft-ietf-
   <wgname>.

   The closing of a WG has no effect on the status of documents that
   have already been approved by the IESG for publication.

















Alvestrand                Expires July 7, 2003                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              An IESG charter                 January 2003


6. IESG BOF procedures

   Each AD decides which BOFs are appropriate in his area.

   It is regarded as courteous, but not required, to pass the BOF
   description to the IESG and IAB lists for feedback (and detection of
   AD-shopping or end-runs) before approving the BOF.

   Important things to consider when approving a BOF where the desired
   outcome is formation of a WG include:

      Whether or not there is a clearly defined problem statement

      Whether or not there is a likely successful outcome

      Whether or not there is sufficient community interest

   The first two points are most easily answered by having (personal)
   internet-drafts published before the BOF describing the work to be
   done, or proposed solutions to it; the last point is most easily
   demonstrated by having an active, open mailing list for the issue at
   hand.





























Alvestrand                Expires July 7, 2003                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              An IESG charter                 January 2003


7. IESG appeals procedure

   The formal appeals procedure is described in RFC 2026 section 6.5.

   An appeal to the IESG is initiated by email to the IETF Chair, copied
   to the IESG secretary.  If the appeal is not clear about whether or
   not it is an appeal, what is being appealed, or what the proposed
   remedies are, there may be a dialogue between the chair and the
   appealing person(s) to clarify the appeal.

   The IESG will then ask the responsible AD to give her opinion of the
   matter, as evidenced by the previous required step of discussing the
   matter with the responsible AD.

   The IESG will then discuss the matter in a telechat without the IAB
   liaison or the IAB chair being present (in order to keep the
   separation from the responsible body for a possible appeal), and will
   usually assign to some AD (not the responsible AD) the task of
   writing a draft response.

   When the proposed response text is ready, the IESG will discuss it by
   email (using a special mailing list that contains only the IESG
   members), and in a new telechat where the IAB has been asked to
   leave.  When the IESG agrees upon the text, it is sent to the
   appealant and to the ietf-announce list, as well as being archived on
   the IESG's public web pages.


Author's Address

   Harald Tveit Alvestrand
   Cisco Systems
   Weidemanns vei 27
   Trondheim  7043
   NO

   EMail: harald@alvestrand.no














Alvestrand                Expires July 7, 2003                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              An IESG charter                 January 2003


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Alvestrand                Expires July 7, 2003                 [Page 12]

