Internet Engineering Task Force                             Alain Durand
INTERNET-DRAFT                                     SUN Microsystems, Inc
July 5, 2000                                               
Expires January 4, 2001                                 
                                                           
                                                          
                                                                  
                                                           
    
                                                            
    
              MIME TYPE definition for IP in IP tunnels 
            <draft-durand-ngtrans-tunnel-mime-type-00.txt>
    
    
    
    
    
Status of Memo
    
    This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
    all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.
    This document is an Internet-Draft. Internet-Drafts are working
    documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
    and its working groups. Note that other groups may also distribute
    working documents as Internet-Drafts.
    
    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
    at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
    reference material or to cite them other than as
    ``work in progress.''
    
    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
    
    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.
    
Abstract
    
    IP in IP tunnels are very common in the Internet. They are often
    used to deploy new technologies such as multicast or IPv6 when the
    underlying infrastructure is not ready to natively support
    those new protocols. Virtual Private Network are also often build
    using IP in IP tunnels.
    This document describe a MIME type that provide configuration
    information about IP in IP tunnels.
    
    
1. Introduction
    
    Managing IP in IP tunnels can be a complex task and various
    approaches have been developed to assist network administrators.
    In the context of IPv6 transition, the tunnel broker model [BROKER]
    has been developed for that very purpose and highlighted the need
    for a formal description of IPv6 in IPv4 tunnels.
    However, such a description can be made more generic and provide
    information about almost any IP in IP tunnels.
    
2. Related work
    
    [RADTUN] describe tunnel attributes in RADIUS format.
    
    
3. Tunnel management
    
    Tools and/or protocols to do the actual tunnel management are
    out of the scope of this document.
    
    
4. MIME type definition
    
    In conformance with [MIME], the MIME object to describe
    IP in IP tunnels is defined in the IETF tree as a subtype
    of the "Application" MIME type.
    
    The proposed subtype is "tunnel".
    
    The tunnel described by this object is a unidirectional tunnel
    from host src to host dst.
    
    
4.1 Mandatory Parameters
    
4.1.1 Encapsulation type
    
    parameter name: encapsulation-type
    parameter value: Integer
    defined values:
        0 IPv4 in IPv4
        1 IPv6 in IPv4
        2 IPv6 in IPv6
        3 IPv4 in IPv6
    
4.1.2 src exposed IP source address
    
    parameter name: src-exposed
    parameter value: any textual representation of an IPv4 or an IPv6
                     address enclosed in square brackets.
    
    Src exposed source address is the source address in the outer
    header of any packet originated from src through the tunnel.
    
4.1.3 src encapsulated IP source address
    
    parameter name: src-encapsulated
    parameter value: any textual representation of an IPv4 or an IPv6
                     address enclosed in square brackets.
    
    Src encapsulated source address is the source address in the inner
    header of any packet originated from src through the tunnel.
    
4.1.4 dst exposed IP source address
    
    parameter name: dst-exposed
    parameter value: any textual representation of an IPv4 or an IPv6
                     address enclosed in square brackets.
    
    Dst exposed source address is the destination address in the outer
    header of any packet originated from src through the tunnel.
    
4.1.5 dst encapsulated IP source address
    
    parameter name: dst-encapsulated
    parameter value: any textual representation of an IPv4 or an IPv6
                     address enclosed in square brackets.
    
    
    Dst encapsulated source address is the destination address in the
    inner header of any packet originated from src through the tunnel.
    
    
4.2 Optional Parameters
    
4.2.1 Exposed IP addresses lifetime
    
    parameter name: exposed-lifetime
    parameter value: Integer
    
    The lifetime in second of the exposed pair of IP addresses of src
    and dst. A value of zero means infinite lifetime.
    
4.2.2 Encapsulated IP addresses lifetime
    
    parameter name: encapsulated-lifetime
    parameter value: Integer
    
    The lifetime in second of the encapsulated pair of IP addresses
    of src and dst.  A value of zero means infinite lifetime.
    
    
4.2.3 E-mail contact for src
    
    parameter name: src-email 
    parameter value: valid email address, according to [MAIL822].
    
    This is the administrative contact email address for host src.
    The exact semantic of this parameter is beyond the scope of
    this document.
    
4.2.4 E-mail contact for dst
    
    parameter name: dst-email 
    parameter value: valid email address, according to [MAIL822].
    
    This is the administrative contact email address for host dst.
    The exact semantic of this parameter is beyond the scope of
    this document.
    
    
5. IANA registration

    To: ietf-types@iana.org
    Subject: Registration of MIME media type application/tunnel

    MIME media type name: application

    MIME subtype name: tunnel

    Required parameters: encapsulation-type, 
                         src-exposed, src-exposed,
                         dst-exposed, dst-encapsulated

    Optional parameters: exposed-lifetime, encapsulated-lifetime,
                         src-email, dst-email

    Encoding considerations: None

    Security considerations:
    The information contained in this MIME type may be used by
    application to configured tunnel. Inaccurate information can
    introduce all kind of security hazards, thus it is of the utmost
    importance that these information are transferred over a secure
    channel, that their originator is authenticated and that they are
    guaranteed not to be corrupted.

    Interoperability considerations:
    The mandatory parameters are necessary to guarantee interoperability.

    Published specification: none

    Applications which use this media type:
    Tunnel Brokers, tunnel servers,
    tunnel clients, any database storing tunnel information.

    Additional information:

      Magic number(s): none
      File extension(s): none
      Macintosh File Type Code(s): none

    Person & email address to contact for further information:

    Alain Durand
    Alain.Durand@sun.com

    Intended usage: COMMON

    Author/Change controller: Alain.Durand@sun.com



6. Security Considerations

    The information contained in this MIME type may be used by
    application to configured tunnel. Inaccurate information can
    introduce all kind of security hazards, thus it is of the utmost
    importance that these information are transferred over a secure
    channel, that their originator is authenticated and that they are
    guaranteed not to be corrupted. The exact procedure/protocols to be
    used for this purpose is out of the scope of this document.
       
    
    
7. References
    
[BROKER] Durand, A., Fasano, P., Guardini, I., Lento, D.,
         IPv6 Tunnel Broker,
         draft-ietf-ngtrans-broker-03.txt, work in progress

[MIME]   Freed, N., Borenstein, N.,
         "Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions
         (MIME) Part four: MIME registration procedure, RFC 2048,
         November 1996.

[RADTUN] Zorn, G., Leifer, D., Rubens, A., Shriver, J., Holdrege, M.,
         Goyret, I., RADIUS Attributes for Tunnel Protocol Support,
         RFC2868, June 2000.

[MAIL822] Crocker, D.,
          Standard for the format of ARPA Internet text messages,
          RFC822, August 1982.
    
    
8. Author's addresses
    
    Alain Durand
    SUN Microsystems, Inc
    901 San Antonio Road
    MPK17-202
    Palo Alto, CA 94303-4900
    USA
    Tel: +1 650 786 7503
    Mail: Alain.Durand@sun.com

