


Network Working Group                                         L. Dondeti
Internet-Draft                                              V. Narayanan
Intended status: Standards Track                          QUALCOMM, Inc.
Expires: April 19, 2007                                 October 16, 2006


          EAP Keying and Re-authentication in Visited Domains
                        draft-dondeti-eap-vkh-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 19, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document specifies a visited domain key hierarchy derived from
   the extended master session key (EMSK) from EAP to facilitate visited
   domain key management for various purposes including fast handovers
   and visited domain services.  The visited domain key hierarchy avoids
   the latency associated with communicating with the home domain as in
   case of a full EAP method run or even in a single round trip as with
   the EAP efficient reauthentication scheme, and that is especially
   desirable when the protocol is in the critical path of a handover.



Dondeti & Narayanan      Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                   EAP VKH                    October 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Overview of Visited Domain Keying  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  EMSK Hierarchy for Visited Domains . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     4.1.  VRK Derivation and Properties  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.2.  VMSK Derivation and Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       4.2.1.  VMSK Establishment and Delivery  . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Intra-Visited Domain Re-authentication Keying Hierarchy  . . . 11
     5.1.  V-rRK Derivation and Properties  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     5.2.  V-rRK Usage and Derived Keys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   8.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 15































Dondeti & Narayanan      Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                   EAP VKH                    October 2006


1.  Introduction

   The extensible authentication protocol (EAP) specified in [1]
   requires the peer to authenticate to an EAP server located typically
   in the peer's home domain.  The authentication process may involve
   several roundtrips in case of a full EAP authentication, or a single
   roundtrip in case of the EAP efficient reauthentication (EAP-ER) [2]
   protocol.  When the EAP peer is roaming in a visited domain, even a
   single roundtrip to the home domain is often unacceptable, especially
   when the EAP authentication needs to take place in the critical path
   of a handover.

   To avoid the need to revisit the home network each time an EAP peer
   moves to a new EAP authenticator within a visited domain, a visited
   domain keying hierarchy (V-KH) for re-authentication is specified in
   this document.  Corresponding to this hierarchy, the EAP-ER protocol
   operation to support fast handovers with the availability of the V-KH
   is also specified.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [3].

   This document uses terminology defined in [1].  In addition, this
   document uses the following terms:

   Visited Domain

      A domain that an EAP peer may attach to while roaming.  This
      domain is different from the domain that hosts the EAP server with
      which the peer shares credentials.

   Visited Root Key (VRK)

      This is the Usage Specific Root Key derived from the EMSK for
      visited domain keying purposes.  Specific visited domain session
      keys for various visited domains are derived from the VRK.

   Visited Domain Master Session Key (VMSK)

      The VMSK is derived from the VRK for a given visited domain to
      serve as the master key for services within that visited domain.
      This document only defines EAP efficient re-authentication service
      within the visited domain.




Dondeti & Narayanan      Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                   EAP VKH                    October 2006


3.  Overview of Visited Domain Keying

   The idea behind visited domain keying is that an EAP peer, after
   completion of at least one full EAP exchange with its home domain EAP
   server, can re-authenticate within the visited network by running an
   EAP-ER exchange with a visited domain EAP-ER server.  This process
   does require the visited domain to host an EAP-ER server that
   supports the V-KH and EAP-ER - however, it does not require that the
   visited domain server support any EAP methods.  Given that EAP-ER is
   method agnostic, it works well with the visited domain support
   concept.  The EAP peer still only has to support methods that its
   home domain EAP server supports.  As long as the peer supports the
   V-KH and EAP-ER, it will be able to perform EAP-ER within a visited
   domain that supports EAP-ER.

   Either during a full EAP exchange or during an EAP-ER bootstrap
   exchange as specified in [2], a visited domain EAP-ER server may
   request keying material for the peer from the home domain EAP server
   performing the EAP authentication with the peer.  The visited domain
   key request message is sent in a AAA attribute to the AAA server,
   which is then relayed to the EAP layer.  The home EAP server will
   derive a VMSK (Visited domain Master Session Key) specific to the
   requesting domain and provide it in a AAA attribute back to the
   requesting visited domain EAP-ER server.  In order to preserve the
   stateless nature of the visited domain servers, it would be feasible
   to provide this key, along with other parameters such as lifetimes
   and authorization information to the peer in the form of a ticket
   that can later be presented to the visited domain EAP-ER server.
   This mechanism will be specified in a later version of this document.
   Along with the VMSK, the server MUST send a lifetime and may send
   authorization and other policy information pertinent to the peer.
   The standardization of any AAA attributes needed to accomplish this
   exchange is outside the scope of this document itself and will be
   done separately.


4.  EMSK Hierarchy for Visited Domains














Dondeti & Narayanan      Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                   EAP VKH                    October 2006


              EMSK
               |
  +------------+-------------+
  |            |             |
 rRK          VRK   ...    USRKn
               |
     +---------+---------+
     |                   |
   VMSK1      ...      VMSKn


* VMSKx is the root key for the key hierarchy of a given visited domain X


                  Figure 1: VMSK derivation from the EMSK

   The above figure shows the EMSK keying hierarchy as defined in [4].
   The re-authentication Root Key (rRK) shown is defined in [2] for the
   purpose of EAP re-authentication with the home domain.  In many
   cases, this may be the same server with which the peer executed a
   full EAP exchange.  This document defines another USRK called Visited
   domain Root Key (VRK).  The VRK is then used to derive a specific
   VMSK, which is given to an EAP-ER server in a particular visited
   domain.

4.1.  VRK Derivation and Properties

   The VRK is derived from the EMSK using the prf+ operation defined in
   RFC4306 [5] as follows.

   VRK = prf+ (K, S), where,

      K = EMSK and

      S = VRK Label

   The VRK Label is an IANA-assigned ASCII string "EAP Visited domain
   Root Key" assigned from the USRK Key Label name space in accordance
   with [4].  This document specifies IANA registration for the VRK
   label above.

   The PRF used may be specified in the EAP Re-authentication message,
   as described in [2].  When that is not available, the default PRF to
   be used is HMAC-SHA-256.

   Along with the VRK, a unique VRK name is derived to identify the VRK.

   The VRK name is derived as follows.



Dondeti & Narayanan      Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                   EAP VKH                    October 2006


   VRK_name = NDF-64( EAP Session-ID, VRK Label )

   where NDF-64 is the first 64 bits from the output of the name
   derivation function (NDF).  The NDF is a hash function, currently
   specified as SHA-256.  The EAP Session-ID MUST be of the EAP session
   corresponding to the EMSK used in the derivation of the VRK.

   The VRK has the following properties.

   o  The length of the VRK MUST at least be 64 bytes.

   o  The VRK is to be used only as a root key for the derivation of
      specific VMSKs corresponding to different visited domains and MUST
      NOT be used to directly protect any data.

   o  The VRK is only used for derivation of VMSKs as specified in this
      document.

   o  The VRK must remain on the peer and the server and MUST NOT be
      transported to any other entity.

   o  The VRK is cryptographically separate from any other USRK derived
      from the EMSK.

   o  The lifetime of the VRK is the same as that of the EMSK.  The VRK
      is expired when the EMSK expires and removed from use at that
      time.

   o  If a new EMSK is derived due to a full EAP exchange, a new VRK
      from that EMSK must be derived for the purpose of subsequent VMSK
      derivations.  The new VRK MUST replace an existing VRK derived
      from a previous EMSK.

4.2.  VMSK Derivation and Properties

   The VMSK is derived from the VRK using the prf+ operation defined in
   RFC4306 [5] as follows.

   VMSK = prf+ (K, S), where,

      K = VRK and

      S = Server ID || Domain Name

   The server ID is the identity of the server requesting the VMSK.
   This should be included as a AAA attribute along with the AAA message
   carrying the EAP message requesting the VMSK.  The server ID may
   typically be the FQDN of the server.  In the event that state would



Dondeti & Narayanan      Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                   EAP VKH                    October 2006


   be replicated on more than one visited domain server, the server ID
   could be a wildcard.  The domain name is the realm of the visited
   domain requesting the VMSK.  When the server ID is an FQDN, the realm
   would already be part of that and having a separate domain name is
   redundant.  However, when other types of server IDs are allowed, it
   is important to have the domain name specified separately.  For sake
   of consistency, the domain name is always specified as above,
   irrespective of the nature of the server ID.

   The PRF used may be specified in the EAP Re-authentication message,
   as described in [2].  When that is not available, the default PRF to
   be used is HMAC-SHA-256.

   Along with the VMSK, a unique VMSK name is derived to identify the
   VMSK.

   The VMSK name is derived as follows.

   VMSK_name = NDF-64( EAP Session-ID, Server ID || Domain Name )

   where NDF-64 is the first 64 bits from the output of the name
   derivation function (NDF).  The NDF is a hash function, currently
   specified as SHA-256.  The EAP Session-ID is the session-id of the
   full EAP exchange used to derive the corresponding EMSK used as the
   parent key.

   The VMSK has the following properties.

   o  The length of the VMSK MUST at least be 64 bytes.

   o  The VMSK is to be used only as a root key for the derivation of
      specific keys for visited domain services such as re-
      authentication within the visited domain and MUST NOT be used to
      directly protect any data.

   o  The VMSK is used for derivation of the V-rRKs as specified in this
      document.  The VMSK may be used for derivation of other visited
      domain keys - it is outside the scope of this document to specify
      such keys.

   o  The VMSK MUST NOT be transported to any entity other than the one
      requesting it.  The VMSK scope must be clearly defined.  The VMSK
      MUST NOT be used for any purpose other than what is authorized by
      the server deriving and distributing the key.

   o  A given VMSK is cryptographically separate from any other VMSK
      derived from the VRK.




Dondeti & Narayanan      Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                   EAP VKH                    October 2006


   o  The lifetime of the VMSK MUST NOT be greater than the lifetime of
      the VRK.  The associated lifetime of the VMSK must be transported
      along with the VMSK to the entity requesting it.  By default, the
      lifetime of the VMSK is the same as that of the VRK and the EMSK.
      The VMSK MUST be removed from use when the lifetime expires.

   o  The VMSK and the keys derived from it have limited applicability
      and have a specific lifetime.  These keys are used to derive other
      keys to provide proof of having participated in an EAP
      conversation or having received the keys from an entity that
      participated in the EAP conversation.  No other uses are allowed
      as per this specification.  Such key scoping is important to
      disallow misuse of the keys which might result in compromise of
      security sessions established using those keys.

   o  If a new VRK is derived due to a full EAP exchange, a new VMSK
      from that EMSK SHOULD be derived to replace a VMSK that is in use
      from the previous EAP exchange.

4.2.1.  VMSK Establishment and Delivery

   A given VMSK is derived by the home EAP server upon request from a
   visited domain.  This section specifies the establishment and
   transport of the VMSK and associated parameters.

   A visited domain AAA server may request a VMSK in the EAP Response
   Identity sent by the peer.  Alternately, it may request for a VMSK in
   the EAP Re-auth Initiate message sent by the peer, in accordance with
   [2].  If there is an EAP Re-auth Initiate message from the peer, a
   visited domain server that supports VMSKs MUST include a request for
   VMSK in the EAP Re-auth Initiate message, even if it had already
   included the request in the EAP Response Identity message
   corresponding to that peer earlier.  This is so that the home server
   can send the corresponding parameters to the peer in the EAP Re-auth
   Finish message.  Further, note that the visited domain entities will
   typically be unaware if a VMSK has already been obtained for that
   particular peer earlier, as the peer ID may not be available to the
   visited domain entities during the EAP exchange.

   The home EAP server, upon receiving a request for VMSK, based on
   authorization information for the peer, SHOULD provide a VMSK to the
   requesting server.  The VMSK may be provided along with the EAP
   Success message or with the EAP Re-auth Finish message.  Along with
   the VMSK, the server MAY also provide relevant authorization policy.
   When provided with the EAP Re-authentication Finish, the server MUST
   also provide the relevant server IDs and visited domain information
   for the peer.  Specifically, the server MUST provide the visited
   domain name to the peer.  It MAY provide one or more server IDs to



Dondeti & Narayanan      Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                   EAP VKH                    October 2006


   the peer - for e.g., its own server ID and the requesting visited
   domain server ID.  When the VMSK is provided to the requesting entity
   along with the EAP Success message, it is assumed that the peer
   obtains the information relevant for computing the VMSK via the lower
   layer.  Such mechanisms are out of scope of this document.

   Based on the information in the EAP Re-auth Finish message, the peer
   would be able to derive the VMSK and associated keys for re-
   authentication in the visited domain.  Upon handoff to an EAP
   authenticator within the same domain, the peer SHOULD use the V-rIK
   to send an EAP Re-authentication Initiate message to the visited
   domain EAP-ER server in accordance with [2].

4.2.1.1.  Peer Considerations

   The EAP peer, while attached to an authenticator in the visited
   domain, may or may not be aware of the domain it is attached to.  If
   the peer is aware, for instance, via lower layer advertisements, of
   the domain it is attached to, it may be aware that the visited domain
   supports VMSKs or not.  Further, it may also receive the visited
   domain EAP-ER server ID via the lower layer or it may be aware via
   configuration that the server ID can be a wildcard.  In such cases,
   the peer may never need to send an EAP Re-auth Initiate message with
   the Bootstrap flag set for the purpose of receiving VMSK related
   parameters.  It may still send an EAP Re-auth Initiate message with
   the Bootstrap flag to retrieve some parameters for the home domain,
   in accordance with [2].

   A peer that supports EAP-ER, in accordance with [2], MAY send an EAP
   Re-auth Initiate message with the Bootstrap flag set, immediately
   following a full EAP exchange.  In response to this, if it receives
   an EAP Re-auth Finish message from the server, it MUST process it in
   accordance with [2].  In addition, it MUST check if the message
   contained a visited domain server ID and a visited domain name.  If
   it does, the peer MUST compute the VMSK using that information.  If
   the message contained a visited domain name, but no visited server
   ID, the peer MUST use a wildcard entry as the server ID.  If the
   message contained a temporary peer ID to use within the visited
   domain, the peer MUST use that in a subsequent EAP re-auth initiate
   message sent within that visited domain.  If not, the peer SHOULD use
   the V-rIKName as its ID in the visited domain.  The V-rIKName
   appended with the visited domain name will provide the NAI to use as
   the peer ID in the EAP Re-auth Initiate message.

   Once a VMSK and subsequent keys for visited domain EAP re-
   authentication are available, the peer MUST process EAP Re-
   authentication messages in accordance with [2], even though it may be
   executed with the visited domain.



Dondeti & Narayanan      Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                   EAP VKH                    October 2006


4.2.1.2.  Authenticator Considerations

   An authenticator that is compliant with [2] may advertise the
   presence of a visited domain EAP-ER server in the lower layer to the
   peer.  The authenticator has no special considerations for VMSK
   support and is transparent to whether the EAP-ER exchange occurs with
   the visited domain or the home domain for a given peer.

4.2.1.3.  Visited Domain EAP-ER Server Considerations

   The visited domain server MAY request a VMSK in an EAP Response
   Identity message sent by a peer through an authenticator in the
   visited domain.  Alternately, it MAY request a VMSK in the EAP Re-
   auth Initiate message from the peer.  If the request for VMSK was
   sent in the EAP Response Identity message, the server MUST retrieve
   the VMSK from the AAA message carrying the EAP Success message.  If
   the result is an EAP failure, no state for that peer must be
   established in the visited domain.  If the request for VMSK was sent
   in the EAP Re-auth Initiate message, the visited domain server MUST
   retrieve the VMSK in the AAA message carrying the EAP Re-auth Finish
   message.

   If the visited EAP-ER server obtains a VMSK, it MUST derive a V-rRK
   and a V-rIK from it.  It may then serve as the EAP-ER server for
   subsequent EAP Re-authentication messages from the peer.

   The AAA attributes needed for the VMSK request and delivery are not
   defined in this document.  These will be specified in a separate
   document.

4.2.1.4.  Home EAP Server Considerations

   Upon receiving a request for a VMSK from the visited EAP-ER server,
   the home EAP server SHOULD check if the message contains the server
   ID and the domain name of the visited server.  If so, the home EAP
   server SHOULD derive a VMSK and provide it to the requesting visited
   EAP-ER server.  If the request was sent along with an EAP Response
   Identity message, the key MUST be provided in the EAP Success
   message.  If the request was sent along with an EAP Re-auth Initiate
   message, the key MUST be provided in the EAP Re-auth Finish message.

   After transporting the VMSK, the home EAP server MUST delete the VMSK
   immediately.  The VMSK MUST be securely transported from the home EAP
   server to the requesting visited EAP-ER server.  If the visited
   server ID is unavailable or if the visited EAP-ER server is not
   specifically indicated, the server ID in the VMSK Label could be
   considered a wildcard.  In this case, the message with the VMSK will
   be routed via normal AAA routing and it is assumed that there is



Dondeti & Narayanan      Expires April 19, 2007                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                   EAP VKH                    October 2006


   backend duplication of keying material in the visited domain.  The
   visited domain name and the appropriate server ID MUST be provided to
   the peer in an EAP Re-auth Finish message, if the server received an
   EAP Re-auth Initiate message that triggered the derivation of a VMSK.


5.  Intra-Visited Domain Re-authentication Keying Hierarchy


                VMSK
                  |
                V-rRK
                  |
       +----------+---------------+
       |          |               |
    V-rIK     V-rMSK1   ...    V-rMSKn


                  Figure 2: Visited Domain Key Hierarchy

   The above figure shows a V-KH for re-authentication purposes.  A
   Visited domain Master Session Key (VMSK) is at the top of the
   hierarchy.  A visited domain re-authentication root key (V-rRK) is
   derived from the VMSK.  The V-rRK hierarchy is identical to the rRK
   hierarchy for EAP-ER with the home domain; the exception here is that
   the scope of these keys is the visited domain that owns the VMSK.
   Other keys may be derived from the VMSK - however, such keys are out
   of scope of this document.

5.1.  V-rRK Derivation and Properties

   This document defines the derivation of a Visited domain re-
   authentication Root Key (V-rRK) from the VMSK.  This key is identical
   in purpose to the rRK defined in [2].

   The V-rRK is derived from the VMSK using the prf+ operation defined
   in RFC4306 [5] as follows.

   rRK = prf+ (K, S), where,

      K = VMSK and

      S = rRK Label

   The rRK Label is an IANA-assigned ASCII string "EAP Re-authentication
   Root Key" as specified in [2].

   The PRF used is specified in the EAP Re-authentication Response.  The



Dondeti & Narayanan      Expires April 19, 2007                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                   EAP VKH                    October 2006


   default PRF used is HMAC-SHA-256.

   The V-rRK has the following properties.

   o  The V-rRK MUST be 64 octets in length.

   o  The V-rRK is to be used only as a root key for re-authentication
      within the visited domain and never used to directly protect any
      data.

   o  The V-rRK is only used for derivation of V-rIK and V-rMSK as
      specified in this document.

   o  The rRK must remain on the peer and the server deriving it and
      MUST NOT be transported to any other entity.

   o  The V-rRK is cryptographically separate from any other key derived
      from the VMSK.

   o  The lifetime of the V-rRK is the same as that of the VMSK.  The
      V-rRK is expired when the VMSK expires and removed from use at
      that time.

   o  If a new VMSK is available for the visited domain, a new V-rRK
      from that VMSK must be derived for the purpose of subsequent
      EAP-ER exchanges in the visited domain.  The new V-rRK MUST
      replace an existing V-rRK derived from a previous VMSK.

5.2.  V-rRK Usage and Derived Keys

   The V-rRK is used within the visited domain in exactly the same
   manner as the rRK defined in [2].  The scope of all the derived keys,
   however, is limited to the visited domain to which the server
   belongs.


6.  Security Considerations

   All the security considerations stated in [2] are also applicable for
   this document.  In addition, scope of the VMSK MUST be restricted to
   the visited domain to which the VMSK is provided.  Further, when a
   non-wildcard visited domain server ID is used to compute the VMSK the
   scope of the VMSK MUST be limited to the particular visited EAP-ER
   server to which the key is provided.  The VMSK MUST remain on the
   peer and the visited domain EAP-ER server and MUST NOT be transported
   to any other entity, including other visited domain EAP-ER servers.

   The keys defined by this document must adhere to the properties and



Dondeti & Narayanan      Expires April 19, 2007                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                   EAP VKH                    October 2006


   requirements stated here: A VMSK MUST NOT be used after expiry of its
   lifetime.  When a new VMSK is available, the old VMSK MUST be
   replaced by the new one and the old key MUST NOT be used to compute
   any subsequent child keys.

   The VMSK MUST be securely transported from the EAP server to the
   visited domain entity requesting it.  The visited domain entity MUST
   be authorized to receive such a key and perform re-authentication for
   the EAP peer.  Authorization may be based on policies and such a
   process itself is outside the scope of this document.


7.  IANA Considerations

   TBD


8.  Acknowledgments

   We would like to thank, in alphabetical order, Bernard Aboba, Parag
   Agashe, Paul Bender, Sam Hartman, Russ Housley, Joe Salowey, George
   Tsirtsis, Fatih Ulupinar, Michaela Vanderveen, and Jun Wang for
   several useful discussions and reviews of the contents of this
   document.


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Aboba, B., Blunk, L., Vollbrecht, J., Carlson, J., and H.
        Levkowetz, "Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP)", RFC 3748,
        June 2004.

   [2]  Narayanan, V. and L. Dondeti, "EAP Extensions for Efficient Re-
        authentication", draft-vidya-eap-er-00 (work in progress),
        June 2006.

   [3]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [4]  Salowey, J., "Specification for the Derivation of Usage Specific
        Root Keys (USRK) from an  Extended Master Session Key (EMSK)",
        draft-salowey-eap-emsk-deriv-01 (work in progress), June 2006.

   [5]  Kaufman, C., "Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2) Protocol", RFC 4306,
        December 2005.




Dondeti & Narayanan      Expires April 19, 2007                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                   EAP VKH                    October 2006


   [6]  Aboba, B., "Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) Key
        Management Framework", draft-ietf-eap-keying-14 (work in
        progress), June 2006.

9.2.  Informative References

   [7]  Housley, R. and B. Aboba, "Guidance for AAA Key Management",
        draft-housley-aaa-key-mgmt-04 (work in progress), October 2006.

   [8]  Narayanan, V. and L. Dondeti, "Gap analysis on the EAP keying
        hierarchy", draft-vidya-eap-keying-gap-analysis-00 (work in
        progress), April 2006.

   [9]  Dondeti, L. and V. Narayanan, "EAP Extensions Problem
        Statement", draft-dondeti-eapext-ps-00 (work in progress),
        June 2006.


Authors' Addresses

   Lakshminath Dondeti
   QUALCOMM, Inc.
   5775 Morehouse Dr
   San Diego, CA
   USA

   Phone: +1 858-845-1267
   Email: ldondeti@qualcomm.com


   Vidya Narayanan
   QUALCOMM, Inc.
   5775 Morehouse Dr
   San Diego, CA
   USA

   Phone: +1 858-845-2483
   Email: vidyan@qualcomm.com













Dondeti & Narayanan      Expires April 19, 2007                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                   EAP VKH                    October 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Dondeti & Narayanan      Expires April 19, 2007                [Page 15]


