 



INTERNET-DRAFT: SFC working group                                 L. Zhu
Intended Status: Informational                       Huawei Technologies
Expires: 2 January 2016                                      3 July 2015


                      Issues to SFC OAM Framework 
                 draft-zhu-sfc-oam-architectual-issues-00


Abstract

   This document is motivated to illustrate SFC OAM issues from
   framework perspective. This document contains the problems,
   requirements and framework issues to support operation and management
   in SFC architecture. These SFC OAM framework considerations are
   applicable for vitalization platform.


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html


Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
 


L. Zhu                  Expires  January 2, 2016                [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT        Issues to SFC OAM Framework           July 3, 2015


   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Table of Contents

   1  Background  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Issues and Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3. Issues and Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   6  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     6.1  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     6.2  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7



























 


L. Zhu                  Expires  January 2, 2016                [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT        Issues to SFC OAM Architecture        July 3, 2015


1  Background

   The delivery of end-to-end services often requires various service
   functions. Service Function Chaining (SFC) enables the creation of
   composite services that consist of an ordered set of Service
   Functions (SF) that are applied to packets and/or frames selected as
   a result of classification. Service Function Chaining is a concept
   that provides for more than just the application of an ordered set of
   SFs to selected traffic; rather, it describes a method for deploying
   SFs in a way that enables dynamic ordering and topological
   independence of those SFs.	

   The specification of architecture of SFC in a network is referenced
   to Service Function Chaining (SFC) Architecture,in [SFC ARC]. The SFC
   architecture would be considered to run over physical sets of service
   functions, or, abstract set of service functions.

   The exemplary use case for SFC architecture is illustrated in [mobile
   use case]. The application domain of SFC mobile use case is the joint
   network services of mobile core network, including PGW and policy
   provision aspect, and Gi-LAN in a mobile network applied SFC
   framework and protocol for IETF SFC WG.

   Vitalization is desirable to behave a vitalization technology to
   support scalability of service functions. Vitalization also applies
   the common platform of compute, storage and network as hardware
   platform which is commonly desirable for 3rd party vendor from SFs
   suppliers. The maintenance elements to a service function are
   composited of configuration, operation and management. The operation
   and management in SFC architecture is the subject in this document,
   which is to illustrate the issues to SFC OAM and the possible
   architectural issues to a SFC framework. This document should not
   target to address all detail of SFC OAM issues, as SFC architecture
   would include SFC components (e.g. Traffic Classification, Service
   Function, and Service Forwarding Function etc), management elements
   of a Service Function and supportive underlying networking functions.
   

1.1  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

   SFC terminologies are defined in [SFC ARC].

   SFC OAM: SFC Operation, Administration and Maintenance. A group SFC
   functions of  management functions that provide fault detection,
 


L. Zhu                  Expires  January 2, 2016                [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT        Issues to SFC OAM Architecture        July 3, 2015


   fault localization,  performance information, and data and diagnosis
   functions. Management objects of SFC OAM are SFC, SFP, SFC policy.

   SFC OAM entity: data plane SFC OAM functions for execution of fault
   detection, fault localization and performance information notice.

2.  Issues and Requirements

   SFC OAM (Operation Administration and Maintenance) should provide
   relevant functions and features to enable SFC architecture for
   purpose of fault detection and localization, SFC functional behavior
   information, performance information and diagnosis approaches in SFC
   architecture. Based on SFC architecture with scoped SFC components,
   the SFC OAM involves SFF, SF, SFC, SFP and Classifier.

   The framework of SFC OAM shall support OAM functions for service
   functions. The fault detection, performance monitoring and recovery
   functions are out of scope of this document. The framework of SFC OAM
   shall support OAM functions for service function chaining and service
   forwarding path. OAM function for SFC shall support fault detection
   and failure trace in a SFC and a SFP. OAM function for SFC in data
   plane shall support fault and performance information notification to
   OAM entity in control plane. OAM function for SFC in data plane and
   control plane shall support provisioning of SFC OAM configuration to
   SFC OAM entities, e.g. SFC Classifier.

   The following requirements are outlined for SFC OAM from
   architectural perspective. Functional requirements:

   1. SFC OAM shall support SFC OAM control entity and data plane OAM
   functions.

   2. SFC OAM data plane function shall involve SFC Classifier, SFF, and
   may involve SFs.

   3. SFC OAM data plane function shall support service forwarding path
   validation.

   4. SFC OAM data plane function shall support service function
   chaining validation.

   5. SFC OAM data plane function should support SFC performance, fault
   detection (e.g. occurs of SFC failure).

   6. SFC OAM data plane function shall support SFC OAM packages with
   enough information (e.g. OAM flag, SFF identifier, SFC identifier and
   performance information) collected for OAM uses, which can be
   forwarded in a service forwarding path.
 


L. Zhu                  Expires  January 2, 2016                [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT        Issues to SFC OAM Architecture        July 3, 2015


   7. SFC SF should bypass SFC OAM package once received.

   8. SFC OAM framework shall support a control entity, for purposes of
   collection OAM notification, provisioning OAM information to SFC OAM
   function in data plane.

   9. SFC control entity shall support to enable SFC OAM localization
   action in SFC OAM data plane.

   10. SFC OAM control entity shall support validation of SFC rule
   provisioning rules.

   11. SFC OAM framework shall reuse existing OAM protocol for
   forwarding planes (e.g. link and network layer), for SFC OAM uses.

   12. SFC OAM framework shall allow OAM functions to support back
   compatibility to existing OAM methods (e.g. ICMP) in forwarding
   plane, which are in scope of SFC architecture.


3. SFC OAM Architectural Issues 

   SFC OAM should be compliance with SFC architecture, which composites
   of multiple layers for application layer, SF forwarding layer,
   networking layer, and of components for service function, service
   forwarding function, classifier as functional entities in SFC
   architecture.

   SF, SFF (Service Function Forwarding) and Classifier are SFC entities
   in SFC architecture. The application layer as top part of SFC
   architecture would apply application layer management and service
   assurance to SFC(s). This document references and respects current
   application management aspect for legacy management manner for SFC.
   For example, management for firewall and media processor in a Gi-LAN
   use case in mobile network as what described in [Mobile Use Case].
   Furthermore, service functions running over vitalization platform are
   desirable for operators in this context of document, which management
   manner would evolve with vitalization management since service
   assurance would likely rely on combined analysis for service related
   alarm and virtual resource failure information, finally rely on
   service decision to switch forwarding path in SFC or any other
   failure handling process in that management logic. SFC OAM shall not
   handle those service function management for service assurance in
   this document. 

   SFF (Service Function Forwarders) and Classifier are specified to
   functionality of SFC data plane functions. Classifier would match SFC
   rules to provisioned SFPs, support function of SFC data plane
 


L. Zhu                  Expires  January 2, 2016                [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT        Issues to SFC OAM Architecture        July 3, 2015


   encapsulation and forwarding function. Service function forwarding is
   responsible for forwarding packets to connected service functions
   according to information carried in the SFC encapsulation. Service
   function forwarding will handle packet coming back from the service
   function, and including necessary forwarding plane information for
   OAM. Forwarding plane information is assumed to support record
   performance related information as an addition to service function
   forwarder identifiers. The metadata and encapsulation support in SFC
   forwarding layer is out of scope of this document. Once traffic is
   forwarded in SFC domain, SFC classifier shall include SFC
   encapsulation in packet including enough information for service
   function forwarder(s). 

   The SFC OAM control entity is responsible to provision OAM actions of
   reporting data plane OAM results. SFC OAM control entity is also to
   enable SFC OAM actions to validate SFC or SFP. SFC OAM architecture
   shall include north bound interface between SFC data plan OAM
   entities and SFC OAM control entity. Information element, description
   language (e.g. YANG modeling based language) shall be described in
   other document(s).

   Other layers in SFC architecture:

   1)Link layer entity and networking layer are also necessary parts to
   support SFC architecture, for forwarding proper packets to SFFs and
   further service functions. Link layer OAM actions for networking
   service assurance should be supported by link layer administration
   domain. SFC classifier and service function forwarders may be
   provisioned to schedule link layer OAM actions. The SFC OAM control
   entity should support enable link layer OAM actions in SFC
   architecture.

   2)SFC OAM control entity might also support OAM information report to
   higher layer OAM entity from SFC domain to vitalization platform
   management aspect. The interface and protocol to vitalization
   platform management aspect is out of scope of SFC OAM.



4  Security Considerations

   TBD.


5  IANA Considerations

   New SFC OAM metadata would be specified and needs IANA registration.

 


L. Zhu                  Expires  January 2, 2016                [Page 6]

INTERNET DRAFT        Issues to SFC OAM Architecture        July 3, 2015


6  References

6.1  Normative References

   [KEYWORDS] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.



6.2  Informative References

   [SFC ARC]  Halpern, J., "Service Function Chaining (SFC)
              Architecture", https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-sfc-
              architecture-09, June 7, 2015.

   [Mobile Use Case]  Haeffner, W., "Service Function Chaining Use Cases
              in Mobile Networks", https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-
              ietf-sfc-use-case-mobility-03, January 13, 2015.






Authors' Addresses


   L. Zhu
   Address: Huawei Building,No. 3, Xinxi Road, Haidian District
   E-mail address: Lei.zhu@huawei.com

