


SIPPING Working Group                                          A. Monrad
Internet-Draft                                                 S. Loreto
Intended status: Informational                                  Ericsson
Expires: December 8, 2008                                   Jun 06, 2008


     A Uniform Resource Name (URN) Namespace for the 3rd Generation
                       Partnership Project (3GPP)
             draft-monrad-sipping-3gpp-urn-namespace-03.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 8, 2008.

Abstract

   This document describes the Namespace Identifier (NID) for Uniform
   Resource Namespace (URN) resources published by the 3rd Generation
   Partnership Project (3GPP). 3GPP defines and manages resources that
   utilize this URN name model.  Management activities for these and
   other resource types are provided by the 3GPP Support Team.









Monrad & Loreto         Expires December 8, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           URN Namespace for 3GPP                 Jun 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  URN Specification for the 3GPP Namespace Identifier (NID) . . . 3
   3.  Examples  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Namespace Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Community Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   8.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 8







































Monrad & Loreto         Expires December 8, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           URN Namespace for 3GPP                 Jun 2008


1.  Introduction

   3GPP is a cooperation of international telecommunication standards
   bodies developing technologies for cellular networks.  This activity
   is supported by a membership composed of network operators, equipment
   vendors, content providers, and other suppliers to the mobile market.

   Some of the technologies being developed by 3GPP need URN namespaces
   that are managed so that they are unique and persistent.  To assure
   that the uniqueness is absolute, the registration of a specific NID
   for use by 3GPP was deemed appropriate.  Therefore, a full and
   complete registration will follow the namespace specification process
   as defined in RFC 3406 [RFC3406].


2.  URN Specification for the 3GPP Namespace Identifier (NID)

   Namespace ID:

         The NID "3gpp" is requested.

   Registration Information:

         registration version number: 1
         registration date:           2007-11-16

   Declared registrant of the namespace:

         Registering organization
            Name:    3rd Generation Partnership Project
            Address: ETSI
                     Mobile Competence Centre
                     650, route des Luciole
                     06921 Sophia-Antipolis Cedex
                     France

         Designated contact
            Role:    Specifications Manager
            Email:   john.meredith@etsi.org


   Declaration of syntactic structure:

      The Namespace Specific String (NSS) of all URNs that use the
      "3gpp" NID will have the following structure:

            urn:3gpp:{3gpp-urn}




Monrad & Loreto         Expires December 8, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           URN Namespace for 3GPP                 Jun 2008


      where the "3gpp-urn" is a US-ASCII string that conforms to the
      NSS(Namespace Specific String) Syntax described in RFC2141
      [RFC2141] and defines a specific resource type.

   Relevant ancillary documentation:

      3GPP provides information on registration for each URN.  More
      information about 3GPP and the registration activities and
      procedures to be followed are available at:

            http://www.3gpp.org/tb/Other/URN/URN.htm

   Identifier uniqueness considerations:

      3GPP will manage resources using the "3gpp" NID and will be the
      authority for managing the "3gpp-urn" strings.  In the associated
      procedures, 3GPP will ensure the uniqueness of the strings
      themselves or shall permit secondary responsibility for management
      of well-defined sub-trees.

      3GPP may permit use of experimental type values that will not be
      registered.  As a consequence, multiple users may end up using the
      same value for separate uses.  As experimental usage is only
      intended for testing purposes, this should not be a real issue.

   Identifier persistence considerations:

      3GPP will provide clear documentation of the registered uses of
      the "3gpp" NID.  This will be structured such that each "3gpp-
      urn", if needed, will have a separate description and registration
      table.

      The registration tables and information will be published and
      maintained by 3GPP on its web site.

   Process of identifier assignment:

      3GPP will provide procedures for registration of each type of
      resource that it maintains.  Each such resource may have three
      types of registration activities:

      1.  Registered values associated with 3GPP spec or services
      2.  Registration of values or sub-trees to other entities
      3.  Name models for use in experimental purposes

   New Namespace Identifier (NID) labels





Monrad & Loreto         Expires December 8, 2008                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           URN Namespace for 3GPP                 Jun 2008


      The Entries in the registration table will be the following:

        3gpp-urn:    the registered value;
        Description: description of the registered vaulue;
        Reference:   3GPP spec that defines the value;
        Contact:     person requesting the URN assignment.

   Process for identifier resolution:

      The namespace is not listed with a Resolution Discovery System
      (RDS); as this is not relevant.

   Rules for Lexical Equivalence:

      No special considerations; the rules for lexical equivalence of
      RFC 2141 [RFC2141] apply.

   Conformance with URN Syntax:

      No special considerations.

   Validation mechanism:

      None specified.  URN assignment will be handled by procedures
      supported and maintained by 3GPP.

   Scope:

      Global


3.  Examples

   The following examples are representative urns that could be assigned
   by 3GPP.  They are not actual strings that are assigned.

   urn:3gpp:featurephones

      Defines the "3gpp-urn" to be used for "featurephones".

   urn:3gpp:acme.foo-serv

      Defines the urn associated with the operator identified by the
      "3gpp-urn" value "acme", which has decided to register and provide
      information about its service identified by value "foo-serv".






Monrad & Loreto         Expires December 8, 2008                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           URN Namespace for 3GPP                 Jun 2008


4.  Namespace Considerations

   The 3rd Generation Partnership Project is developing a variety of
   enablers and applications.  Some of these require information to be
   fully specified.

   For proper operation, descriptions of the needed information must
   exist For the URNs and be available in a unique, reliable, and
   persistent manner.

   As 3GPP is ongoing and covers many technical areas, the possibility
   of binding to various other namespace repositories has been deemed
   impractical.  Each object or description, as defined in 3GPP, could
   possibly be related to multiple different other namespaces, so
   further conflicts of association could occur.  Thus the intent is to
   utilize the 3GPP specifications manager as the naming authority for
   3GPP-defined URNs and its descriptions.


5.  Community Considerations

   The objects and descriptions required for enablers produced by 3GPP
   are generally available for use by other organizations.  The 3rd
   Generation Partnership Project Support Office will provide access and
   support for name requests by these organizations.  This support can
   be enabled in a timely and responsive fashion as new objects and
   descriptions are produced.


6.  Security Considerations

   There are no additional security considerations other than those
   normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general.


7.  IANA Considerations

   This section register a new URN NID with the registration provided in
   Section 2.

   The update can be found at:
   http://www.iana.org/assignments/urn-namespaces and any associated
   mirrors.

   "3gpp-urn" strings are identified by label managed by 3GPP.  Thus,
   creating a new label does not require any IANA action.





Monrad & Loreto         Expires December 8, 2008                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           URN Namespace for 3GPP                 Jun 2008


8.  Normative References

   [RFC3406]  Daigle, L., van Gulik, D., Iannella, R., and P. Faltstrom,
              "Uniform Resource Names (URN) Namespace Definition
              Mechanisms", BCP 66, RFC 3406, October 2002.

   [RFC2141]  Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997.


Authors' Addresses

   Atle Monrad
   Ericsson
   Televeien 1
   Grimstad  4898
   Norway

   Email: atle.monrad@ericsson.com


   Salvatore Loreto
   Ericsson
   Hirsalantie 11
   Jorvas  02420
   Finland

   Email: Salvatore.Loreto@ericsson.com
























Monrad & Loreto         Expires December 8, 2008                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           URN Namespace for 3GPP                 Jun 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Monrad & Loreto         Expires December 8, 2008                [Page 8]


