



SACM Working Group                                           H. Birkholz
Internet-Draft                                            Fraunhofer SIT
Intended status: Standards Track                           N. Cam-Winget
Expires: October 10, 2016                                  Cisco Systems
                                                           April 8, 2016


                         SACM Information Model
               draft-camwinget-sacm-information-model-00

Abstract

   ***replaces abstract in WG IM*** This document defines the
   information model for Security Automation and Continuous Monitoring
   (SACM).  This includes the definition of information elements
   transported between SACM components (data in motion) and how to
   express their relationships.  This information model is maintained as
   the IANA "SACM Information Elements" registry.  The information model
   captures the information needs described in the use cases defined by
   SACM.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 10, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Requirements notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Information Elements (IE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  Context of Information Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.2.  Extensibility of Information Elements . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Structure of Information Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     4.1.  Atomic Information Elements (AIE) . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.2.  Composite Information Elements (CIE)  . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.3.  SACM Statements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.4.  SACM Content Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.5.  Relationship Types  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.6.  Events  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5.  Information Element Vocabulary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.1.  Vocabulary of Categories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     5.2.  Vocabulary of Atomic Information Elements . . . . . . . .   8
     5.3.  Vocabulary of Composite Information Elements  . . . . . .  21
   6.  Example composition of SACM statements  . . . . . . . . . . .  30
   7.  IANA considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
   9.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
   10. Change Log  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
   11. Contributors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
   12. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
     12.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
     12.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  33
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  33

1.  Introduction

   ***replaces Introduction in the WG IM*** The purpose of the SACM
   Information Model (IM) is to ensure interoperability between SACM
   data models that are used as transport encoding and to provide a base
   set of information elements that may be exposed or shared between
   SACM components in a scalable and extensible fashion.  A complete set
   of requirements imposed on the IM can be found in
   [I-D.ietf-sacm-requirements].  The SACM IM defines information
   elements that are required to carry out the tasks conducted by SACM
   components.  The SACM IM itself is intended to be used for data
   exchange between SACM components (data in motion).  Nevertheless, the
   information elements defined in this document can be leveraged to
   create and align corresponding data models for data at rest.



Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


   The information model expresses, for example, target endpoint (TE)
   attributes, guidance or evaluation results.  The corresponding
   information elements (IE) are consumed and produced by SACM
   components as they carry out tasks.

   The primary tasks that this information model supports (on data,
   control and management plane) are:

   o  TE Discovery

   o  TE Characterization

   o  TE Classification

   o  Collection

   o  Evaluation

   o  Information Sharing

   o  SACM Component Discovery

   o  SACM component Authentication

   o  SACM component Authorization

   o  SACM component Registration

2.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC
   2119, BCP 14 [RFC2119].

3.  Information Elements (IE)

   **to be inserted between section 2 and section 3** Every type or
   group of information, e.g. the information elements, defined in this
   document represent subjects transported (data in motion) between SACM
   components and are associated with a unique label in the information
   model: their name.  This document defines a set of information
   elements standardized by SACM.








Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


3.1.  Context of Information Elements

   The IE in this information model represent information related to the
   following areas (based on the use cases described in [RFC7632]):

   o  Endpoint Management

   o  Software Inventory Management

   o  Hardware Inventory Management

   o  Configuration Management

   o  Vulnerability Management

3.2.  Extensibility of Information Elements

   A SACM data model based on this information model MAY include
   additional information elements that are not defined here.  The
   labels of additional information elements included in different SACM
   data models MUST NOT conflict with the labels of the information
   elements defined by this information model, and the names of
   additional information elements MUST NOT conflict with each other or
   across multiple data models.  In order to avoid naming conflicts, the
   labels of additional IEs SHOULD be prefixed to avoid collision across
   extensions.  The prefix MUST include an organizational identifier and
   therefore, for example, MAY be an IANA enterprise number, a (partial)
   name space URI or an organization name abbreviation.

4.  Structure of Information Elements

   **replaces beginning text of Information Model Framework and 3.1-3.4,
   will move syntax 3.1.1 and 3.2.1 to aggregated sub-section, will also
   privacy sub-section 3.5 and label sub-section 3.6** The IEs defined
   in this document are differentiated into two basic types of
   Information Elements:

   o  Attributes: an attribute is the simplest IE structure comprised of
      a unique attribute name and an attribute value (attributes are
      listed in Section 5.2).

   o  Subjects: a subject is a richer structure that has a unique
      subject name and one or more attributes or subjects (subjects are
      listed in Section 5.3).  In essence, the instance of a subject is
      defined by the attribute values associated with it.

   Metadata is constructed as a subject and is associated with
   attributes or subjects to provide additional information about them.



Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


   The IM explicitly defines two specific kinds of metadata: metadata
   about the data origin and metadata about the data source.  Metadata
   can include relationships that refer to other attributes or subjects
   by referencing labels included in their corresponding metadata.

4.1.  Atomic Information Elements (AIE)

   **to be salvaged an then removed** Atomic IEs represent the smallest
   building blocks for SACM content, including, for example, a SACM
   endpoint attribute, a policy entry, a configuration item, an expected
   states, or a threshold value.  AIE can be bundled into composite IE.
   The set of AIEs defined by the SACM IM is described in section
   Section 5.2.

   In essence, AIEs are attribute value pairs that constitute the
   "leaves" in a SACM semantic structure.  While the SACM IM sometimes
   does elaborate on the structure of values (e.g. an IPv6 address is an
   octet string with a maximum length of 16 that my be collapsed in
   certain conditions), it does not prescribe specific types used in the
   data model representation (e.g. an unbounded character string).

   Every AIE is registered as an corresponding entry at the IANA
   registry.  The Integer Index of the IANA SMI number tables can be
   used by SACM data models.

4.2.  Composite Information Elements (CIE)

   **to be salvaged an then removed** Composite IEs constitute bundles
   of atomic AIEs and/or composite IEs.  A CIE represents a specific set
   of related information that share a semantic relationship, e.g. a
   SACM statement metadata or state information about a network
   interface.  The set of CIEs defined by the SACM IM is described in
   section Section 5.3.  In essence, CIEs are a "named container"
   construct that can be used to compose additional CIEs that go beyond
   the ones standardized by the SACM information model.

   The SACM IM allows for recursive or circular nesting of composite
   IEs.  A SACM data Model (DM) MUST include the "default-depth" base
   AIE that is part of the SACM content metadata.

4.3.  SACM Statements

   **to be salvaged an then removed** The data exchanged between SACM
   components is always embedded in a SACM statement.  SACM Statements
   contain one or more CIEs and/or AIEs.  A SACM statement functions as
   an "envelope" type that is associated with metadata about the
   providing SACM component.  The SACM statement metadata can be used to




Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


   resolve conflicting information, retrace the provenance of
   information or to locate archived information in data repositories.

   Examples of SACM statement metadata information elements:

   o  SACM Domain Identifier: a globally unique identifier that enables
      the differentiation of SACM statements across SACM domains.

   o  Data Origin: the SACM domain unique identifier associated with a
      SACM component.

   o  Statement Identifier: an identifier that enables to uniquely
      reference this specific statement.

   SACM statements are comprised of one or more CIEs; Section 6 provides
   examples for constructing SACM statements.

4.4.  SACM Content Elements

   **to be salvaged an then removed** SACM Content Elements are
   categorized CIEs.  The content elements can be composed of one or
   more AIEs and/or CIEs or it can be another representation that is
   embedded in the statement, for example, an IPFIX Template Record.
   Each SACM content element has its own Content Metadata associated
   with it (analogously to the way that each SACM statement has metadata
   associated to it).  Content element metadata include information
   about its type, data source (the result produced by a collector) or
   data origin (the result produced by most other SACM components).

   Examples of SACM content element metadata information elements:

   o  Target Endpoint Label: an identifier that enables to distinctly
      identify a target endpoint as a SACM content element.

   o  Relationship Identifier(s): a set of semantic relationships that
      associate this SACM content element with other SACM content
      elements via their content element identifier.

   o  Content Element Identifier: an identifier that enables to uniquely
      reference this specific content element.

   SACM content elements are described in section FIXME.

4.5.  Relationship Types

   **to be salvaged an then removed** Relationships are expressed via
   AIE contained within a CIE.  There are two ways SACM content elements
   are associated with each other.  "A Flow" associated with "A User",



Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


   for example, would be a typical case, in which two separate SACM
   content elements could be associated with each other.

   One way is to include the Relationships AIE in the content element
   metadata that preludes the actual content (in this example, the
   content element metadata of the flow record).  Relationship Types are
   uni-directional.  For example, the "is-associated-with-user"
   Relationship AIE included in the content element metadata points to a
   specific user via a corresponding content element identifier.

   The alternative way is to include the reference of associated
   information directly into the content of the content element.  A
   session CIE, for instance, could refer to a specific user by
   including identifying attributes about that user.  While this is a
   valid way of creating a relationship between different kinds of
   content, it requires careful matching or the introduction of another
   appropriate identifier mechanism (that does not conflict with other
   SACM statements and SACM content element identifiers).  If a SACM
   data model allows for transport of other representations as payload
   of a content element (e.g. a pcap fragment containing suspicious
   packets, for example), there might be no alternative as to use the
   content element metadata to include relationships to other content
   elements.

4.6.  Events

   **to be salvaged an then removed** Events are a specific type of CIE
   that are always associated with a time stamp and represent a change
   of state or configuration that can be expressed as a SACM content.
   The time an event was published by a SACM component is recorded in
   its corresponding SACM statement metadata, the time it was created
   (or initially observed) is recorded in its content element metadata.
   It is also recorded in the CIE itself, which is somewhat redundant
   but can improve performance in some scenarios.  Event CIE can also
   include the past state or configuration before the change occurred,
   or - if applicable - a threshold or trigger condition that lead to
   the creation of the event.

5.  Information Element Vocabulary

   **to be inserted in section 5 as candidates** The vocabulary of
   Information Element names standardized by the SACM IM does not
   prescribe the use of these exact same names in every SACM data model.
   If terms diverge, a mapping has to be provided in the corresponding
   SACM data model document.

   A subset of the names of the information elements defined in this
   document are appended with "-type".  This indicates that the IM



Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


   defines a set of values for these information elements (e.g. the
   interface types defined by the IANA registry or the relationship
   types).

5.1.  Vocabulary of Categories

   Categories are special Information Elements that enable to refer to
   multiple types of IEs via just one name.  Therefore, they are similar
   to a type-choice.  A prominent example of a category is network-
   address.  Network-address is a category that every kind of network
   address is associated with, e.g. mac-address, ipv4-address,
   ipv6-address, or typed-network-address.  If a CIE includes network-
   address as one of its components, any of that categories members is
   valid to be used in its stead.

   Another prominent example is EndpointIdentifier.  Some IEs can be
   used to identify (and over time re-recognize) target endpoints -
   those are associated with the category endpoint-identifier.

   content:  this is a very broad category.  Content is the payload of a
      content element in a SACM statement.  Formally, metadata is the
      complement to content and everything that is not part of SACM
      statement metadata or content element metadata is therefore
      considered to be content.  Every IE can be content (although the
      same type of IE can be used in the metadata at the same time - and
      those would not be content as described before).  Annotating every
      IE with this category would be highly redundant and is therefore
      omitted for brevity.

   network-address: (work-in-progress)

      ipv4-address

      ipv6-address

      mac-address

   endpoint-identifier: (work-in-progress)

   software-component: (work-in-progress)

   software-label: (work-in-progress)

5.2.  Vocabulary of Atomic Information Elements

   **to be inserted in section 5 as candidates** The content of every
   Atomic Information Element is expressed in a single value.  Note that




Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


   while this section lists AIEs, some of them may also be represented
   as a CIE (especially if metadata is used).

   access-privilege-type:  a set of types that represents access
      privileges (e.g. read, write, none)

      References: none

   account-name:  a label that uniquely identifies an account that can
      require some form of (user) authentication to access

      References: none

   administrative-domain:  a label the is supposed to uniquely identify
      an administrative domain

      References [IFMAP]

   address-association-type:  a set of types that defines the type of
      address associations (e.g. broadcast-domain-member-list, ip-
      subnet-member-list, ip-mac, shared-backhaul-interface, etc.)

      References: none

   address-mask-value:  a value that expresses a generic address
      subnetting bitmask

   address-type:  a set of types that specifies the type of address that
      is expressed in an address CIE (e.g. ethernet, modbus, zigbee)

      References: none

   address-value:  a value that expresses a generic network address

      References: none

      Category: network-address

   application-component:  a label that references a "sub"-application
      that is part of the application (e.g. an add-on, a cipher-suite, a
      library)

      References: [SWID]

      Category: software-component

   application-label:  a label that is supposed to uniquely reference an
      application



Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


      References: [SWID]

      Category: software-label

   application-type:  a set of types (FIXME maybe a finite set is not
      realistic here - value not enumerator?) that identifies the type
      of (user-space) application (e.g. text-editor, policy-editor,
      service-client, service-server, calendar, rouge-like RPG)

      References: [SWID]

      Category: software-type

   application-manufacturer:  the name of the vendor that created the
      application

      References: [SWID]

      Category: software-manufacturer

   application-name:  a value that represents the name of an application
      given by the manufacturer

      References: [SWID]

   application-version:  a version string that identifies a specific
      version of an application

      References: [SWID]

      Category: software-version

   authenticator:  a label that references a SACM component that can
      authenticate target endpoints (can be used in a target-endpoint
      CIE to express that the target endpoint was authenticated by that
      SACM component)

      References: none

   attribute-name:  a value that can express the attribute name of
      generic Attribute-Value-Pair CIE

      References: none

   attribute-value:  a value that can express the attribute value of
      generic Attribute-Value-Pair CIE

      References: none



Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


   authentication-type:  a set of types that expresses which type of
      authentication was used to enable a network interaction/connection

      References: [PXGRID]

   birthdate:  a label for the registered day of birth of a natural
      person (e.g. the date of birth of a person as an ISO date string
      http://rs.tdwg.org/ontology/voc/Person#birthdate)

      References: [SCAP-AI]

   bytes-received:  a value that represents a number of octets received
      on a network interface

      Reference : [PXGRID]

   bytes-sent:  a value that represents a number of octets sent on a
      network interface

      Reference : [PXGRID]

   certificate:  a value that expresses a certificate that can be
      collected from a target endpoint

      References: none

      Category: endpoint-identifier

   collection-task-type:  a set of types that defines how collected SACM
      content was acquired (e.g. network-observation, remote-
      acquisition, self-reported)

      Reference: none

   confidence:  a representation of the subjective probability that the
      assessed value is correct.  If no confidence value is given it is
      assumed that the confidence is 1 (limits confidence values to the
      range between zero and one)

      References: [ARF]

   content-action:  a set of types that expresses a type of action (e.g.
      add, delete, update).  Can be associated, for instance, with an
      event CIE or with an network observation

      References: [ARF]





Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


   content-elements:  a value that represents the number of content-
      elements included in a SACM statement

      References: none

   content-topic:  a set of types that defines what kind of concept the
      information is included in a content element (e.g.  Session, User,
      Interface, PostureProfile, Flow, PostureAssessment,
      TargetEndpoint)

      References: none

   content-type:  a set of types that defines what kind of information
      is included in a content element (e.g.  EndpointConfiguration,
      EndpointState, DirectoryEntry, Event, Incident)

      References: none

   country-code:  a set of types according to ISO 3166-1 trigraphic
      codes of countries

      References: FIXME

   data-origin:  a label that uniquely identifies a SACM component in
      and across SACM domains

      References: none

      Aliases: sacm-component-id

   data-source:  a label that is supposed to uniquely identify the data
      source (e.g. a target endpoint or sensor) that provided an initial
      endpoint attribute record

      References: [ARF]

      Aliases: te-id (work-in-progress)

   decimal-fraction-denominator:  a denominator value to express a
      decimal fraction time stamp (e.g. in timestamp)

      References: none

   decimal-fraction-numerator:  a numerator value to express a decimal
      fraction time stamp (e.g. in timestamp)






Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


   default-depth:  a value that expresses how often a circular reference
      of CIE is allowed to repeat, or how deep a recursive nesting may
      occur, respectively.

      References: none

   discoverer:  a label that refers to the SACM component that
      discovered a target endpoint (can be used in a target-endpoint CIE
      to express, for example, that the target endpoint was
      authenticated by that SACM component)

      References: none

   email-address:  a value that expresses an email-address

      References: none

   event-type:  a set of types that define the categories of an event
      (e.g. access-level-change, change-of-privilege, change-of-
      authorization, environmental-event, or provisioning-event)

      Reference: none

   event-threshold:  if applicable, a value that can be included in an
      event CIE to indicate what numeric threshold value was crossed to
      trigger that event

      Reference: none

   event-threshold-name:  if an event is created due to a crossed
      threshold, the threshold might have a name associated with it that
      can be expressed via this value

      References: none

   event-trigger:  this value is used to express more complex trigger
      conditions that may cause the creation of an event.

   firmware-id:  a label that represents the BIOS or firmware ID of a
      specific target endpoint

      Reference: none

      Category: endpoint-identifier

   hardware-serial-number:  a value that identifies a piece of hardware
      that is a component of a composite target endpoint (in essence,




Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


      every target endpoint is a composite) and can be acquired from a
      target endpoint by a collection task

      Reference: none

      Category: endpoint-identifier

   host-name:  a label typically associated with an endpoint but not
      always intended to be unique in a given scope

      References [ARF], [SCAP-AI]

      Category: endpoint-identifier

   interface-label:  a unique label a network interface can be
      referenced with

      Reference: none

   ipv6-address-subnet-mask-cidrnot:  an IPv6 subnet bit mask in CIDR
      notation

      References: TBD

   ipv6-address-value:  an IPv4 address value

      References: TBD

      Category: endpoint-identifier, network-address

   ipv4-address-subnet-mask-cidrnot:  an IPv4 subnet bit mask in CIDR
      notation

      References: TBD

   ipv4-address-subnet-mask:  an IPv4 subnet mask

      References: TBD

   ipv4-address-value:  an IPv4 address value

      References: TBD

      Category: endpoint-identifier, network-address

   layer2-interface-type:  a set of types referenced by IANA ifType

      References: [RFC3635], [RFC2863]



Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


   layer4-port-address:  a layer 4 port address (typically used, for
      example, with TCP and UDP)

      References: none

      Category: network-address

   layer4-protocol:  a set of types that express a layer 4 protocol
      (e.g.  UDP or TCP)

   location-name:  a value that represents a named region of space FIXME

      References: [IFMAP], [ARF], [SCAP-AI]

   mac-address:  a value that expresses an Ethernet address

      References: [IFMAP], [ARF], [SCAP-AI]

      Category: endpoint-identifier, network-address

   method-label:  a label that references a specific method registered
      and used in a SACM domain (e.g. method to match and re-identify
      target endpoints via identifying attributes)

      References: none

   method-repository:  a label that references a SACM component methods
      can be registered at and that can provide guidance in the form of
      registered methods to other SACM components

      References: none

   network-access-level-type:  a set of types that expresses categories
      of network access-levels (e.g. block, quarantine, etc.)

      References: [IFMAP]

   network-id:  most networks, such as AS, an OSBF domains, or vlans,
      can have an ID that is represented via this AIE

      References: none

   network-interface-name:  a label that uniquely identifies an
      interface associated with a distinguishable endpoint

      References: FIXME





Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


   network-layer:  a set of layers that express the specific network
      layer an interface operate on (typically layer 2-4)

      References: FIXME

   network-name:  a label that is associated with a network.  Some
      networks, for example effective layer2-broadcast-domains, are
      difficult to "grasp" and therefore quite complicated to name

      References: none

   organization-id:  a label that is supposed to uniquely identify an
      organization

      References: [ARF]

   organization-name:  a value that represents the name of an
      organization

      References: [ARF]

   os-component:  a label that references a "sub-component" that is part
      of the operating system (e.g. a kernel module, microcode, or ACPI
      table)

      References: [SWID]

      Category: software-component

   os-label:  a label that references a specific version of an operating
      system, including patches and hotfixes

      References: [SWID]

      Category: software-label

   os-manufacturer:  the name of the manufacturer of an operating system

      References: [IFMAP]

      Category: software-manufacturer

   os-name:  the name of an operating system

      References: [IFMAP]

      Category: software-name




Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


   os-type:  a set of types that identifies the type of an operating
      system (e.g. real-time, security-enhanced, consumer, server)

      References: none

      Category: software-type

   os-version:  a value that represents the version of an operating-
      system

      Category: software-version

   patch-id:  a label the uniquely identifies a specific software patch

      References: [ARF]

   patch-name:  the vendor's name of a software patch

      References: [ARF], [SWID]

   person-first-name:  the first name of a natural person

      References: [ARF], [SCAP-AI]

   person-last-name:  the last name of a natural person

      References: [ARF], [SCAP-AI]

   person-middle-name:  the first name of a natural person

      References: [ARF], [SCAP-AI]

   phone-number:  a label that expresses the u.s. national phone number
      (e.g. pattern value="((\d{3}) )?\d{3}-\d{4}")

      References: [ARF], [SCAP-AI]

   phone-number-type:  a set of types that express the type of a phone
      number (e.g.  DSN, Fax, Home, Mobile, Pager, Secure, Unsecure,
      Work, Other)

      References: [ARF]

   privilege-name:  the attribute-name of the privilege represented as
      an AVP

      References: none




Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


   privilege-value:  the value-content of the privilege represented as
      an AVP

      References: none

   protocol:  a set of types that defines specific protocols above layer
      4 (e.g. http, https, dns, ipp, or unknown)

      References: none

   public-key:  the value of a public key (regardless of its method of
      creation, crypto-system, or signature scheme) that can be
      collected from a target endpoint

      Reference: none

      Category: endpoint-identifier

   relationship-content-element-guid:  a reference to a specific content
      element used in a relationship CIE

      References: none

   relationship-statement-guid:  a reference to a specific SACM
      statement used in a relationship CIE

      References: none

   relationship-object-label:  a reference to a specific label used in
      content (e.g. a te-label or a user-id).  This reference is
      typically used if matching content AIE can be done efficiently and
      can also be included in addition to a relationship-content-
      element-guid reference.

      References: none

   relationship-type:  a set of types that is in every instance of a
      relationship CIE to highlight what kind of relationship exists
      between the CIE the relationship is included in (e.g.
      associated_with_user, applies_to_session, seen_on_interface,
      associated_with_flow, contains_virtual_device)

      References: none

   role-name:  a label that references a collection of privileges
      assigned to a specific entity (identity?  FIXME)

      References: FIXME



Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


   session-state-type:  a set of types a discernible session (an ongoing
      network interaction) can be in (e.g.  Authenticating,
      Authenticated, Postured, Started, Disconnected)

      References: [PXGRID]

   statement-guid:  a label that expresses a global unique ID
      referencing a specific SACM statement that was produced by a SACM
      component

      References: none

   statement-type:  a set of types that define the type of content that
      is included in a SACM statement (e.g.  Observation,
      DirectoryContent, Correlation, Assessment, Guidance)

      References: none

   status:  a set of types that defines possible result values for a
      finding in general (e.g. true, false, error, unknown, not
      applicable, not evaluated)

      References: [ARF]

   sub-administrative-domain:  a label for related child domains an
      administrative domain can be composed of (used in the CIE
      administrative-domain)

      References: none

   sub-interface-label:  a unique label a sub network interface (e.g. a
      tagged vlan on a trunk) can be referenced with

      References: none

   super-administrative-domain:  a label for related parent domains an
      administrative domain is part of (used in the CIE administrative-
      domain)

      References: none

   super-interface-label:  a unique label a super network interface
      (e.g. a physical interface a tunnel interface terminates on) can
      be referenced with

      References: none





Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


   te-assessment-state:  a set of types that defines the state of
      assessment of a target-endpoint (e.g. in-discovery, discovered,
      in-classification, classified, in-assessment, assessed)

      References: [ARF]

   te-label:  an identifying label created from a set of identifying
      attributes used to reference a specific target endpoint

      References: none

   te-id:  an identifying label that is created randomly, is supposed to
      be unique, and used to reference a specific target endpoint

      References: [ARF], [SWID]

      Aliases: data-source

   timestamp:  a timestamp the expresses a specific point in time

      References: [IFMAP], [ARF]

   timestamp-type:  a set of types that express what type of action or
      event happened at that point of time (e.g. discovered, classified,
      collected, published).  Can be included in a generic timestamp CIE

      References: none

   units-received:  a value that represents a number of units (e.g.
      frames, packets, cells or segments) received on a network
      interface

      Reference : [PXGRID]

   units-sent:  a value that represents a number of units (e.g. frames,
      packets, cells or segments) sent on a network interface

      Reference : [PXGRID]

   username:  a part of the credentials required to access an account
      that can be collected from a target endpoint

      References: none

      Category: endpoint-identifier

   user-directory:  a label that identifies a specific type of user-
      directory (e.g. ldap, active-directory, local-user)



Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


      Reference: [PXGRID]

   user-id:  a label that references a specific user known in a SACM
      domain

      References: [PXGRID]

   web-site:  a URI that references a web-site

      References: [ARF]

   WGS84-longitude:  a label that represents WGS 84 rev 2004 longitude

      References: [SCAP-AI]

   WGS84-latitude:  a label that represents WGS 84 rev 2004 latitude

      References: [SCAP-AI]

   WGS84-altitude:  a label that represents WGS 84 rev 2004 altitude

      References: [SCAP-AI]

5.3.  Vocabulary of Composite Information Elements

   **to be inserted in section 5 as candidates** The content of every
   Composite Information Element is expressed by the mandatory and
   optional IE it can be composed of.  The components of an CIE can have
   a cardinality associated with them:

   o  (*): zero to unbounded occurrences

   o  (+): one to unbounded occurrences

   o  (?): zero or one occurrence

   o  (n*m): between n and m occurrences

   o  no cardinality: one occurrence

   If there is no cardinality highlighted or the cardinality (+) or
   (n*m) is used, including this IE in the CIE is mandatory.  In
   contrast, optional IE are expressed via the cardinality (?) or (*).
   An CIE can prescribe a strict sequence to the component IE it
   contains.  This in indicated by an (s).

   address-association (s):  some addresses are associated with each
      other, e.g. a mac-address can be associated with a number of IP



Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 21]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


      addresses or a sensor address can be associated with the external
      address of its two redundant IP gateways.  The first address is
      the address a number of addresses with the same type is associated
      with.  An address type SHOULD be included and the addresses
      associated with the first address entry MUST be of the same type.
      NANCY FIXME

      address

      address-type (?)

      address (+)

      address-type (?)

   administrative-domain:  this CIE is intended to express more complex
      setups of interconnected administrative domains

      administrative-domain

      sub-administrative-domain (*)

      super-administrative-domain (?)

      location (?)

   application:  an application is software that is not part of the
      kernel space (therefore typically runs in the user space.  An
      application can depend on specific running party of an operating
      system.

      application-label (?)

      application-name

      application-type (*)

      application-component (*)

      application-manufacturer (?)

      application-version (?)

   application-instance:  a specific instance of an application that is
      installed on an endpoint.  The application-label is used to refer
      to corresponding information stored in an application CIE

      application-label



Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 22]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


      target-endpoint

   attribute-value-pair:  a generic CIE that is used to express various
      AVP (e.g.  Radius Attributes)

      attribute-name

      attribute-value

   content-creation-timestamp:  a decimal fraction timestamp that
      specifies the point in time the content element was created by a
      SACM component

      decimal-fraction-denominator

      decimal-fraction-numerator

   content-element:  content produced by a SACM component is
      encapsulated in content-elements that also include content-
      metadata regarding that content

      content-metadata (+)

      content (+)

   content-metadata:  metadata regarding the content included in a
      specific content-element.  The content the metadata annotates can
      be initially collected content - in this case a data-source has to
      be included in the metadata.  Content can also be the product of a
      SACM component (e.g. an evaluator), which requires a data-origin
      IE instead that references the producer of information.

      content-element-guid

      content-creation-timestamp

      content-topic

      content-type

      data-source (?)

      data-origin (?)

      relationship (*)

   data-source:  a CIE that refers to a target endpoint that is the
      source of SACM content - either via a label (data-source, which



Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 23]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


      could also be used without this CIE), or via a list of endpoint-
      identifiers (category).  Both can be included at the same time but
      MUST NOT conflict.

      data-source (?)

      endpoint-identifier (*)

   dst-flow-element:  identifies the destination of a flow.  The port
      number SHOULD be included if the network-address is an IP-address.

      network-address

      layer4-port-address (?)

   ethernet-interface:  the only two mandatory component of this CIE is
      the mac-address and the generated label (to distinguish non-unique
      addresses).  This acknowledges the fact that in many cases this is
      the only information available about an Ethernet interface.  If
      there is more detail information available it MUST be included to
      avoid ambiguity and to increase the usefulness for consumer of
      information.  The exception are sub-interface-labels and super-
      interface-labels, which SHOULD be included.

      interface-label

      network-interface-name (?)

      mac-address

      network-name (?)

      network-id (?)

      layer2-interface-type (?)

      sub-interface-label (*)

      super-interface-label (*)

   event (s):  this a special purpose CIE that represents the change of
      content.  As with content-elements basically every content can be
      included in the two content entries.  The mandatory content entry
      represents the "after" state of the content and the optional
      content entry can represent the "before" state if available or
      required.

      event-type (?)



Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 24]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


      event-threshold (?)

      event-threshold-name (?)

      event-trigger (?)

      typed-timestamp

      content

      content (?)

   flow-record:  a composite that expresses a single flow and its
      statistics.  If applicable, protocol and layer4-protocol SHOULD be
      included

      src-flow-element

      dst-flow-element

      protocol (?)

      layer4-protocol (?)

      flow-statistics

   flow-statistics:  this CIE aggregates bytes and units send and
      received

      bytes-received

      bytes-sent

      units-received

      units-sent

   group:  insert text here (work in progress)

   ipv4-address:  an IPv4 address is always associated with a subnet.
      This CIE combines these both tightly nit values.  Either a subnet
      mask or a CIDR notation bitmask SHOULD be included.

      ipv4-address-value

      ipv4-address-subnet-mask-cidrnot (?)

      ipv4-address-subnet-mask (?)



Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 25]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


   ipv6-address:  an IPv6 address is always associated with a subnet.
      This CIE combines these both tightly nit values.  A CIDR notation
      bitmask SHOULD be included.

      ipv6-address-value

      ipv6-address-subnet-mask-cidrnot (?)

   location:  a CIE that aggregates potential details about a location

      location-name

      WGS84-longitude

      WGS84-latitude

      WGS84-altitude

   operation-system:  an operation-system is software that is directly
      interacting with the hardware, provides the runtime environment
      for the user-space and corresponding interfaces to hardware
      functions.

      os-label (?)

      os-name

      os-type (*)

      os-component (*)

      os-manufacturer (?)

      os-version (?)

   organization:  this CIE aggregates information about an organization
      and can be references via its id

      organization-id

      organization-name

      location (?)

   person:  a CIE that aggregates the details about a person and
      combines it with a identifier unique to SACM domains

      person-first-name



Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 26]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


      person-last-name

      person-middle-name (*)

      phone-contact (*)

      email-address (*)

   phone-contact:  this CIE can be used to reference a phone number and
      how it functions as a contact

      phone-number

      phone-number-type (?)

   privilege:  a CIE to express privileges via a specific name/value
      pair

      privilege-name

      privilege-value

   relationship:  the relationship CIE enables to associate the CIE it
      is included in with other CIE if they contain a unique identifier
      or label - providing an alternative to including attributes of
      other content CIE as a means to map them (which remains a valid
      alternative, though).  The relationship CIE MUST at least
      reference one relationship object (either a SACM statement iden

      relationship-type

      relationship-content-element-guid (*)

      relationship-statement-guid (*)

      relationship-object-label (*)

   sacm-statement:  every SACM components produces information in this
      format.  This CIE can be considered the root IE for every SACM
      message generated.  There MUST be at least one content element
      included in a SACM statement and if there are more than one, they
      are ordered in a sequence.

      statement-metadata

      content-element (+)(s)





Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 27]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


   session:  represents an ongoing network interaction that can be in
      various states of authentication or assessement

      session-state-type

      (work-in-progress)

   src-flow-element:  identifies the source of a flow.  The port number
      SHOULD be included if the network-address is an IP-address.

      network-address

      layer4-port-address (?)

   statement-creation-timestamp:  a decimal fraction timestamp that
      specifies the point in time the SACM statement was created by a
      SACM component

      decimal-fraction-denominator

      decimal-fraction-numerator

   statement-publish-timestamp:  a decimal fraction timestamp that
      specifies the point in time the SACM component attempted to
      publish the SACM statement (if successful, this will result in the
      publish-timestamp send with the SACM statement).

      decimal-fraction-denominator

      decimal-fraction-numerator

   statement-metadata:  every SACM statement includes statement metadata
      about the SACM component it was produced by and a general category
      that indicates what this statement is about

      statement-guid

      data-origin

      statement-creation-timestamp (?)

      statement-publish-timestamp

      statement-type

      content-elements





Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 28]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


   target-endpoint:  this is a central CIE used in the process chains a
      SACM domain can compose.  Theoretically every kind of information
      can be associated with a target endpoint CIE via its corresponding
      content element.  A few select IE can be stored in the CIE itself
      to reduce the overhead of following references that would occur in
      most scenarios.  If the hostname is unknown the value has to be
      set as an equivalent to "not available" (e.g.  NULL).  Comment
      from the authors: This is "work in progress" an a good basis for
      discussion

      host-name

      te-label

      administrative-domain (?)

      application-instance (*)

      ethernet-interface (*)

      address-association (*)

      data-source (?)

      operation-system (?)

   te-profile:  a set of expected states, policies and pieces of
      guidance that can be matched to a target endpoint (or a class of
      target endpoints "work in progress")

   typed-timestamp:  a flexible timestamp CIE that can express the
      specific type of timestamp via its content.  This is an
      alternative to the "named" timestamps that do not include a
      timestamp-type

      decimal-fraction-denominator

      decimal-fraction-numerator

      timestamp-type

   user:  a CIE that references details of a specific user known in a
      SACM domain active on a specific target endpoint

      user-id

      username (?)




Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 29]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


      data-source (?)

      user-directory (?)

6.  Example composition of SACM statements

   This section illustrates how SACM statements can be composed of
   content information elements, how relationship CIEs can be used in
   content metadata, and how the categories statement-type, content-
   topic and content-type are intended to be used.

   The SACM statements instances are written in pseudo code.  AIE end
   with a colon.  Some AIE include exemplary values to, for example,
   present how references to guid and labels can be used.  For the sake
   of brevity, not all mandatory IE that are part of a CIE are always
   included (e.g. as it is the case with target-endpoint).

   The example shows three SACM statements that were produced by three
   different SACM components that overall include four related content
   elements.

   This is (work in progress).

   sacm statement
     statement-metadata
       statement-guid: example-sguid-one
       data-origin: SACM-component-label-one
       statement-publish-timestamp: exmample-TS-one
       statement-type: Observation
     content-element
       content-metadata
         content-element-guid: example-cguid-one
         content-creation-timestamp:
         content-topic: Flow
         content-type: EndpointState
         relationship
           relationship-type: is-associated-with-user
           relationship-content-object: example-cguid-three
         relationship
           relationship-type: is-associated-with-te
           relationship-content-object: example-cguid-two
         relationship
           relationship-type: is-associated-with-te
           relationship-content-object: example-te-label
       flow-record
         src-flow-element
           network-address (ipv4-address)
             ipv4-address-value:



Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 30]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


             ipv4-address-subnet-mask-cidrnot:
           layer4-port-address: 23111
         dst-flow-element
           network-address (IPv4-address)
             ipv4-address-value:
             ipv4-address-subnet-mask-cidrnot:
           layer4-port-address: 22
         protocol: ssh
         layer4-protocol: tcp
         flow-statistics
           bytes-received:
           bytes-sent:
           units-received:
           units-sent:
     content-element
       content-metadata
         content-element-guid: example-cguid-two
         content-creation-timestamp:
         content-topic: TargetEndpoint
         content-type: EndpointConfiguration
       target-endpoint
         te-label: example-te-label
         host-name: example-host-name
         ethernet-interface: example-interface

   sacm statement
     statement-metadata
       statement-guid: example-sguid-two
       data-origin: SACM-component-label-two
       statement-publish-timestamp: exmample-TS-two
       statement-type: DirectoryContent
     content-element
       content-metadata
         content-element-guid: example-cguid-three
         content-creation-timestamp:
         content-topic: User
         content-type: DirectoryEntry
       user
         user-name: example-username
         user-directory: component-id

   sacm statement
     statement-metadata
       statement-guid: example-sguid-three
       data-origin: SACM-component-label-three
       statement-publish-timestamp: exmample-TS-three
       statement-type: Observation
     content-element



Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 31]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


       content-metadata
         content-element-guid: example-cguid-four
         content-creation-timestamp:
         content-topic: Privileges
         content-type: Event
         relationship
           relationship-type: is-associated-with-user
           relationship-content-object: example-cguid-three
       event
         event-type: change-of-privilege
         typed-timestamp
           decimal-fraction-denominator:
           decimal-fraction-numerator:
           timestamp-type: time-of-observation
         privilege
           privilege-name: super-user-escalation
           privilege-value: true
         privilege
           privilege-name: super-user-escalation
           privilege-value: false


7.  IANA considerations

   This document includes requests to IANA.

8.  Security Considerations

9.  Acknowledgements

10.  Change Log

   First revision -00

   Second revision -00.  Rename to Camwinget (removed -) to make
   submissions happier.  Demonstrate how to integrate with WG draft.

11.  Contributors

12.  References

12.1.  Normative References

   [ARF]      Corporation., T., "Assessment Results Format", 2010.

   [IFMAP]    "TCG Trusted Network Communications - TNC IF-MAP Metadata
              for Network Security Specification Version 1.1r9", May
              2012.



Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 32]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


   [PXGRID]   Appala, S., Cam-Winget, N., McGrew, D., and J. Verma, "An
              Actionable Threat Intelligence system using a Publish-
              Subscribe communications model", ACM Proceedings of the
              2nd ACM Workshop on Information Sharing and Collaborative
              Security, page 61-70, DOI 10.1145/2808128.2808131,
              ISBN 978-1-4503-3822-6.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC2863]  McCloghrie, K. and F. Kastenholz, "The Interfaces Group
              MIB", RFC 2863, DOI 10.17487/RFC2863, June 2000,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2863>.

   [RFC3635]  Flick, J., "Definitions of Managed Objects for the
              Ethernet-like Interface Types", RFC 3635,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3635, September 2003,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3635>.

   [SCAP-AI]  Wunder, J., Halbardier, A., and D. Waltermire,
              "Specification for Asset Identification 1.1", NIST
              Interagency Report 7693 , 2011.

   [SWID]     "Information technology - Software asset management - Part
              2: Software identification tag'", ISO/IEC 19770-2:2015,
              October 2015.

12.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-sacm-requirements]
              Cam-Winget, N. and L. Lorenzin, "Security Automation and
              Continuous Monitoring (SACM) Requirements", draft-ietf-
              sacm-requirements-13 (work in progress), March 2016.

   [RFC7632]  Waltermire, D. and D. Harrington, "Endpoint Security
              Posture Assessment: Enterprise Use Cases", RFC 7632,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7632, September 2015,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7632>.

Authors' Addresses









Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 33]

Internet-Draft           SACM Information Model               April 2016


   Henk Birkholz
   Fraunhofer SIT
   Rheinstrasse 75
   Darmstadt  64295
   Germany

   Email: henk.birkholz@sit.fraunhofer.de


   Nancy Cam-Winget
   Cisco Systems
   3550 Cisco Way
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Email: ncamwing@cisco.com



































Birkholz & Cam-Winget   Expires October 10, 2016               [Page 34]
