




Media Gateway Control                                      Sarah Cornel
                                                       C. Michael Brown
Internet Draft                                          Nortel Networks
Document: draft-cornel-megaco-enhancedd-00.txt                July 2000
Category: Informational 
 
 
Enhanced DTMF Detection Package for Megaco/H.248 
    
   Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
    
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress."  
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
 
    
1. Abstract 
    
   This document provides proposed definitions for a supplemental 
   package for Megaco/H.248. This package addresses enhanced support of 
   DTMF detection. 
    
    
2. Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2]. 
    
 
3. Enhanced DTMF Detection Package Definition 
 
3.1 Enhanced DTMF Detection Package 
   PackageID: edd 
   Version: 1 
   Extends: dd version 1 
    
   This packages extends the mechanisms for detecting and reporting 
   DTMF tones. Additionally, it changes the way the digit maps are 
   interpreted. 
  
cornel                                                               1 




                 draft-cornel-megaco-enhancedd-00.txt        July 2000 

    
   The package depends on tones described in packages dg and dd (basic 
   DTMF generator package and DTMF detection package). 
    
   Properties 
   None. 
    
   Events 
   DigitMap Matched Completion Event 
   EventID: mce 
   EventsDescriptor parameters:  
    
   Digit map processing is activated only if a digit map parameter is 
   present, specifying a digit map by name or by value. Other 
   parameters such as a KeepActive flag, embedded Events or Signals 
   Descriptors may be present. 
    
   ObservedEventsDescriptor parameters: 
        DigitString 
        ParameterID: ds (0x0001) 
        Type: string of digit map symbols (possibly empty) returned as 
   a quotedString. 
        Possible values: a sequence of the characters "0" through "9", 
   "A" through "F", and the long duration modifier "Z". 
        Description: the portion of the current dial string as 
   described in the procedures section which matched all of an 
   alternative event sequence specified in the digit map. 
        Termination Method 
        ParameterID:    Meth (0x0003) 
        Type: enumeration 
        Possible values: 
                "UM" (0x0001) Unambiguous match 
                "FM"  (0x0003) Full match, completion by timer expiry 
   or unmatched event 
        Description: indicates the reason for generation of the event. 
   See the procedures section. 
    
    
   Signals 
   None.  
    
   Statistics 
   None. 
    
   Procedures 
    
   Procedures for detecting this event are different than those for the 
   completion event (dd/ce). Procedures for invoking these procedures 
   apply if the matched completion event is requested. It should be 
   noted that the completion event (dd/ce) and the matched completion 
   event (edd/mce) are incompatible. A request for both these events 
   should treat the completion event (dd/ce) as the event with 
   precedence.  
    
  
Cornel          Informational - Expires: January 2001                2 




                 draft-cornel-megaco-enhancedd-00.txt        July 2000 

   The following describes the procedures for the matched digit map 
   completion event.A digit map is active while the events descriptor 
   which invoked it is active and it has not completed. A digit map 
   completes when: 
    
   an alternative event sequence has been matched and no other 
   alternative event sequence in the digit map could be matched through 
   detection of an additional event (unambiguous match), or 
    
   an event has been detected (usually another digit or timer expiry) 
   such that a match to a complete alternative event sequence of the 
   digit map will be impossible no matter what additional events are 
   received, and at least one event sequence is matched (full match). 
     
   Upon completion, a digit map completion event as defined in this 
   package providing the events being mapped into the digit map shall 
   be generated. At that point the digit map is deactivated, however 
   collection of events into the _event buffer_ continues until 
   explicitly stopped. 
    
   Alternatively, one of the following conditions may be detected: 
    
   an event has been detected such that a match to a complete 
   alternative event sequence of the digit map will be impossible no 
   matter what additional events are received, and no event sequence is 
   matched, or 
    
   a timer has expired and no sequence is matched. 
    
   If these conditions occur, the contents of the current dial string 
   should have the first event in its buffer flushed, and the current 
   digit map should be reapplied. These are considered to be  reset 
   conditions for the digit map. This process continues until either 
   there is a match, or the request is terminated. 
    
   Additionally, unless noted here, the processing of the current dial 
   string and the digit map proceeds like the processing of a 
   completion event (dd/ce) . 
 
 
4. Formal Syntax 
    
   Not Applicable 
    
   The following syntax specification uses the augmented Backus-Naur 
   Form (BNF) as described in RFC-2234 [3]. 
 
    
5. Security Considerations 
 
   Not Applicable 
    
6. References

  
Cornel          Informational - Expires: January 2001                3 




                 draft-cornel-megaco-enhancedd-00.txt        July 2000 

 
   1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   2  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
   3  Crocker, D. and Overell, P.(Editors), "Augmented BNF for Syntax 
      Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, Internet Mail Consortium and 
      Demon Internet Ltd., November 1997 
    
 
    
7. Acknowledgments 
    
    
    
8. Author's Addresses 
    
   Sarah Cornel 
   Nortel Networks 
   4008 Chapel Hill Road 
   Research Triangle Park, NC USA 27709 
   Phone: (919) 991-2853 
   Email: sarahc@nortelnetworks.com 
    
   C. Michael Brown 
   Nortel Networks 
   4008 Chapel Hill Road 
   Research Triangle Park, NC USA 27709 
   Phone: (919) 991-7767 
   Email: C.Michael.Brown@nortelnetworks.com 
    
9. Full Copyright Statement 
    
   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English.  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and 
   will not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or 
   assigns.  This document and the information contained herein is 
   provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE 
   INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
  
Cornel          Informational - Expires: January 2001                4 




                 draft-cornel-megaco-enhancedd-00.txt        July 2000 

   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE." 
    
10. Expiration Date 
    
   This memo is filed as draft-cornel-megaco-enhancedd-00.txt, and 
   expires January 2001. 
    
    













































  
Cornel          Informational - Expires: January 2001                5 
